I. Spring
     II. Summer
     III. Autumn
     IV. Winter




I

SPRING


Spring always seems to begin on the morning that the Imp, in a bright
pink nightgown, comes rushing into my room without knocking, and throws
himself on my bed, with a sprig of almond blossom in his hand. You see,
the almond blossom grows just outside the Imp's window, and the Imp
watches it very carefully. We are none of us allowed to see it until it
is ready, and then, as soon as there is a sprig really out, he picks it
and flies all round the house showing it to everybody. For the Imp loves
the Spring, and we all know that those beautiful pink blossoms mean that
Spring is very near.

"Spring!" shouts the Imp, waving his almond blossoms, and we begin to
keep a little note-book, and write down in it after the almond blossom
day all the other days of the really important things, the day when we
first see the brimstone butterfly, big and pale and golden yellow,
flitting along the hedgerow near the ground, and the day of picking the
first primrose and the finding of the first bird's nest.

And then walks begin to be real fun. No dull jig-jog, jig-jog, just so
many miles before going home to lunch, when all the time you would much
rather have stayed at home altogether. The Imp and the Elf love Spring
walks, and are always running ahead trying to see things. There are such
a lot of things to see, and every one of them means that Summer is a
little nearer. And that is a jolly piece of news, is it not?

The Imp and the Elf have a nurse to take them for walks, and a very nice
old nurse she is, with lots of fairy tales. But somehow she is not much
interested in flowers, or birds, or mice, or even in the Spring, so that
very soon after the day of the apple blossom those two children start
coming to my door soon after breakfast. They knock both at once very
quietly. I pretend not to hear. They knock again, and still I do not
answer. Then they thunder on the door. Do you know how to thunder on a
door? You do it by doubling up your fist and hitting hard with the podgy
part that comes at the end where your thumb is not. You can make a
tremendous noise that way, And then suddenly I jump up and roar out,
"Who's there?" as if I were a terrible giant. And the Imp and the Elf
come tumbling in, and stand in front of me, and bow and say, "Oh, Mr.
Ogre, we hope you are not very really truly busy, because we want you to
come for a walk."

And then we stick our things on, and away we go through the garden and
into the fields, with our three pairs of eyes as wide open as they will
go, so as not to miss anything.

We watch the lark rise high off the ploughed lands and sing up into the
sky. He is a little speckled brown bird with a very conceited head, if
only you can get near enough to see him. The Imp says he ought not to be
so proud just because he has a fine voice. And certainly, if you watch
the way he swings into the air, with little leaps of flying, higher and
higher and higher, you cannot help thinking that perhaps he does think a
little too much of himself. He likes to climb higher than all the other
birds, just as if he were a little choir boy perched up in the organ
loft. He climbs up and up the sky till you can scarcely see him, but he
takes care that you do not forget him even if he is so high as to be out
of sight. He sings and sings and sings. The Imp and the Elf like to wait
and watch him till he drops down again in long jumps, just as if he were
that little choir boy coming down the stairs ten steps at a time. "Now
he's coming," says the Imp, as he sees the lark poise for an instant.
"Now he's coming," the Elf cries, as he drops a foot or two. But we
always think he is coming before he really is.

As we go through the fields we keep a good look out for primroses and
cowslips. The primroses come long before the cowslips. Cowslips really
belong to the beginning of the Summer. But early in the Spring there are
plenty of woods and banks we know, where we are sure of finding
primroses with their narrow, furry, green leaves, and the pale yellow
flowers on a long stalk sprouting out of the heart of the leaves.

In the primrose-wood where we always go in the Spring, we find lots and
lots of primroses, and some of them are not yellow at all, but pale pink
and purple coloured. The Elf collects them for her garden, and she
carries a little trowel and digs deep down into the earth all round them
so as not to hurt their roots and then pulls them up, and puts them in
the basket to plant in her garden at home. You see, they really belong
to gardens, for they are not quite proper primroses, but the children of
primroses and polyanthuses. You know polyanthuses. The Imp says their
names are much too long for them. But you know them quite well, just
like cowslips, they are, only all sorts of colours.

About the same time that the primroses are out the wild dog violets
begin to show themselves. We always know when to look for them, for wild
ones bloom as soon as the sweet ones in our garden are over. The Elf
watches the garden violets and picks the last bunch of them, and ties
them up with black cotton and puts them on my plate ready for me when I
come down late to breakfast. Yes, I do come down late for breakfast. I
know it is naughty, but you see even grown-ups are naughty sometimes.
The Imp thinks I am very naughty indeed, and so one day, when I was
late, he took my porridge, and got on a high chair, and put it on the
top of the grandfather clock for a punishment. You see, whenever the Imp
and the Elf are late they have to go without porridge. That is why they
are very seldom late. Well, as soon as I came down I saw my blue
porridge bowl smiling over the top of the clock, and I just reached up
and took it down and ate it, and very good porridge it was, too. But the
Imp said, "It's horrid of you, Ogre, to be so big," and then he laughed,
and I laughed, and it was all right.

Oh, yes, I was just telling you that the Elf put the last bunch of the
sweet violets on my plate. Well, when that happens we all know that our
next walk will be to the places where the wild violets grow for they are
sure to be just coming out.

The wild violets are just like the sweet ones in liking cool, shady
places for their homes. We find them nestling in the banks under the
hedge that runs along the side of the wood. They cuddle close down to
the ground, with their tiny heart-shaped leaves and wee pale purple
flowers, just like little untidy twisted pansies.

The Elf reminds me that I am to tell you about the daffodils. I had
forgotten all about them. Really, you know it is the Imp and the Elf who
are writing this book. If it were not for them I should be forgetting
nearly everything. There are such a lot of things to remember In the
wood where we find the coloured primroses there are great banks of
daffodils under the green larches. They are just like bright yellow
trumpets growing out of pale yellow stars. The Imp says they are the
golden horns the fairies blow when they go riding through the woodland
in the moonlight on their fairy coaches. I do not know if he is right,
but anyhow they are very pretty. They have lots of long flat leaves
growing close round each flower, like sword blades sticking up out of
the ground, and the buds look at first as if they were two leaves
tightly rolled together. And then the green opens and a pale spike comes
out, and a thin covering bursts off the spike, and the spike opens into
the five-pointed star, leaving the brilliant golden trumpet in the
middle. Gardeners, and that sort of person grow double daffodils that
look like two flowers one inside the other, but the ordinary wild
daffodil is far the prettier. At least the Imp and the Elf think so, and
I think so, too.

We go to the wood and lie down on the dried leaves from last year, and
watch the flowers and talk about them and the little mice who live in
the undergrowth. Sometimes, if we are not too lazy, the Elf makes us
pick primroses and daffodils and violets to send to children we know in
town--pale-faced children who think we must be dull in the country, with
nothing to do, and no pantomimes. Really, of course, there is such a lot
to do in the country that we have always got the next thing planned
before we have done what we are doing. And as for pantomimes this very
wood is just like a theatre, with mice and rabbits and birds for actors,
and the most beautiful transformation scenes. Why, just now in Spring it
is yellow with primroses and daffodils, with pale larches wearing their
new green dresses. But soon all the trees will be green, and the whole
wood will be carpeted in blue, deep rich blue, the colour of the wild
blue-bells, whose leaves we can see coming up all over the place. Spiky
green leaves they are, and the children see them at once. "Blue-bells
are coming," sing the Imp and the Elf, and so they are, and with the
blue-bells comes Summer.

Besides the lark and cuckoo, who is going to be talked about in a
minute, besides the flowers, there are other things we watch for signs
of Summer, and those are the trees themselves.

We watch the trees for flowers and for buds. From the high windows of
the house we can see over the fields to the woods, and see them change
colour from the dead bareness of Winter very early in the Spring. And
when we go to the woods in daffodil time we all three of us watch the
buds coming out on every branch farthest out on the lowest boughs, which
for Imps and Elves are also easiest to see.

Earlier than this we look for catkins on the hazel trees. The Elf calls
the hazels "the little children of the wood" because they grow low, and
the other trees, the oaks, and beeches, and elms, and chest-nuts, and
birches, tower above them. In some parts of the country catkins are
called lambstails, because they hang down just like the flabby little
tails of the Spring lambs. What do you think they really are? The Elf
would not believe me when I told her they were hazel flowers. "Trees
don't have flowers," she said. I reminded her of hawthorns and wild
roses, and she said, "Oh, yes, but these things are greeny-brown and not
like flowers at all." But they _are_ flowers. They are the flowers of
the hazel tree, and they are almost the very first of the Spring things
that we see. If you look about when you are in the woods you will find
that lots of other trees have green flowers, too, and many of them just
the same shape as the lambstails.

The Imp and the Elf are early on the look-out for another tree-flower
that is one of the Spring signs, and that is the flower that people who
know nothing about it call "palm." Hundreds of men and women from the
towns come out into the country to gather it, and a horrible mess they
make of our country lanes and fields. The Elf calls them the
"Ginger-beer-bottle-and-paper-bag-people" and hates them with all her
small heart.

Really, that flower that those people come to gather belongs to the
sallow, which is a kind of willow. You know it quite well, with its
beautiful straight, tall, bendable stems that look as if they were
simply made for bows and arrows. In Spring-time the sallow flowers in
pretty little silvery tufts, soft and silky to touch, clinging all along
its twigs. The Elf always picks the first bit that she can find that is
really out and carries it home in triumph, and puts it in a jampot full
of water to remind her that Winter is really over and gone.

On the way to the woods we have to pass through broad green fields full
of grey sheep with long tangled wool all nibbling at the grass. And very
early in the Spring a day comes when by the side of one of the old grey
sheep there is something small and white. And the Elf says nothing, but
slips her hand into mine, so that I can feel it shaking with excitement.
She touches the Imp, so that he sees the white thing, too, and then we
all three go across the field as quietly as ever we can to see the
little new lamb as near as possible. But little lambs and their grey
mothers are very nervous, and long before we are really close to them
the grey sheep moves away, and the little white lamb jumps up and
scampers after her.

Before the Spring is half through nearly all the grey sheep have one or
two little white woolly children trotting about with them, and we watch the
lambs chasing each other and skipping over tussocks of grass like little
wild mountain goats. The Imp and the Elf are always wondering what they
think about in those queer little heads of theirs, with the big ears and
great round puzzled eyes.

But of all the Spring signs the oldest and sweetest and dearest is the
cry of the cuckoo that comes when Spring is just going to change into
Summer. For hundreds of years English children have listened for the
cuckoo in the Spring, and the very oldest English song that was ever
written down is all about the cuckoo's cry.

     "Summer is a coming in,
         Loudly sing cuckoo.
     Groweth seed and bloweth mead,
     And springeth the wood now.
     Ewe bleateth after lamb,
     Lowth after calf the cow,
     Bullock starteth,
     Buck now verteth,
     Merry sing cuckoo.
         Sing cuckoo,
     Well singeth thou, cuckoo, cuckoo.
     Nor cease thou ever now."

The Imp and the Elf love that little song and know it by heart. It was
written by an old monk in the Spring-time years and years and years ago,
and some of the words he used are difficult to understand now. Verteth
is an old word meaning going on the green grass. Nearly all the other
words I have made as much like our own as I can.

[Illustration]

It is much easier to hear the cuckoo than to see him. He is a biggish
grey gentleman with stripes across his middle, and he is horribly hard
to notice unless we get quite close to him. He is very shy, and that
makes it harder still. But sometimes when you hear him cry, cuckoo,
cuckoo, if you are very quick indeed, you can see him flying across a
field from hedge to hedge.

Mrs. Cuckoo is the laziest mother that ever was. The Elf thinks her
perfectly horrid. I wonder if you know why? She is so gay and fond of
flying about that she finds she has no time to build a nest or bring up
her little ones as all good mothers do. So she just leaves her egg in
someone else's home, and flies happily away, leaving the someone else to
hatch the egg and bring up the little cuckoo. She often chooses quite
small birds like the little greenfinches or even the sparrows. And when
the young cuckoo comes tumbling out of his egg, instead of being kind
and polite to the children to whom his nursery really belongs he just
wriggles his big naked body under them and tumbles them out of the nest.
That is why, though we love to hear the cuckoo, we think him rather a
lazy bird, and his wife a very second-rate kind of mother.

When we come back from the walk on which we have heard the first cuckoo
of the year, we really begin to long for the Summer. All the Spring
signs have come. When we get back to my room, the Imp and the Elf sit on
my table and swing their legs and say, "Brimstone butterfly, palm,
catkins, daffodils, violets, primroses, blue-bells, and cuckoo; Summer
is coming, don't you think, Ogre?" And I say yes. And they say, "Tell us
what Summer is like, do, please." And I tell them, though they know
already, and they sit on the table and wriggle at all the nicest parts
of the telling, and we are all very happy indeed.




II

SUMMER


And what are the things we know the Summer by? Summer clothes say little
girls, and big straw hats say boys. Well, and what do they mean but the
heat? The Imp wears a huge straw hat and a loose holland overall but he
goes about panting, and lies flat on the ground with the straw hat over
his nose to keep the sun from burning his face. And the Elf wears an
overall, too, and a pale blue calico sunbonnet over her curls. All the
same she is often too hot to enjoy anything except sitting in the swing
in the orchard and listening to fairy tales. And I, well, I am often too
hot to tell fairy tales. For fairyland is a cool, comfortable place, and
big, hot Ogres melt it away like an ice palace.

"Yes, yes, yes," you say, "but what do you do? It can't always be too
hot to do anything." I asked the Elf what we do do in Summer time, and
her eyes grew bigger and bigger, and she clapped her hands and said,
"Do? Why, everything." And now I am going to try to tell you a few of
the things that make the everything so delightful.

First of all there are cowslip balls. We go, the three of us, to the
field where the cowslips grow. Little cousins of the primroses the
cowslips are, as you know already. Well, we take a long piece of string
and fasten one end to a bush, and pick piles of flowers close to the
top of the long stalk and hang them over the thread, so that some of the
flowers hang on one side and some on the other. And when we have a great
row hanging on the thread we take its two ends and tie them together.
And all the cowslips tumble into the middle and crowd up against each
other, and when the thread is tied they are packed so close that they
make a beautiful ball, with nothing but cowslip faces to be seen all
over it. And that is a cowslip ball.

Close under the moor, not so very far away from the house, there is a
gate where the lane divides into three or four rough paths that run over
the heather to the moorland farms. And just by the gate there is a
hawthorn tree. The flowers of the hawthorn are not, like the catkins,
over before the hazel shows its leaves. They wait till all the tree is
vivid green, and then sparkle out all over it in brilliant white or
coral colour. We call the hawthorn May. And a long time ago all over
England on May-Day people used to pick the May and make a crown of it
and decorate a high pole in the middle of each village. And then they
danced round the pole, and crowned the prettiest of the girls and called
her the Queen of the May. She had a sprig of hawthorn blossom for a
sceptre, and everybody did what she told them. It must have been rather
nice for the little girl who was chosen Queen.

But now nearly everybody has forgotten about May-Day fun. Perhaps they
would not enjoy it even if they remembered. But here, when the May is
out, the country children from the farms over the moorland and from this
end of the valley choose a fine day and come to the tree. The Imp and
the Elf always take care to find out when they are coming. Then they
bang on the study door for me and away we go, with plenty of buns and
sandwiches in our pockets. And always when we get to the tree we find
that some of the country children are there before us. And soon the fun
begins. They all dance round the tree, and after eating all the buns and
things they choose a King and Queen, and play Oranges and Lemons, the
King and Queen leading off. This year they chose the Imp and the Elf,
and you just can't imagine how proud they were, and how the Imp strutted
about with his hawthorn sceptre, and the Elf kept re-arranging her curls
under her green and starry crown. The sun shone all day, and we were all
as happy as anyone could wish to be.

Then, too, in Summer we go quietly and softly through the little wood at
the back of the house and wait at the other side of it and peep over the
hedge. There is a steep bank on the other side and then a row of little
trees, the remains of an old hedge, and then another bank. And the other
bank is full of holes, and the holes are full of rabbits. And in the
Summer evening we go there and watch the little rabbits skipping about
and nibbling the grass. And of course as the Summer goes on the grass
grows very high, and when we walk through it we can sometimes see
nothing but the ears of the little rabbits peeping up above it. You
can't imagine how funny they look. Once the Imp fell right over the top
of one of them that was hidden in the grass. It jumped out under his
feet and he was so startled that he fell forward, and felt something
warm and furry wriggling in his hands, and found that he had caught a
baby rabbit. The Elf and the Imp patted and stroked it till it was not
frightened any more, and then we put it on the ground and let it go. It
hopped gaily away through the grass and disappeared into its burrow in
the bank. I do not wonder that it was a little afraid and trembly when
the Imp, who must seem a giant to it though he only seems a boy to me,
came bumping down on it out of the sky.

[Illustration]

Besides the rabbits we find all sorts of other charming things in the
long grass that swishes so happily round our ankles. Buttercups are
there which send a golden light over your chin if you hold them near
enough, buttercups, and dandelions, and purple thistles, and wild
orchids. You know thistles and dandelions, of course, but I wonder if
you know an orchid when you see one? They are quite common things, but
lots of even country children do not bother to look for them. Next time
you are in the fields in Summer just look about you for a spike of tiny
purple flowers with speckled lips rising out of a little cluster of
green leaves with brown spots on them. Soon after these have begun to
flower we often find another kind, with speckled flowers too, only far
paler purple. And later still there is a meadow where we can usually
discover just a very few Butterfly orchids. They have a spike of
delicate fluttery flowers, not so close together as the purple kinds,
and with green in the veins of their white petals. They are a great
prize and the Elf always picks one, leaving the rest, and brings it very
carefully home and keeps it in water for as long as she can for it is a
treasure indeed.

In another bank, not so very far from the home of the rabbits, another
little furry creature lives, a pretty little brown-coated, long-tailed
person, a great hunter, and much feared by the rabbits. He has a long,
thin body, and a sharp little head, and a wavy tail. He is a weasel. His
bank is just by the side of a pleasant little trickling beck, and not
very far from the wood where the pheasants live. Some day he will be
shot by the keeper for I am afraid he is rather fond of pheasant. There
are plenty of stories about him among the country people. They say that
if you whistle near his hole he will come running out to see what is
the matter; and if you go on whistling he will come nearer and nearer
until you can catch him with your hands. I have never tried, so I do not
know if this is true. But I should not like to catch him in my hands for
his teeth are as sharp as a rat's. At any rate there is one thing that
is far more certain to bring him out of his hole than any whistle, and
that is want of rabbit. Once, as we walked through the fields in the
Summer twilight, we heard a short squeal and saw a poor little rabbit
hopping feebly away with Mr. Weasel running nimbly along after him. And
the funny thing is that the rabbit instead of scampering away as fast as
he could go, was going quite slowly, and in the end stopped altogether,
when the weasel ran up and killed him. The Elf said it was cruel of the
weasel and silly of the rabbit. The Imp said he did not know about the
weasel, but the rabbit deserved to be killed for being so slow in
getting away. But our old gardener, who is wisest of us all, says that
the weasel has to kill rabbits to keep alive, and that it isn't the
rabbit's fault that it cannot run fast. He says that when a rabbit is
chased by a weasel it cannot help going slower and slower, and being
terribly frightened because it knows that it cannot escape.

The sheep in the fields are just as interesting as the rabbits or the
weasels. One of the most exciting of all the Summer things has to do
with them. Towards the end of May the Elf and the Imp are always
bothering the farmers round about, to find out when shearing and washing
time is going to be. There is an old rhyme that the farmers' wives tell
us, and it says:

     "Wash in May,
     Wash wool away.
     Wash in June,
     The wool's in tune."

What it means is that if the farmers wash the sheep in May the wool is
not so strong and healthy as it is later, and comes off in the water.
While, if they wash them in June the wool is quite crisp and stands on
end, and so is very easy to cut. Usually the farmers wash the sheep in
the beginning of June, and these two children always manage to find out
the day before. They come and bang at my door as usual, but when they
come in they bring my hat and walking-stick with them, for they know
quite well that on sheep-washing day I am sure to want to come with
them. And then off we go along the road that leads by the hawthorn tree,
over the moor and down on the other side, to where a little river runs
between two farms about a mile from each. The river widens into a broad
shallow pool, and here the farmers bring the sheep. The Imp and the Elf
and I have a fine seat in the boughs of a big oak that overhangs the
water. Here we sit in a row and have a splendid view. The sheep are all
crowded together in pens at each side of the water, and the farmers wade
out into the stream taking the sheep between their legs, and wash them
one after the other. I told you there were two farms who use this
washing place. Well, every year they race in their sheep-washing, and
see who can get most sheep washed in the shortest time. The Elf takes
one side and the Imp takes the other, and it is really quite exciting.

When the sheep are all clean they are turned loose in the fields again
for a whole week in which to get properly dry. Then they are driven into
the farmyards or into pens in the fields, and the farmers clip the wool
off them close to the skin. They only shear the old sheep and last
year's lambs; and that is why, after shearing time, the new lambs have
so much finer and longer coats than those of their mothers. We always
wondered why that was, until we found out that the farmers only clip the
tails of the lambs, but leave their coats on, while they take all the
wool off the old sheep, and send it away to be made into nightgowns and
things for Imps and Elves and you and me and everybody else.

After the sheep-shearing comes the haymaking, and that is the piece of
Summer fun that the Imp loves best of all. We watch the grass growing
taller and taller, till the buttercups no longer tower above it, and the
orchids die away. We notice all the different grasses, the beautiful
feathery ones that the fairy ladies use as fans in the warm midsummer
nights, and those like spears, and those like swords, flat and green and
horribly sharp at the edges. We see them all grow up and up, and change
their colour under the Summer sun. And then at last comes the day when
the farmers of the farm across the meadow harness old Susan, the big
brown horse, to a scarlet clattering rattling mowing machine that
glitters in the sunlight. And then we hear it singing down the field,
making a noise like somebody beating two sticks together very fast
indeed. As soon as we hear that, we climb through the hedge at the
bottom of the garden or over it, and run round the field, because if we
came straight across it, we should trample the grass, and then the
farmer would not smile at us so pleasantly. And we shout for Dick the
labourer who sometimes lets the Imp or the Elf ride Susan home from the
fields. We find him sitting on the little round seat at the back of the
mowing machine holding the long ropes which do instead of reins. And
Susan is tramping solidly ahead, and the machine drags after her, and
the hay falls behind flat on the ground in great wisps. And the Imp runs
along by the side of the machine, and tells Dick that he is going to be
a farmer, too, when he is big enough. Do you know I never met a little
boy yet, who did not want to be a farmer when the hay is being cut? I
was quite certain that I was going to be a farmer myself, long ago when
I was a little boy, and not an Ogre at all.

And then, when the hay is cut we toss it and dry it, and that is even
jollier than the cutting. The farmer's daughters and Dick's wife come
into the field and join in tossing the grass and turning it over with
long wooden hayrakes, until it is quite dry. And they laugh at the Elf
and the Imp, and throw great bundles of hay over the top of them. And
the Imp and the Elf throw the hay back at them, and tease them until
they are allowed to do a little raking and tossing for themselves. But
they soon tire of that. Presently the Imp throws a wisp of hay over the
Elf, and the Elf throws hay over the Imp, and then they throw hay over
each other, as much and as fast as they can. And then they creep up to
me, where I am sitting as a quiet comfortable Ogre should, smoking or
reading. And suddenly it seems as if all the hay in all the world were
being tumbled over my head and shoulders. The Imp and the Elf cover me
all over with hay, and then sit on top of me, and pretend that I am a
live mountain out of a fairy tale, and that they are giants, a giant and
a giantess taking a rest. And suddenly the live mountain heaves itself
up in the middle, and upsets the giant and the giantess one on each
side. And then we all get up covered with hay and very warm, and laugh
and laugh until we are too hot to laugh any longer.

[Illustration]

When the sun falls lower in the sky, and the hedge throws a broad cool
shadow over the clipped grass, we all sit under it out of the sunlight,
the farmer's daughters in their bright pink blouses and blue skirts, the
farmer and Dick and I smoking our pipes together, and the Elf and the
Imp in their holland smocks. We all meet under the shadow of the hedge
as soon as we see two figures leave the farmyard and come towards us
over the fields. One of them is the maid who helps in the farm and the
other is the farmer's wife. Each of them carries a big round basket.
They come up to us blinking their eyes against the sun, red in the face,
and smiling and jolly. And we help them to unload the baskets, which are
full of food and drink. Great big slices of bunloaf, dark and full of
soft, juicy raisins, and tea, the best tea you ever tasted, for tea
never tastes so nice as when you drink it under a hedge and out of a
ginger beer bottle.

Haymaking is better fun than sheep-washing and lasts longer. It is not
all over in a day. There are such a lot of things to do. The hay has to
be cut and tossed and dried and piled into haycocks before it is ready
to be heaved high on pitchforks on the top of a waggon that is to carry
it away to the farm. And after all when you have made hay in one field
you can go and make it another. And there are such a lot of fields about
here.

But when the hay is dry and ready in big, lumpy haycocks, the Imp and
the Elf shout for joy to see old Susan harnessed to the big waggon come
lumbering into the field, and to see the men throw the huge bundles of
hay into the cart. One man stands amid the hay in the waggon and takes
each new bundle as soon as it is pitchforked up, and packs it neatly
with the hay already there. The hay rises higher and higher in the
waggon, and the Imp loves to be in the waggon with the man, and to climb
higher with the hay until at last he is high above the hedges, for by
the time the cart is fully loaded you would think it was a great house
of hay, ready to topple over the next minute. But the men do not seem to
be afraid of that. They just fling a rope across the top and fasten it
to keep all safe. And the Imp lies flat on his stomach on the very top
of everything, and hears the farmer below him sing out, "Gee hoa,
Susan!" and Susan swings herself forward and with one great jerk starts
the waggon, and the Elf waves her pocket-handkerchief as they go
rumbling away across the rough field and out on the lane to the farm,
taking the hay that is to keep the cows fat and healthy through the
winter.

When the last of all the carts of hay has rumbled away like that, Dick's
wife, who knows all the old songs, reminds the Elf and the Imp of this
one:

     "With the last load of hay
     Light-heart Summer trips away,
     When the cuckoo's double note
     Chokes within his mottled throat,
     Then we country children say,
     Light-heart Summer trips away."

Though Summer does not go quite yet, there is a sad sound already in the
woods, for the cuckoo who told us that Summer was coming, sings cuckoo
no longer, but only a melancholy cuck, cuck, as if he were too hot and
tired to finish his song. And that means that he is going soon.

     "Cuckoo, cuckoo,
     How do you?
     In April
     I open my bill;
     In May
     I sing by night and day;
     In June
     I change my tune;
     In July
     Away I fly;
     In August
     Away I must."

It is very hard to tell when Summer ends and Autumn begins. But as soon
as we hear the cuckoo drop the last note of his song we know that we
must soon expect the time of golden corn, and after that of crimson
leaves and orange. And when we hear the cuckoo no more at all, the Imp
and Elf and I take marmalade sandwiches and bottled tea for a picnic in
the hazel wood that is now thick with leaves, and so thickly peopled
with caterpillars that they tumble on the Imp's big hat and get
entangled in the Elf's hair as we pick our way through the trees. We
have our picnic on a bank there, the very bank where we find violets and
primroses in the spring, and the Elf lying close to the warm ground
whispers "Good-bye, Summer," and even the cheerful Imp feels a little
sad.

[Illustration]




III

AUTUMN


I told you that we are sad when we know that Summer is passing away; but
that is only because we love the Summer, with her gay flowers and fair
green clothes, and not because we do not like the Autumn. The Imp and
the Elf laugh at me when I tell them that all Ogres and Ogresses, all
people who are grown up and can never be Imps and Elves again, love the
Autumn and the Spring even better than the Summer herself. And then, to
make them understand, I tell them a fairy story, how, once upon a time,
Spring and Summer and Winter and Autumn were four beautiful little
girls. Winter wore a white frock with red berries in her hair; Summer
was dressed in deep green, with a crown of hawthorn and blue hyacinths;
and Spring had a dress of vivid green, the colour of the larches in the
woods, and a beautiful wreath of primroses and violets on her head;
while Autumn was only allowed Summer's old dresses when they were faded
and nearly worn out Autumn was very unhappy, for she loved pretty
dresses like every little girl. But she went about bravely, with a
smiling brown face, and never said anything about it. And then one day a
fairy Godmother, just like Cinderella's, came into the garden, and asked
to see all her little Godchildren. And Spring and Summer and Winter all
put on their best frocks and came to be kissed by her. But poor Autumn
could only tidy up Summer's old dress, which she did as well as she
could, and then came out after the others. But she was shy because she
knew that her dress was only an old faded one, and not so pretty as the
spick and span clothes of her sisters. So she hung back and was kissed
last of all. The Godmother kissed the others on the forehead, but when
she came to Autumn she saw that all was not quite well, and looked at
her very tenderly and said, "Tell me all about it," just as all the
nicest fairy Godmothers do. And Autumn whispered that she was sorry that
she was not looking as pretty as the others, but that she really could
not help it, because she had no frocks of her own.

[Illustration]

The Godmother laughed, and took her in her arms and kissed her on the
lips. And then the Godmother put her arm round Autumn's neck, and,
walking hand in hand, they went together down the garden under the
bending trees to the edge of the pond. "Look into the water, my dear,"
said the Godmother, and Autumn looked and knew that a magic had been
done, for her old faded dress was red and gold, and a rich gold crown
lay on her dark hair. And she turned to thank the Godmother, and found
that she had gone. She only heard a little laugh in the air, and then
she laughed, too, and went away singing happily over the green grass.
She has been happy ever since.

And really that is a true tale, and it happens once every year. You can
see it happening for yourself after the end of the Summer, just as the
Imp and the Elf and I watch it in the fields and woods. First you will
see that Autumn is wearing Summer's old clothes, getting shabbier and
shabbier and shabbier, and then the fairy Godmother comes, and you see
the dusty green grow dim and dark, and then blaze in scarlet and orange,
and even before this you will have seen the green corn pale and turn to
deepening gold. And when these things have happened you can be very
happy, for you will know that Autumn is smiling happily to herself, for
she has her own dress at last.

The cutting of the golden corn is almost as jolly as the haymaking, so
think the Imp and the Elf. Not quite so jolly, but very nearly. As soon
as the hay is cut and tossed and dried and carted away to the stacks we
begin watching the corn turn yellower and yellower while its golden
grains hang heavily down. And at last, when the fields are bright gold
in the sun, and the sky promises us clear weather for a day or two, the
scarlet machine comes out again, and Susan has more work to do. This
time it is not the hay, but the tall corn that falls swishing (with a
noise just like that) behind the machine. And men go behind and bind it
into corn-sheaves, great big bundles of corn, and then the corn-sheaves
are piled into corn shocks. Eight sheaves stand on end in two rows of
four leaning on each other. In some parts of the country they only have
three in each row. As soon as the shocks are made the Imp has some
delightful games. He loves to lie flat on the stubbly ground, and
wriggle his way into the tunnel between the sheaves of corn until he
crawls out at the other end covered with little bits of straw and
prickling all over. The Elf does not like this part of it quite so much,
but she does it sometimes, and once, when I was littler, I used to do
it, too. But that was a very long time ago.

The girls from the farm come into the field to pick up all the stray
corn that the men have dropped in making and carrying the sheaves, so
that none is wasted at all. That is called gleaning. A long time ago
rich farmers used to let poor women come into their fields and keep all
the corn that they could glean, all that the reapers had left. In those
days, instead of one man sitting on a scarlet reaping machine, they had
many reapers, who took the corn in bundles in their arms and cut it off
close to the ground with a curved knife called a sickle. This used to be
done everywhere till the machines came, and even now there is a little
farm we know over the hills where they use the sickle still.

[Illustration]

Autumn is the gathering-in time of all the year. In Spring the farmers
sow their corn. It grows all the Summer and in Autumn is harvested. In
Autumn we gather the garden fruit. In Autumn we pick blackberries, and
is not that the finest fun of all the year?

We go blackberrying with deep baskets, and parcels of sandwiches and
cakes. We have several good blackberry walks. One of them takes us past
the hawthorn tree and along the edge of the moors, and then down into a
valley through a long lane with high banks covered with brambles and
black with the squashy berries. As we pass the hawthorn tree the Elf
always look up at it, and though she says nothing I know she is thinking
of the Mayday and the dancing and the playing at Oranges and Lemons.

We have a basket each when we go blackberrying, and we race to see who
can pick most blackberries. It is a curious thing that the Elf always
wins, though the Imp and I work just as hard. Partly I think it is
because little girls' fingers are so nimble. Perhaps from making doll's
clothes. What do you think?

You see just grabbing blackberries is no use at all. We have to pull
them carefully from their places, so as to get the berries and nothing
else; just the soft black lumps that drop with such nice little plops
into the baskets, and go squish in the mouth with such a pleasant taste.
Oh, yes, pleasant taste, that reminds me of another reason why when we
get home we always find the Elf's basket more full of blackberries than
the Imp's. The Imp is like me, and eats nearly as many as he picks.
Blackberries are easier to carry that way.

Away behind the house there is an orchard, where there are pears and
damsons and apples and quinces, all the very nicest English fruits. And
all along the high wall of the orchard on the garden side grow plums,
broad trees flat against the wall fastened up to it by little pieces of
black stuff with a nail on each side of the boughs.

When the Autumn comes the Imp and the Elf slip slily round the garden
path to the plum trees and pinch the beautiful purple and golden plums
and the round greengages to see if they are soft. For as soon as they
are soft they are ripe, and as soon as they are ripe comes picking time.
And then the old gardener comes with big flat baskets and picks the
plums, taking care not to bruise them. And the Imp and the Elf help as
much as he allows them and he gives them plums for wages. And then they
come to my study with mouths sticky and juicy with ripe plum bringing a
plum or perhaps a couple of greengages for me. "For Ogres like plums
even if they are busy," says the Elf, as she sits on my knee and crams
half a plum and several sticky fingers into my mouth.

[Illustration]

Then come the joyous days of apple-gathering and damson picking. When we
sit on the orchard wall eating the cake that the cook sends out to us
for lunch in the morning we wonder and wonder when the damsons will be
ready. Long ago they have turned from green to violet, and now are deep
purple. And the Imp wriggles down from the wall and climbs up the
easiest of the trees and shouts out that they are quite soft. And at
last the tremendous day comes when the gardener, and the gardener's boy,
and the cook, and the kitchenmaid, and the housemaid all troop into the
orchard with ladders and baskets. And the gardener climbs a ladder into
the highest apple tree and drops the red round apples into the hands of
the maids below. The Imp and the Elf seize the step-ladder from the
scullery and climb up into a beautiful little apple tree that has a
broad low branch that is heavy with rosy-cheeked apples. They wriggle
out along the branch and eat some of the apples and drop the rest into
the basket on the ground beneath them. And other people pluck the
damsons from the damson trees and soon the baskets are full of crimson
apples and purple damsons, and away they go into the house where the
cook takes a good lot of them to make into a huge damson and apple tart
that we shall eat to-morrow.

The old gardener then takes the longest of all the ladders and props it
up against the quince tree, for the quince is the highest of all the
trees in the orchard. One of the maids climbs half-way up below the
gardener and he gathers the green and golden quinces and passes them to
her and she passes them to the kitchenmaid, who stands ready on the
ground to put them into the basket. And the Imp and the Elf sit in their
apple tree and eat apples and laugh and then pretend that they are two
wise little owls and call tuwhit tuwhoo, tuwhit tuwhoo, till I take up a
walking-stick and pretend to shoot them, and then they throw apples at
me and we have a game of catch with the great round red-cheeked balls.
Oh, it is a jolly time, the apple-gathering, as the Imp and the Elf
would tell you.

About now the fairy Godmother works her miracle for Autumn. We look up
to the moors and find them no longer dark and dull for the green
brackens have been turned a gorgeous orange by the early frosts in the
night-times. And when we look over the farm land to the woods we find
the trees no longer green, and the Elf says, "Do you see Ogre, the
Godmother has crowned Autumn now?" and sure enough, for the leaves are
turned like the brackens into a glory of splendid colours. And then we
go and picnic in the golden woods, and sometimes when the sun is hot we
could almost fancy it was summer if it were not for the colour. We
picnic under the trees and do our best to get a sight of a squirrel, and
watch the leaves blowing down from the trees like ruddy golden rain.
Once, before we went to the woods, I asked the Imp and the Elf which
leaves fall first, the leaves on the topmost branches of the trees or
the leaves on the low boughs, The Imp said the top ones, the Elf said
the low, and the Elf was right, although I do not think that either of
them really knew. Usually the Imp is right, and when I said the low
leaves fell the first, he said, "But isn't the wind stronger up above,
and don't the high leaves get blown hardest?" Yes, one would think that
the high leaves would be the first to drop. Can you guess why they are
not? Shall I tell you? Well, you just remember in Spring how the first
buds to open were the low ones. Then you will see why they are the first
to fall. They are the oldest. When we came to the woods we found that
this was just what was happening. All the leaves at the bottom fall, and
sometimes many of the trees in the woods kept little plumes of leaves on
their topmost twigs after all the others had gone fluttering down the
wind.

I am only going to remind you of three more things that belong to
Autumn. And one of them is pretty, and one of them is exciting, and one
of them is a little sad.

The first is a garden happening. Close under the house we have a broad
bed, and for some time before the real Autumn it is full of a very tall
plant with lots and lots of narrow dark green leaves. And after a little
it is covered with buds, rather like daisy buds only bigger. And then
one day the Imp leans out of the window and gives a sudden wriggle.
"Come and hold on to my legs, Ogre, but you must not look." And I hold
on to his round fat legs and keep my eyes the other way. And he leans
farther and farther out of the window, puffing and panting for breath,
until he can reach what he wants. And then the fat legs kick backwards,
and I pull him in, and when he is quite in he says, "The first," and
there in his hand is a beautiful flower like a purple daisy with a
golden middle to it. And sure enough it is the first Michaelmas daisy.
That is the really most autumnal of all flowers, just as the primrose is
the most special flower of Spring.

The second of the three happenings belongs to the moorland. Up on the
high moors, where there is a broad flat place with a little marshy pond
in it, the Elf and the Imp have a few very special friends. There are
the curlews, with their speckly brown bodies and long thin beaks and
whistling screams, and the grouse who make a noise like an old clock
running down in a hurry when they leap suddenly into the air. But these
are not the favourites. The birds that the Imp and the Elf love best of
all on the moorland have a beautiful crest on the tops of their heads,
and they are clothed in white and dark green that looks like black from
a little way off. They cry pe-e-e-e-wi, pe-e-e-e-e-wi, and the Imp cries
"peewit" back to them. Some people call them plovers, and some people
call them lapwings, because of the way they fly, but we always call them
the "peewits." All through the spring and summer they are there, and it
is great fun to watch them, for they love to fly into the air and turn
somersaults, and throw themselves about as if they were in a circus,
just for fun, you know, and because it is jolly to be alive.

But in the Autumn many of the birds do strange things. Some, like the
swallows and martins, fly far away over the seas to warmer countries for
the winter. Some only come here to spend the winter months, living in
cooler countries through the summer. And the peewits, when Autumn comes,
collect in tremendous flocks. All the friends and relations of our
peewits on the moor seem to come and join them, and then they move away
all over the country from place to place, wherever they can get food.
When we go up to the moor just at this time, we see not two or three or
half-a-dozen peewits, but crowds and crowds of them flying low, and
strutting on the ground, with their crests high up over their heads.

The last of the three happenings is the saddest. Do you remember the
haymaking and what the hay was carted away for? You remember how the
farmers stored it to feed the cows in winter. At the end of the Autumn
comes an evening when the cows are driven home for milking, and do not
go back again. The fields are left empty all the Winter, while the red
and white cows are fastened up in the byre (a byre is a nice name for a
cowshed) to eat the hay. When that day comes the Imp and the Elf always
walk home from the fields with the cows, and pat them and say good-bye
to them at the door of the byre, and promise to come and visit them
during the Winter. And then they come home to the house, and knock sadly
on the door of my study, and come in and say, "Ogre, the cows have been
shut up for the Winter, and nurse says we are to begin our thicker
things to-morrow." And then we are all sad, for that means Winter. And I
have to tell all sorts of jolly stories of King Frost and the Snow Queen
before we are cheerful enough to go to bed.




IV

WINTER


In Winter, real Winter, we get up with our teeth chattering to tell each
other how cold it is, and we find the water frozen in the basin, and the
soap frozen to the soap-dish, and the sponge frozen hard. That is what
Winter is like indoors, and it is not very nice. But there is a nice
indoor Winter too, when the fire is burning in the study grate with logs
on it from old broken ships, making blue flames that lick about the
chimney-hole. The Imp and the Elf plant cushions on the floor, and I sit
in a big chair and read stories to them out of a book or tell them out
of my head, making them up as I go along. That is the greatest fun,
because I do not know any better than the children what is going to
happen, whether the green pigmy or the blue will win in the battle in
the water lily, or whether the little boy with scarlet shoes will be
eaten by the giant, or whether he will make friends with him and be
asked to stop to tea. We can make the stories do just what we want, be
happy if we are happy, or full of scrapes if we are feeling naughty.

When we are in the middle of stories like this, we hear a tremendous
screaming, screaming, screaming outside, and a white cloud passes the
window with a great, shrill shriek, and we all jump up crying, "The
gulls, the gulls!"

And in the meadow and in the garden and flying in the air, screaming and
laughing with their weird voices, are hundreds of seagulls, blown inland
from the sea, bringing wild weather with them. You know the place where
we live is only a few miles from the sea, where it runs up into the land
in a broad, sandy bay that ends in wide marshes. There are seagulls in
the bay all the year round, and we sometimes see them in the fields in
Summer before the storms reach us from the west. But in Winter when the
cold and windy weather is coming, they fly in great flocks like clouds
of huge snow-flakes, and we watch them from the window and wonder how
soon the storm will follow them. And the next day or the day after, or
sometimes the very day when they come, the air is white again, this time
with driving snow. It comes flying past the windows, to be whirled up
high by the gale and dropped again till we see the ground speckled with
white, and then white everywhere except close round the big tree trunks.
Even the branches of the trees are heaped with snow, so they look like
white boughs with black shadows beneath them.

It snows all day and all night, and when our eyes are tired of looking
at the shining dazzling white, we come away from the window and sit down
by the fire, and talk about it, and think of children long ago, who used
to tell each other, when it was snowing, that geese were being plucked
in Heaven.

The Imp and the Elf put the matter another way. The Imp says, "It's old
King Frost freezing the rain, isn't it, Ogre?" I say "yes." And the Elf
goes on, "He does it because he wants to run about and play without
hurting the poor little plants. He knows that he is so cold that they
would die, like the children in the story book, if he danced about on
top of them, without covering them with a blanket So he just freezes the
rain into a big cosy white blanket for them and lays It gently down."

Presently, after we have been talking and telling stories for a little,
the Imp cries out, "Ogre, Ogre, we have forgotten all about the
cocoanut," and the Elf shouts, "Oh yes, the cocoanut," and away they
fly, leaving the door open and a horrible draught in the room. But soon
they run back again, with a saw and a gimlet, and a round, hard, hairy
cocoanut. We bore a few holes with the gimlet, to let the cocoanut milk
run out. The Imp likes cocoanut milk, but the Elf hates it, and says it
is just like medicine. Then comes the difficult part. I have to hold the
cocoanut steady on the edge of a chair, and saw away at it, all round
the end, while the Imp and the Elf stand watching, till the hard shell
is cut through. Then we knock the end off and the cocoanut is ready.
Ready for what, you want to know? Look out of the window and then you
will understand. All the ground is covered with snow, and the poor birds
are finding it difficult to find their food. The Imp and the Elf, who
love all live things, and the birds above all, could tell you a little
about that, for every winter day, as soon as breakfast is over, they
collect all the scraps off everybody's plates, and the crumbs off the
bread-board, and throw a great bowl of food out on the snowy lawn. And
then there is a fine clutter and a fuss. Starlings, and jackdaws, and
sparrows, and blackbirds, and thrushes, and sometimes rooks, and once,
one exciting day, a couple of magpies, all squabble and fight for the
food, and of course the sparrows get the best of it, because though they
are so small they are the cheekiest little birds that ever are. When all
the food is done the birds fly away, and leave the snow covered with the
marks of their feet, like very delicate tracery, or like that piece of
embroidery that the Elf is trying to do for a Christmas present, when
she is not busy with something else.

Well, well, but still you have not told us what you want to do with the
cocoanut. Wait just a minute, just half a minute, while I tell you about
the robin. Little Mr. Redbreast does not let us see much of himself
in summer, when he is off to the hedges and the hazel woods, having as
gay a time as a happy little bird knows how to enjoy. But he is a lazy
small gentleman, and as soon as the cold weather comes, he flies back to
the houses where he has a chance of scraps. He even flies in at the
pantry window and chirps at the cook till she gives him some food.

There are some other little birds just like the robin in this and these
are the tits. In the Summer we can see them in the woods if we go to
look for them, but they do not trouble about repaying our call; they do
not come to our gardens very often. But when Winter comes things are on
quite a different footing. They are very fond of suet or fat or the
white inside of a cocoanut, and as soon as the snow comes so do they,
looking for their food. We tie the cocoanut up with string and hang it
outside the study window from a big nail, and before it has been there
very long there is a fluttering of wings and a little blue-capped bird
with a green coat, blue splashes on his wings, and a golden waistcoat,
perches on the top of it. He puts his head first on this side and then
on that, and then he nimbly hops to the end of the cocoanut, just above
the hole, bends over, and peeps in. He flutters off into the air and
perches again, this time in the mouth of the hole; and then suddenly he
plunges his head in and has a good peck at the juicy white stuff inside.
Presently another blue tit comes flying, and then another. They perch on
the top of the cocoanut and quarrel and flap about till the first tit
has finished, and then they both try to get into the hole together and
find that it is not big enough. We all watch them and would like to clap
our hands at the performance but dare not for fear of frightening them.

At the beginning of the Winter the tits are very shy, but later on, if
the window is open, they often alight on the window-sill and have a good
look about the room when they have had their turn at the cocoanut and
are waiting till the others have done to have a second peck.

I think all the Seasons are jolly in their own way, and perhaps it is a
good thing that they are all so different. Do you remember the Autumn
fairy story? Well the Seasons really are just like a family of sisters,
and we should find them very dull if they were all exactly the same.
After the snowstorms, when we go out together, things are quite
different, and we are quite different. The Imp and the Elf wear red
woolly caps instead of sunbonnet and straw hat. They wear thick, fluffy
coats and piles of things underneath them, and thick furry gloves. Why,
the Elf carries a muff just like any grown-up. And the ground has
changed as much as they. It is all white with snow, so that it is
difficult to believe that the hayfield where we played in Summer is
really the same place. We put on our thickest boots, and they go crunch,
crunch in the crisp snow. And we gather the snow in our hands and make
snowballs and throw them at each other. And then we make a giant
snowball, The Imp makes the biggest snowball he can in his hands and
then puts it on the ground and rolls it about. Everywhere it rolls the
snow clings to it, and it gets bigger and bigger till at last it is
nearly as big as the Imp himself and it takes all three of us to roll
it. We roll another and put it on the top of the first, and then a
smaller one and put it on the top of that, and then we roll snow into
long lumps for arms, and there we have our snow-man. We make eyes for
him with little blobs of earth, and a nose and a mouth, and in his mouth
we always put one of my pipes to make the poor fellow comfortable.

When we are tired of making snowballs and snow-men we go out of the
garden and across the road and along the field paths to the wood,
tramping through the shining snow. And we drag something behind us: can
you guess what it is? Do you remember in the fairy stories about the
people who lived near the forests? When the winter came they used to
shiver and rub their cold hands and go to the forests for firewood. And
as there were wolves in the forest they used to take a sledge so that
they could carry the sticks quickly back again before the wolves could
catch them. Well, when we go to the woods in winter we pretend that we
are going to the forests for firewood and we drag the Imp's big wooden
sledge behind us, and keep a bright look-out for wolves, though, of
course, there are no wolves in England now. All the same it is very good
fun to pretend that there are.

A jolly time we have on the way to the woods. The hedges are all bright
with hips and haws, coral colour and scarlet, the fruits of the wild
rose and the hawthorn. They glitter like crimson jewels in the white
hedges, where the birds are eating them as fast as they can. The
sunlight shimmers on the snow of the fields and the snow of the woods,
and the broad white shining slopes of the distant hills. And, of course,
all the way we watch carefully for the tracks of the wolves. We do not
find them, but we find the tracks of birds that have gone hop, hop, hop,
leaving each time the print of their feet in the snow, and the little
paddy tracks of the rabbits, and the flap tracks made by the rooks'
wings as they flag up from the ground.

For a long time the road is all up hill, but then we come to a deep
slope down, when the Elf and the Imp sit on the sledge, and I give them
a push off, and away they slide, quicker and quicker all the way to the
bottom; and then, instead of going straight on to the wood, they drag
the sledge up and go down again, and then once more, and then we all go
down together and sometimes end in a heap on the snow.

[Illustration]

When we leave the sliding hill we go up into the woods, and sometimes
really do find the tracks of a big four-footed animal. The Imp and the
Elf cry, "Wolf, wolf," but we know that really it is not a wolf, but a
big red fox with a bushy tail, who has passed that way in the night,
perhaps after stealing a chicken from the yard of one of the farms.

The woods are like fairy woods now, just as if the fairies had hung them
with glittering jewels, for they are covered with snow and frost, and
icicles, too, when the snow on the boughs has begun to melt and then
been frozen again. We hear crunch, crash, crash, crunch, and then the
woods are very still for a moment, and then we hear a great heavy
crunch, and perhaps see a mass of caked snow tumble off a branch to the
ground.

If it is near Chrismas time we do not bother about looking for sticks
and dead branches. We walk straight along the edge of the wood to where
three stout holly bushes grow close together. You cannot think how
pretty they look, with their dark green leaves and red berries, and the
white snow resting on the leaves, and you just cannot think how prickled
we get in picking the branches of holly. But we think of Christmas fun,
and do not mind the prickles much, while the Elf sings:

     "Get the pale mistletoe,
      And the red holly.
        Hang them up,
        Hang them up,
      We will be jolly.

     "Kiss under mistletoe,
      Laugh under holly,
        Hang them up,
        Hang them up,
      We will be jolly."

[Illustration]

The mistletoe is not so easy to find as the holly. I remember once after
we had piled the sledge with holly and dragged it home, the Elf pouted
her lips and looked very unhappy and said, "There isn't a mistletoe tree
anywhere in all the world, not even in the Long Wood. We shan't have any
mistletoe for Christmas." Things really did look rather sad, so I sent
her off to ask the old gardener about it, and the Imp went too. In about
an hour they came running back all smiles and happiness, and with their
arms as full as they could be. I shouted out to them as they went past
the window, "Where did you get all that mistletoe?" And they laughed
and said that it grew on the apple tree in the orchard, and that the old
gardener had cut it for them, and promised to let them bob for apples in
a bucket in the wood-shed if they were quick back. That is really and
truly the way the mistletoe grows. It is just like a baby that will not
leave its nurse. It pines away and will do nothing by itself, so it has
to be stuck into another tree to grow there more happily.

But you know the snow does not last all the Winter. After Christmas, and
before, there are weeks without any snow at all, and then we find it
rather sorrowful to walk over the bleak bare fields. But the hips and
haws are bright in the hedges, and whenever there is sunshine everything
is made jolly. And then, too, it is great fun to watch them ploughing
the land ready for next year's corn.

"Old Susan isn't pulling hay carts now," says the Elf, and we look up
and there is Susan side by side with another of the farm horses
harnessed to a plough. And a boy, a big strong boy, holds the handles of
the plough and the reins at the same time, and shouts to the horses, and
they cross the field slowly, tramp, tramp, tramp, and the rough earth is
turned over by the steel ploughshare, all dark and earthy, ready for the
seed. In the middle of one of the fields is a special friend of the
Imp's. He wears a battered hat and an old green coat, and a red worsted
scarf that flaps in the wind. He is made of two sticks, one stuck in the
earth and one nailed across it, and he is called Sir John Scarecrow,
because it is his duty to scare the birds from the field. But we have
laughed many a day to see the rooks perched on his broken hat and
tattered arms.

When we think of sowing seeds we think of Spring with the new corn green
on the red ground, and when we think of Spring we think of Summer, when
it is tall and wavy in the wind, and when we think of Summer we think of
Autumn when the corn is golden and cut, and then, why, then we come to
Winter again. And now the Imp and the Elf say that I have told you
enough about our Seasons, and that I must tell them fairy stories till
it is time for them to go to bed. So here is good-bye to you and a piece
of advice. If you have got any grown-ups near at hand and it is not
quite bedtime, if I were you I would ask them to tell you stories, too.
INTRODUCTION                                     xi
       I. THE CLOCK STRIKES ONE                       1
      II. ALONG THE HIGHWAY OF THE FOX                9
     III. IN THE TOADFISH’S SHOE                     21
      IV. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO SEE THIS FALL       29
       V. WHIPPED BY EAGLES                          36
      VI. THANKSGIVING AT GRANDFATHER’S FARM         46
     VII. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO DO THIS FALL        52
    VIII. THE MUSKRATS ARE BUILDING                  61
      IX. THE NORTH WIND DOTH BLOW                   67
       X. AN OUTDOOR LESSON                          76
      XI. LEAFING                                    80
     XII. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO HEAR THIS FALL      88
    XIII. HONK, HONK, HONK!                          96
          NOTES AND SUGGESTIONS                     105




    ILLUSTRATIONS


    “ONE OF THE EAGLES STRUCK ME A STINGING BLOW
        ON THE HEAD”                                    _Frontispiece_
    THE FALL OF THE YEAR                                             1
    INITIAL, CHAPTER I                                               1
    INITIAL, CHAPTER II                                              9
    “OVER THE HILL IN A WHIRLWIND OF DUST AND HOWLS”                18
    INITIAL, CHAPTER III                                            21
    “HERE I FOUND HIM KEEPING HOUSE”                                24
    INITIAL, CHAPTER IV                                             29
    A SILKY SKEIN OF COBWEB                                         30
    “A WILD CREATURE, THAT WON’T GET OUT OF YOUR WAY”               32
    THE PYXIE                                                       32
    THE FIELD OF CORN IN THE SHOCK                                  33
    THE WINGED, AND PLUMED, AND BALLOONED SEEDS                 34, 35
    INITIAL, CHAPTER V                                              36
    INITIAL, CHAPTER VI                                             46
    “THE LANTERN FLICKERS, THE MILK FOAMS, THE STORIES FLOW”        48
    INITIAL, CHAPTER VII                                            52
    A COON                                                          54
    QUAILS                                                          55
    SHAGBARKS                                                       56
    WILD SEA FOWL                                                   57
    BLACK HAWTHORN BERRIES                                          58
    INITIAL, CHAPTER VIII                                           61
    “TO-NIGHT THERE IS NO LOAFING ABOUT THE LODGE”                  62
    TAILPIECE                                                       66
    INITIAL, CHAPTER IX                                             67
    A WHITEFOOT                                                     68
    A CHIPMUNK                                                      70
    A WOODCHUCK                                                     72
    FIVE DAYS OF LIFE AND PLENTY FOR THE BIRDS                      74
    INITIAL, CHAPTER X                                              76
    INITIAL, CHAPTER XI                                             80
    “BUT COME, BOYS, GET AFTER THOSE BAGS!”                         84
    INITIAL, CHAPTER XII                                            88
    A LOON                                                          89
    WHEN NIGHT COMES                                                90
    A BLUE JAY                                                      91
    A RED SQUIRREL                                                  92
    A KINGLET                                                       93
    INITIAL, CHAPTER XIII                                           96
    WILD GEESE                                                     102
    TAILPIECE                                                      103




NOTE


It is interesting to observe that the subject of the initial for
chapter IV is witch-hazel; that for chapter VII, the cocoons of the
cecropia, the promethea, and the basket worm; and that for chapter
VIII, a sprig of alder, with the old fruit and a budded catkin. The
subjects of the other initials require no identification.




INTRODUCTION


There are three serious charges brought against nature books of the
present time, namely, that they are either so dull as to be
unreadable, or so fanciful as to be misleading, or so insincere as to
be positively harmful. There is a real bottom to each of these
charges.

Dull nature-writing is the circumstantial, the detailed, the
cataloguing, the semi-scientific sort, dried up like old Rameses and
cured for all time with the fine-ground spice of measurements, dates,
conditions--observations, so called. For literary purposes, one
observation of this kind is better than two. Rarely does the watcher
in the woods see anything so new that for itself it is worth
recording. It is not what one sees, so much as the manner of the
seeing, not the observation but its suggestions that count for
interest to the reader. Science wants the exact observation;
nature-writing wants the observation exact and the heart of the
observer along with it. We want plenty of facts in our nature books,
but they have all been set down in order before; what has not been set
down before are the author’s thoughts and emotions. These should be
new, personal, and are pretty sure therefore to be interesting.

More serious than dullness (and that is serious enough) is the charge
that nature books are untrustworthy, that they falsify the facts, and
give a wrong impression of nature. Some nature books do, as some
novels do with the facts of human life. A nature book all full of
extraordinary, better-class animals who do extraordinary stunts
because of their superior powers has little of real nature in it.
There are no such extraordinary animals, they do no such extraordinary
things. Nature is full of marvels--Niagara Falls, a flying swallow, a
star, a ragweed, a pebble; but nature is not full of dragons and
centaurs and foxes that reason like men and take their tea with lemon,
if you please.

I have never seen one of these extraordinary animals, never saw
anything extraordinary out of doors, because the ordinary is so
surprisingly marvelous. And I have lived in the woods practically all
of my life. And you will never see one of them--a very good argument
against anybody’s having seen them.

The world out of doors is not a circus of performing prodigies, nor
are nature-writers strange half-human creatures who know wood-magic,
who talk with trees, and call the birds and beasts about them as did
one of the saints of old. No, they are plain people, who have seen
nothing more wonderful in the woods than you have, if they would tell
the truth.

When I protested with a popular nature-writer some time ago at one of
his exciting but utterly impossible fox stories, he wrote back,--

“The publishers demanded that chapter to make the book sell.”

Now the publishers of this book make no such demands. Indeed they have
had an expert naturalist and woodsman hunting up and down every line
of this book for errors of fact, false suggestions, wrong sentiments,
and extraordinaries of every sort. If this book is not exciting it is
the publishers’ fault. It may not be exciting, but I believe, and
hope, that it is _true_ to all of my out of doors, and not untrue to
any of yours.

The charge of insincerity, the last in the list, concerns the author’s
style and sentiments. It does not belong in the same category with the
other two, for it really includes them. Insincerity is the mother of
all the literary sins. If the writer cannot be true to himself, he
cannot be true to anything. Children are the particular victims of the
evil. How often are children spoken to in baby-talk, gush, hollow
questions, and a condescension as irritating as coming teeth! They are
written to, also, in the same spirit.

The temptation to sentimentalize in writing of the “beauties of
nature” is very strong. Raptures run through nature books as regularly
as barbs the length of wire fences. The world according to such books
is like the Garden of Eden according to Ridinger, all peace, in spite
of the monstrous open-jawed alligator in the foreground of the
picture, who must be smiling, I take it, in an alligatorish way at a
fat swan near by.

Just as strong to the story-writer is the temptation to blacken the
shadows of the picture--to make all life a tragedy. Here on my table
lies a child’s nature-book every chapter of which ends in
death--nothing but struggle to escape for a brief time the bloody jaws
of the bigger beast--or of the superior beast, man.

Neither extreme is true of nature. Struggle and death go on, but,
except where man interferes, a very even balance is maintained, peace
prevails over fear, joy lasts longer than pain, and life continues to
multiply and replenish the earth. “The level of wild life,” to quote
my words from “The Face of the Fields,” “of the soul of all nature is
a great serenity. It is seldom lowered, but often raised to a higher
level, intenser, faster, more exultant.”

This is a divinely beautiful world, a marvelously interesting world,
the best conceivable sort of a world to live in, notwithstanding its
gypsy moths, tornadoes, and germs, its laws of gravity, and of cause
and effect; and my purpose in this series of nature books is to help
my readers to come by this belief. A clear understanding of the laws
of the Universe will be necessary for such a belief in the end, and
with the understanding a profound faith in their perfect working
together. But for the present, in these books of the Seasons, if I can
describe the out of doors, its living creatures and their doings, its
winds and skies with their suggestions--all of the out of doors, as it
surrounds and supports me here in my home on Mullein Hill, Hingham, so
that you can see how your out of doors surrounds and supports you,
with all its manifold life and beauty, then I have done enough. If
only I can accomplish a fraction of this I have done enough.

    DALLAS LORE SHARP.
    MULLEIN HILL, September, 1911.




THE FALL OF THE YEAR




CHAPTER I

THE CLOCK STRIKES ONE


    “The clock strikes one,
      And all is still around the house!
    But in the gloom
      A little mouse
    Goes creepy-creep from room to room.”

The clock of the year strikes one!--not in the dark silent night of
winter, but in the hot light of midsummer.

It is a burning July day,--one o’clock in the afternoon of the
year,--and all is still around the fields and woods. All is still. All
is hushed. But yet, as I listen, I hear things in the dried grass, and
in the leaves overhead, going “creepy-creep,” as you have heard the
little mouse in the silent night.

I am lying on a bed of grass in the shade of a great oak tree, as the
clock of the year strikes one. I am all alone in the quiet of the hot,
hushed day. Alone? Are you alone in the big upstairs at midnight, when
you hear the little mouse going “creepy-creep” from room to room? No;
and I am not alone.

High overhead the clouds are drifting past; and between them, far
away, is the blue of the sky--and how blue, how cool, how far, far
away! But how near and warm seems the earth!

I lie outstretched upon it, feeling the burnt crisp grass beneath me,
a beetle creeping under my shoulder, the heat of a big stone against
my side. I throw out my hands, push my fingers into the hot soil, and
try to take hold of the big earth as if I were a child clinging to my
mother.

And so I am. But I am not frightened, as I used to be, when the little
mouse went “creepy-creep,” and my real mother brought a candle to
scare the mouse away. It is because I am growing old? But I cannot
grow old to my mother. And the earth is my mother, my second mother.
The beetle moving under my shoulder is one of my brothers; the hot
stone by my side is another of my brothers; the big oak tree over me
is another of my brothers; and so are the clouds, the white clouds
drifting, drifting, drifting, so far away yonder, through the blue,
blue sky.

The clock of the year strikes one. The summer sun is overhead. The
flood-tide of summer life has come. It is the noon hour of the year.

The drowsy silence of the full, hot noon lies deep across the field.
Stream and cattle and pasture-slope are quiet in repose. The eyes of
the earth are heavy. The air is asleep. Yet the round shadow of my oak
begins to shift. The cattle do not move; the pasture still sleeps
under the wide, white glare.

But already the noon is passing--to-day I see the signs of coming
autumn everywhere.

Of the four seasons of the year summer is the shortest, and the one we
are least acquainted with. Summer is hardly a pause between spring and
autumn, simply the hour of the year’s noon.

We can be glad with the spring, sad with the autumn, eager with the
winter; but it is hard for us to go softly, to pause and to be still
with the summer; to rest on our wings a little like the broad-winged
hawk yonder, far up in the wide sky.

But now the hawk is not still. The shadow of my oak begins to
lengthen. The hour is gone; and, wavering softly down the languid air,
falls a yellow leaf from a slender birch near by. I remember, too,
that on my way through the woodlot I frightened a small flock of
robins from a pine; and more than a week ago the swallows were
gathering upon the telegraph wires. So quickly summer passes. It was
springtime but yesterday, it seems; to-day the autumn is here.

It is a July day. At dawn the birds were singing, fresh and
full-throated almost as in spring. Then the sun burned through the
mist, and the chorus ceased. Now I do not hear even the chewink and
the talkative vireo. Only the fiery notes of the scarlet tanager come
to me through the dry white heat of the noon, and the resonant song of
the indigo bunting--a hot, metallic, quivering song, as out of a “hot
and copper sky.”

There are nestlings still in the woods. This indigo bunting has eggs
or young in the bushes of the hillside; the scarlet tanager by some
accident has but lately finished his nest in the tall oaks. I looked
in upon some half-fledged cuckoos along the fence. But all of these
are late. Most of the year’s young are upon the wing.

A few of the spring’s flowers are still opening. I noticed the bees
upon some tardy raspberry blossoms; here and there is a stray
dandelion. But these are late. The season’s fruit has already set, is
already ripening. Spring is gone; the sun is overhead; the red
wood-lily is open. To-day is the noon of the year.

High noon! and the red wood-lily is aflame in the old fields, and in
the low tangles of sweet-fern and blackberry that border the upland
woods.

The wood-lily is the flower of fire. How impossible it would be to
kindle a wood-lily on the cold, damp soil of April! It can be lighted
only on this kiln-dried soil of July. This old hilly pasture is baking
in the sun; the low mouldy moss that creeps over its thin breast
crackles and crumbles under my feet; the patches of sweet-fern that
blotch it here and there crisp in the heat and fill the smothered air
with their spicy breath; while the wood-lily opens wide and full,
lifting its spotted lips to the sun for his scorching kiss. See it
glow! Should the withered thicket burst suddenly into a blaze, it
would be no wonder, so hot and fiery seem the petals of this flower of
the sun.

How unlike the tender, delicate fragrant flowers of spring are these
strong flowers of the coming fall! They make a high bank along the
stream--milkweed, boneset, peppermint, turtle-head, joe-pye-weed,
jewel-weed, smartweed, and budding goldenrod! Life has grown lusty and
lazy and rank.

But life has to grow lusty and rank, for the winter is coming; and as
the woodchucks are eating and eating, enough to last them until spring
comes again, so the plants are storing fat in their tap-roots, and
ripening millions of seeds, to carry them safely through the long dead
months of winter.

The autumn is the great planting time out of doors. Every autumn wind
is a sower going forth to sow. And he must have seeds and to
spare--seeds for the waysides for the winter birds to eat, seeds for
the stony places where there is no depth of soil for them, seeds for
the ploughed fields where they are not allowed to grow, seeds for
every nook and corner, in order that somewhere each plant may find a
place to live, and so continue its kind from year to year.

Look at the seeds of the boneset, joe-pye-weed, milkweed, and
goldenrod! Seeds with wings and plumes and parachutes that go
floating and flying and ballooning.

    “Over the fields where the daisies grow,
      Over the flushing clover,
    A host of the tiniest fairies go--
    Dancing, balancing to and fro,
      Rolling and tumbling over.

    “Quivering, balancing, drifting by,
      Floating in sun and shadow--
    Maybe the souls of the flowers that die
    Wander, like this, to the summer sky
      Over a happy meadow.”

So they do. They wander away to the sky, but they come down again to
the meadow to make it happy next summer with new flowers; for these
are the seed-souls of thistles and daisies and fall dandelions seeking
new bodies for themselves in the warm soil of Mother Earth.

Mother Earth! How tender and warm and abundant she is! As I lie here
under the oak, a child in her arms, I see the thistle-down go floating
by, and on the same laggard breeze comes up from the maple swamp the
odor of the sweet pepper-bush. A little flock of chickadees stop in
the white birches and quiz me. “Who are you?” “Who are you-you-you?”
they ask, dropping down closer and closer to get a peek into my face.

Perhaps they don’t know who I am. Perhaps I don’t know who they are.
They are not fish hawks, of course; but neither am I an alligator or a
pumpkin, as the chickadees surely know. This much I am quite sure of,
however: that this little flock is a family--a family of young
chickadees and their two parents, it may be, who are out seeing the
world together, and who will stay together far into the cold coming
winter.

They are one of the first signs of the autumn to me, and one of my
surest, sweetest comforts as the bleak cold winds come down from the
north. For the winds will not drive my chickadees away, no matter how
cold and how hard they blow, no matter how dark and how dead the
winter woods when, in the night of the year, the clock strikes twelve.

The clock to-day strikes one, and all is still with drowsy sleep out
of doors. The big yellow butterflies, like falling leaves, are
flitting through the woods; the thistledown is floating, floating
past; and in the sleepy air I see the shimmering of the spiders’ silky
balloons, as the tiny aeronauts sail over on their strange voyages
through the sky.

How easy to climb into one of their baskets, and in the fairy craft
drift far, far away! How pleasant, too, if only the noon of the year
would last and last; if only the warm sun would shine and shine; if
only the soft sleepy winds would sleep and sleep; if only we had
nothing to do but drift and drift and drift!

But we have a great deal to do, and we can’t get any of it done by
drifting. Nor can we get it done by lying, as I am lying, outstretched
upon the warm earth this July day. Already the sun has passed
overhead; already the cattle are up and grazing; already the round
shadow of the oak tree begins to lie long across the slope. The noon
hour is spent. I hear the quivering click-clack of a mowing-machine in
a distant hay field. The work of the day goes on. My hour of rest is
almost over, my summer vacation is nearly done. Work begins again
to-morrow.

But I am ready for it. I have rested outstretched upon the warm earth.
I have breathed the sweet air of the woods. I have felt the warm
life-giving sun upon my face. I have been a child of the earth. I have
been a brother to the stone and the bird and the beetle. And now I am
strong to do my work, no matter what it is.




CHAPTER II

ALONG THE HIGHWAY OF THE FOX


With only half a chance our smaller wild animals--the fox, the mink,
the ’coon, the ’possum, the rabbit--would thrive, and be happy forever
on the very edges of the towns and cities. Instead of a hindrance,
houses and farms, roads and railways are a help to the wild animals,
affording them food and shelter as their natural conditions never
could. So, at least, it seems; for here on Mullein Hill, hardly twenty
miles from the heart of Boston, there are more wild animals than I
know what to do with--just as if the city of Boston were a big skunk
farm or fox farm, from which the countryside all around (particularly
my countryside) were being continually restocked.

But then, if I seem to have more foxes than a man of chickens needs to
have, it is no wonder, living as I do on a main traveled road in
Foxland, a road that begins off in the granite ledges this side of
Boston, no one knows where, and, branching, doubling, turning, no one
knows how many times, comes down at last along the trout brook to the
street in front of my house, where, leaping the brook and crossing the
street, it runs beside my foot-path, up the hill, to the mowing-field
behind the barn.

When I say that last fall the hunters, standing near the brook where
this wild-animal road and the wagon road cross, shot seven foxes, you
will be quite ready to believe that this is a much-traveled road, this
road of the foxes that cuts across my mowing-field; and also that I am
quite likely to see the travelers, now and then, as they pass by.

So I am, especially in the autumn, when game grows scarce; when the
keen frosty air sharpens the foxes’ appetites, and the dogs, turned
loose in the woods, send the creatures far and wide for--chickens!

For chickens? If you have chickens, I hope your chicken-coop does not
stand along the side of a fox road, as mine does. For straight across
the mowing-field runs this road of the foxes, then in a complete
circle right round the chicken yard, and up the bushy ridge into the
wood.

How very convenient! Very, indeed! And how thoughtful of me! Very
thoughtful! The foxes appreciate my kindness; and they make a point of
stopping at the hen-yard every time they pass this way.

It is interesting to know, too, that they pass this way almost every
night, and almost every afternoon, and at almost every other odd time,
so that the hens, with hundreds of grubby acres to scratch in, have to
be fenced within a bare narrow yard, where they can only be _seen_ by
the passing foxes.

Even while being driven by the dogs, when naturally they are in
something of a hurry, the foxes will manage to get far enough ahead of
the hounds to come by this way and saunter leisurely around the coop.

I have a double-barreled gun and four small boys; but terrible as that
combination sounds, it fails somehow with the foxes. It is a
two-barreled-four-boyed kind of a joke to them. They think that I am
fooling when I blaze away with both barrels at them. But I am not.
Every cartridge is loaded with BB shot. But that only means
_Blank-Blank_ to them, in spite of all I can do. The way they jump
when the gun goes off, then stop and look at me, is very irritating.

This last spring I fired twice at a fox, who jumped as if I had hit
him (I must have hit him), then turned himself around and looked all
over the end of the barn to see where the shots were coming from. They
were coming from the back barn window, as he saw when I yelled at him.

It was an April morning, cold and foggy, so cold and foggy and so very
early that my chattering teeth, I think, disturbed my aim.

It must have been about four o’clock when one of the small boys
tiptoed into my room and whispered, “Father, quick! there’s a fox
digging under Pigeon Henny’s coop behind the barn.”

I was up in a second, and into the boys’ room. Sure enough, there in
the fog of the dim morning I could make out the moving form of a fox.
He was digging under the wire runway of the coop.

The old hen was clucking in terror to her chicks. It was she who had
awakened the boys.

There was no time to lose. Downstairs I went, down into the basement,
where I seized the gun, and, slipping in a couple of shells, slid out
of the cellar door and crept stealthily into the barn.

The back window was open. The thick wet fog poured in like dense
smoke. I moved swiftly in my bare feet and peered down upon the field.
There stood the blur of the coop,--a dark shadow only in the fog,--but
where was the fox?

Pushing the muzzle of my double-barreled gun across the window-sill, I
waited. And there in the mist stood the fox, reaching in with his paw
under the wire that inclosed the coop.

Carefully, deliberately, I swung the gun on the window-sill until the
bead drew dead upon the thief; then, fixing myself as firmly as I
could with bare feet, I made sure of my mark and fired.

I do not wonder that the fox jumped. I jumped, myself, as both barrels
went off together. A gun is a sudden thing at any time of day, but so
early in the morning, and when everything was wrapped in silence and
ocean fog, the double explosion was extremely startling.

The fox jumped, as naturally he would. When, however, he turned
deliberately around and looked all over the end of the barn to see
where I was firing from, and stood there, until I shouted at him--I
say it was irritating.

But I was glad, on going out later, to find that neither charge of
shot had hit the coop. The coop was rather large, larger than the
ordinary coop; and taking that into account, and the thick, uncertain
condition of the atmosphere, I had not made a bad shot after all. It
was something not to have killed the hen.

But the fox had killed eleven of the chicks. One out of the brood of
twelve was left. The rascal had dug a hole under the wire; and then,
by waiting as they came out, or by frightening them out, had eaten
them one by one.

There are guns and guns, and some, I know, that shoot straight. But
guns and dogs and a dense population have not yet availed here against
the fox.

One might think, however, when the dogs are baying hard on the heels
of a fox, that one’s chickens would be safe enough for the moment from
that particular fox. But there is no pack of hounds hunting in these
woods swift enough or keen enough to match the fox. In literature the
cunning of the fox is very greatly exaggerated. Yet it is, in fact,
more than equal to that of the hound.

A fox, I really believe, enjoys an all-day run before the dogs. And as
for house dogs, I have seen a fox, that was evidently out for mischief
and utterly tired of himself, come walking along the edge of the knoll
here by the house, and, squatting on his haunches, yap down lonesomely
at the two farm dogs below.

This very week I heard the hounds far away in the ledges. I listened.
They were coming toward me, and apparently on my side of the brook. I
had just paused at the corner of the barn when the fox, slipping along
the edge of the woods, came loping down to the hen-yard within easy
gun-shot of me. He halted for a hungry look at the hens through the
wire fence, then trotted slowly off, with the dogs yelping fully five
minutes away in the swamp.

How many minutes would it have taken that fox to snatch a hen, had
there been a hen on _his_ side of the fence? He could have made
chicken-sandwiches of a hen in five minutes, could have eaten them,
too, and put the feathers into a bolster--almost! How many of my hens
he has made into pie in less than five minutes!

As desserts go, out of doors, he has a right to a pie for fooling the
dogs out of those five crowded minutes. For he does it against such
uneven odds, and does it so neatly--sometimes so very thrillingly! On
three occasions I have seen him do the trick, each time by a little
different dodge.

One day, as I was climbing the wooded ridge behind the farm, I heard a
single foxhound yelping at intervals in the hollow beyond. Coming
cautiously to the top, I saw the hound below me beating slowly along
through the bare sprout-land, half a mile away, and having a hard time
holding to the trail. Every few minutes he would solemnly throw his
big black head into the air, stop stock-still, and yelp a long doleful
yelp, as if begging the fox to stop its fooling and try to leave a
reasonable trail.

The hound was walking, not running; and round and round he would go,
off this way, off that, then back when, catching the scent again, he
would up with his muzzle and howl for all the woods to hear. But I
think it was for the fox to hear.

I was watching the curious and solemn performance, and wondering if
the fox really did hear and understand, when, not far from me, on the
crown of the ridge, something stirred.

Without moving so much as my eyes, I saw the fox, a big beauty, going
slowly and cautiously round and round in a small circle among the
bushes, then straight off for a few steps, then back in the same
tracks; off again in another direction and back again; then in and
out, round and round, until, springing lightly away from the top of a
big stump near by, the wily creature went gliding swiftly down the
slope.

The hound with absolute patience worked his sure way up the hill to
the circle and began to go round and round, sniffling and whimpering
to himself, as I now could hear; sniffling and whimpering with
impatience, but true to every foot-print of the trail. Round and
round, in and out, back and forth, he went, but each time in a wider
circle, until the real trail was picked up, and he was away with an
eager cry.

I once again saw the trick played, so close to me, and so
deliberately, with such cool calculating, that it came with something
of a revelation to me of how the fox may feel, of what may be the
state of mind in the wild animal world.

It was a late October evening, crisp and clear, with a moon almost
full. I had come up from the meadow to the edge of the field behind
the barn, and stood leaning back upon a short-handled hayfork,
looking. It was at everything that I was looking--the moonlight, the
gleaming grass, the very stillness, so real and visible it seemed at
the falling of this first frost. I was listening too, when, as far
away as the stars, it seemed, came the cry of the hounds.

You have heard at night the passing of a train beyond the mountains?
the sound of thole-pins round a distant curve in the river? the
closing of a barn door somewhere down the valley? Strange it may seem
to one who has never listened, but the far-off cry of the hounds is
another such friendly and human voice, calling across the vast of the
night.

They were coming. How clear their tones, and bell-like! How mellow in
the distance, ringing on the rim of the moonlit sky, as round the
sides of a swinging silver bell. Their clanging tongues beat all in
unison, the sound rising and falling through the rolling woodland, and
spreading like a curling wave as the pack broke into the open over the
level meadows.

I waited. Rounder, clearer, came the cry. I began to pick out the
individual voices as now this one, now that, led the chorus across
some mighty measure of The Chase.

Was it a twig that broke? Some brittle oak leaf that cracked in the
path behind me? A soft sound of feet! Something breathed, stopped,
came on--and in the moonlight before me stood the fox!

The dogs were coming, but I was standing still. And who was I, anyway?
A stump? A post? No, he saw instantly that I was more than an ordinary
post. How much more?

The dogs were coming!

“Well,” said he, as plainly as anything was ever said, “I don’t know
what you are. But I will find out.” And up he came and sniffed at my
shoes. “This is odd,” he went on, backing carefully off and sitting
down on his tail in the edge of a pine-tree shadow. “Odd indeed. Not a
stump; not a man, in spite of appearances, for a man could never stand
still so long as that.”

The dogs were crashing through the underbrush below, their fierce
cries quivering through the very trees about me.

The fox got up, trotted back and forth in front of me for the best
possible view, muttering, “Too bad! Too bad! What an infernal nuisance
a pack of poodles can make of themselves at times! Here is something
new in the woods, and smells of the hen-yard, as I live! Those silly
dogs!” and trotting back, down the path over which he had just come,
he ran directly toward the coming hounds, leaped off into a pile of
brush and stones, and vanished as the hounds rushed up in a yelping,
panting whirl about me.

Cool? Indeed it was! He probably did not stop, as soon as he was out
of sight, and make faces at the whole pack. But that is because they
have politer ways in Foxland.

It is no such walking-match as this every time. It is nip and tuck,
neck and neck, a dead heat sometimes, when only his superior knowledge
of the ground saves the fox a whole skin.

Perhaps there are peculiar conditions, at times, that are harder for
the fox than for the dogs, as when the undergrowth is all adrip with
rain or dew, and every jump forward is like a plunge overboard. His
red coat is longer than the short, close hair of the hound, and his
big brush of a tail, heavy with water, must be a dragging weight over
the long hard course of the hunt. If wet fur to him means the same as
wet clothes to us, then the narrow escape I witnessed a short time ago
is easily explained. It happened in this way:--

I was out in the road by the brook when I caught the cry of the pack;
and, hurrying up the hill to the “cut,” I climbed the gravel bank for
a view down the road each way, not knowing along which side of the
brook the chase was coming, nor where the fox would cross.

[Illustration: “OVER THE HILL IN A WHIRLWIND OF DUST AND HOWLS”]

Not since the Flood had there been a wetter morning. The air could not
stir without spilling; the leaves hung weighted with the wet; the very
cries of the hounds sounded thick and choking, as the pack floundered
through the alder swamp that lay at the foot of the hill where I was
waiting.

There must be four or five dogs in the pack, I thought; and surely now
they are driving down the old runway that crosses the brook at my
meadow.

I kept my eye upon the bend in the brook and just beyond the big swamp
maple, when there in the open road stood the fox.

He did not stand; he only seemed to, so suddenly and unannounced had
he arrived. Not an instant had he to spare. The dogs were smashing
through the briars behind him. Leaping into the middle of the road,
he flew past me straight up the street, over the ridge, and out of
sight.

I turned to see the burst of the pack into the road, when flash! a
yellow streak, a rush of feet, a popping of dew-laid dust in the road,
and back was the fox, almost into the jaws of the hounds, as he shot
into the tangle of wild grapevines around which the panting pack was
even then turning!

With a rush that carried them headlong past the grapevines, the dogs
struck the warm trail in the road and went up over the hill in a
whirlwind of dust and howls.

They were gone. The hunt was over for that day. Somewhere beyond the
end of the doubled trail the pack broke up and scattered through the
woods, hitting a stale lead here and there, but not one of them, so
long as I waited, coming back upon the right track to the grapevines,
through whose thick door the hard-pressed fox had so narrowly won his
way.




CHAPTER III

IN THE TOADFISH’S SHOE


I was winding up my summer vacation with a little fishing party all by
myself, on a wharf whose piles stood deep in the swirling waters from
Buzzards Bay. My heavy-leaded line hummed taut in the swift current;
my legs hung limp above the water; my back rested comfortably against
a great timber that was warm in the September sun. Exciting? Of course
not. Fishing is fishing--any kind of fishing is fishing to me. But the
kind I am most used to, and the kind I like best, is from the edge of
a wharf, where my feet dangle over, where my “throw-out” line hums
taut over my finger, in a tide that runs swift and deep and dark below
me.

For what may you not catch in such dark waters? And when there are no
“bites,” you can sit and wait; and I think that sitting and waiting
with my back against a big warm timber is just as much fun now as it
used to be when I was a boy.

But after all it is fish that you want when you go fishing; and it is
exciting, moreover, just to sit as I was sitting on the wharf, with
all the nerves of your body concentrated in the tip of your right
forefinger, under the pressure of your line. For how do you know but
that the next instant you may get a bite? And how do you know what the
fish may be?

When you whip a trout stream for trout--why, you expect trout; when
you troll a pond for pickerel, you expect pickerel; but when you sit
on a wharf with your line far out in big, deep waters--why, you can
expect almost anything--except shoes!

Shoes? Yes, old shoes!

As I sat there on the wharf of Buzzards Bay, there was suddenly a
sharp tug at my line. A short quick snap, and I hooked him, and began
quickly hauling him in.

How heavily he came! How dead and stupid! Even a flounder or a cod
would show more fight than this; and very naturally, for on the end of
my line hung an old shoe!

“Well,” I thought, “I have fished for soles, and down on the Savannah
I have fished for ’gators, but I never fished for shoes before”; and
taking hold of my big fish (for it must have been a No. 12 shoe), I
was about to feel for the hook when I heard a strange grunting noise
inside, and nearly tumbled overboard at sight of two big eyes and a
monstrous head filling the whole inside of the shoe!

“In the name of Davy Jones!” I yelled, flinging line and shoe and
_thing_ (whatever it might be) far behind me, “I’ve caught the Old Man
of the Sea with his shoe on!” And, scrambling to my feet, I hurried
across the wharf to see if it really were a fish that now lay flapping
close beside the shoe.

It was really a fish; but it was also a hobgoblin, nightmare, and
ooze-croaker!--if you know what that is!

I had never seen a live toadfish before, and it is small wonder that I
sighed with relief to see that he had unhooked himself; for he looked
not only uncanny, but also dangerous! He was slimy all over, with a
tremendous head and a more tremendous mouth (if that could be), with
jaws studded on the inside with rows of sharp teeth, and fringed on
the outside with folds of loose skin and tentacles. Great glaring eyes
stared at me, with ragged bits of skin hanging in a ring about them.

Ugly? Oh, worse than ugly? Two thirds of the monster was head; the
rest, a weak, shapeless, slimy something with fins and tail, giving
the creature the appearance of one whose brain had grown at the
expense of the rest of his body, making him only a kind of living
head.

I looked at him. He looked at me, and croaked.

“I don’t understand you,” said I, and he croaked again. “But you are
alive,” said I; “and God made you, and therefore you ought not to look
so ugly to me,” and he flapped in the burning sun and croaked again.

Stooping quickly, I seized him, crowded him back into the old shoe,
and dipped him under water. He gasped with new life and croaked again.

“Now,” said I, “I begin to understand you. That croak means that you
are glad to taste salt water again”; and he croaked again, and I
dipped him in again.

Then I looked him over thoughtfully. He was about fifteen inches long,
brown in color, and coarsely marbled with a darker hue, which ran
along the fins in irregular wavy lines.

“You are odd, certainly, and peculiar, and altogether homely,” said I;
“but really you are not very ugly. Ugly? No, you are _not_ ugly. How
could anybody be ugly with a countenance so wise and learned?--so
thoughtful and meditative?” And the toadfish croaked and croaked
again. And I dipped him in again, and understood him better, and liked
him better all the time.

Then I took him in his shoe to the edge of the wharf.

“I am glad to have made your acquaintance, sir,” said I. “If I come
this way next summer, I shall look you up; for I want to know more
about you. Good-by.” And I heard him croak “Good-by,” as he and his
shoe went sailing out and dropped with a splash into the deep dark
water of the Bay.

[Illustration: “HERE I FOUND HIM KEEPING HOUSE”]

I meant what I said, and the next summer, along the shores of the Bay
I hunted him up. He was not in an old shoe this time, but under
certain rather large stones that lay just below ebb-tide mark, so that
they were usually, though not always, covered with water. Here I found
him keeping house; and as I was about to keep house myself, my heart
really warmed to him.

I was understanding him more and more, and so I was liking him better
and better. Ugly? Wait until I tell you what the dear fellow was
doing.

He was keeping house, and he was keeping it all alone! Now listen, for
this is what I learned that summer about the strange habits of Mrs.
Toadfish, and the handsome behavior of her husband.

It is along in June that the toadfish of our New England bays begin to
look round for their summer homes. As far as we now know, it is the
female who makes the choice and leaves her future mate to find her and
her home. A rock is usually chosen, always in shallow water, and
sometimes so far up on the shore that at low tide it is left high and
almost dry. The rock may vary in size from one as small as your hat up
to the very largest.

Having selected the place for her nest, she digs a pathway down under
the rock, and from beneath scoops out a hollow quite large enough to
swim round in. This completes the nest, or more properly burrow, in
which her little toadfish babies are to be reared.

She now begins to lay the eggs, but not in the sand, as one would
suppose; she deliberately pastes them on the under surface of the
rock. Just how she does this no one knows.

The eggs are covered with a clear, sticky paste which hardens in
contact with water, and is the means by which the mother sticks them
fast to the rock. This she must do while swimming on her back,
fastening one egg at a time, each close beside its neighbor in regular
order, till all the cleared surface of the rock is covered with
hundreds of beautiful amber eggs, like drops of pure, clear honey.

The eggs are about the size of buckshot; and, curiously enough, when
they hatch, the young come out with their heads all turned in the same
direction. Does the mother know which is the head end of the egg? Or
has some strange power drawn them around? Or do they turn themselves
for some reason?

It will be noticed, in lifting up the rocks, that the heads of the
fish are always turned toward the entrance to their nest, through
which the light and fresh water come; and it is quite easy to see that
these two important things have much to do with the direction in which
the little fish are turned.

After Mrs. Fish has finished laying her eggs, her maternal cares are
over. She leaves both eggs and cares to the keeping of Mr. Fish, swims
off, and crawls into a tin can--or old shoe!--to meditate in sober
satisfaction for the rest of the summer.

So it was _she_ that I caught, and not the gallant Mr. Toadfish at
all! I am glad of it. I have a deal of sympathy and down-right
admiration for Mr. Fish. He behaves most handsomely.

However, Mrs. Fish is very wise, and could not leave her treasures in
better keeping. If ever there was a faithful parent, it is a Father
Toadfish. For three weeks he guards the eggs before they hatch out,
and then they are only half hatched; for it has taken the little fish
all this time to get out on the top side of the eggs, to which they
are still attached by their middles, so that they can move only their
heads and tails.

They continue to wiggle in this fashion for some weeks, until the yolk
of the egg is absorbed, and they have grown to be nearly half an inch
long. They are then free from the rock and swim off, looking as much
like their parents as children can, and every bit as ugly.

Ugly? Did I say ugly? Is a baby ever ugly to its mother? Or a baby
toadfish to its father? No. You cannot love a baby and at the same
time see it ugly. You cannot love the out of doors with all your
_mind_ as well as with all your heart, and ever see it ugly.

All this time the father has been guarding the little toadfish; and
if, during the whole period, he goes out to get a meal, I have not
been able to find when it is, for I always find him at home, minding
the babies.

The toadfish lives entirely unmolested by enemies, so far as I can
learn; and his appearance easily explains the reason of it. I know of
nothing that would willingly enter a croaking, snapping, slimy
toadfish’s nest to eat him; and it takes some courage to put one’s
hand into his dark hole and pull him out.

His principal diet seems to be shrimp, worms and all kinds of small
fish. Yet he may be said to have no principal diet; for, no matter
what you are fishing for, or what kind of bait you are using, if there
is a toadfish in the vicinity you are sure to catch him. If fishing
along a wharf in September, you may catch the fish, and an old shoe
along with him--with _her_, perhaps I should say.

And if you do, please notice how wise and thoughtful the face, how
beautifully marbled the skin, how courageous the big strong jaw!

Ugly? Not if you will put yourself in the toadfish’s shoe.




CHAPTER IV

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO SEE THIS FALL


I

You ought to see the sky--every day. You ought to see, as often as
possible, the breaking of dawn, the sunset, the moonrise, and the
stars. Go up to your roof, if you live in the city, or out into the
middle of the Park, or take a street-car ride into the edge of the
country--just to see the moon come up over the woods or over a rounded
hill against the sky.


II

You ought to see the light of the October moon, as it falls through a
roof of leafless limbs in some silent piece of woods. You have seen
the woods by daylight; you have seen the moon from many places; but to
be in the middle of the moonlit woods after the silence of the October
frost has fallen is to have one of the most beautiful experiences
possible out of doors.


III

You ought to see a wooded hillside in the glorious colors of the
fall--the glowing hickories, the deep flaming oaks, the cool, dark
pines, the blazing gums and sumacs! Take some single, particular
woodland scene and look at it until you can see it in memory forever.


IV

You ought to see the spiders in their airships, sailing over the
autumn meadows. Take an Indian Summer day, lazy, hazy, sunny, and lie
down on your back in some small meadow where woods or old rail fences
hedge it around. Lie so that you do not face the sun. The sleepy air
is heavy with balm and barely moves. Soon shimmering, billowing,
through the light, a silky skein of cobweb will come floating over.
Look sharply, and you will see the little aëronaut swinging in his
basket at the bottom of the balloon, sailing, sailing--

    Away in the air air--
    Far are the shores of Anywhere,
    Over the woods and the heather.


V

You ought to see (only _see_, mind you,) on one of these autumn
nights, when you have _not_ on your party clothes--you ought to see a
“wood pussy.” A wood pussy is not a house pussy; a wood pussy is a
wood pussy; that is to say, a wood pussy is a--_skunk_! Yes, you ought
to see a skunk walking calmly along a moonlit path and not caring a
fig for you. You will perhaps never meet a wild buffalo or a grizzly
bear or a jaguar in the woods nearest your house; but you may meet a
wild skunk there, and have the biggest adventure of your life. Yes,
you ought to see a skunk some night, just for the thrill of meeting a
wild creature that won’t get out of your way.


VI

You ought to see the witch-hazel bush in blossom late in November. It
is the only bush or tree in the woods that is in full bloom after the
first snow may have fallen. Many persons who live within a few
minutes’ walk of the woods where it grows have never seen it. But
then, many persons who live with the sky right over their heads, with
the dawn breaking right into their bedroom windows, have never seen
the sky or the dawn to think about them, and wonder at them! There are
many persons who have never seen anything at all that is worth
seeing. The witch-hazel bush, all yellow with its strange blossoms in
November, is worth seeing, worth taking a great deal of trouble to
see.

There is a little flower in southern New Jersey called pyxie, or
flowering moss, a very rare and hidden little thing; and I know an old
botanist who traveled five hundred miles just to have the joy of
seeing that little flower growing in the sandy swamp along Silver Run.
If you have never seen the witch-hazel in bloom, it will pay you to
travel five hundred and five miles to see it. But you won’t need to go
so far,--unless you live beyond the prairies,--for the witch-hazel
grows from Nova Scotia to Florida and west to Minnesota and Alabama.

There is one flower that, according to Mr. John Muir (and he surely
knows!), it will pay one to travel away up into the highest Sierra to
see. It is the fragrant Washington lily, “the finest of all the Sierra
lilies,” he says. “Its bulbs are buried in shaggy chaparral tangles, I
suppose for safety from pawing bears; and its magnificent panicles
sway and rock over the top of the rough snow-pressed bushes, while
big, bold, blunt-nosed bees drone and mumble in its polleny bells. A
lovely flower worth going hungry and footsore endless miles to see.
The whole world seems richer now that I have found this plant in so
noble a landscape.”

[Illustration: “A WILD CREATURE THAT WON’T GET OUT OF YOUR WAY”]

And so it seemed to the old botanist who came five hundred miles to
find the tiny pyxie in the sandy swamps of southern New Jersey. So it
will seem to you--the whole world will not only _seem_ richer, but
will _be_ richer for you--when you have found the witch-hazel bush all
covered with summer’s gold in the bleak woods of November.


VII

You ought to see a big pile of golden pumpkins in some farmhouse shed
or beside the great barn door. You ought to see a field of corn in the
shock; hay in a barn mow; the jars of fruit, the potatoes, apples, and
great chunks of wood in the farmhouse cellar. You ought to see how a
farmer gets ready for the winter--the comfort, the plenty, the
sufficiency of it all!


VIII

You ought to see how the muskrats, too, get ready for the winter, and
the bees and the flowers and the trees and the frogs--everything.
Winter is coming. The cold will kill--if it has a chance. But see how
it has no chance. How is it that the bees will buzz, the flowers open,
the birds sing, the frogs croak again next spring as if there had been
no freezing, killing weather? Go out and see why for yourselves.


IX

You ought to see the tiny seed “birds” from the gray birches,
scattering on the autumn winds; the thistledown, too; and a dozen
other of the winged, and plumed, and ballooned, seeds that sail on the
wings of the winds. You should see the burdock burs in the cows’ tails
when they come home from the pasture, and the stick-tights and
beggar-needles in your own coat-tails when you come home from the
pastures. And seeing that, you should _think_--for that is what real
seeing means. Think what? Why, that you are just as good as a cow’s
tail to scatter Nature’s seeds for her, and not a bit better, as she
sees you.


X

You ought to see the migrating birds as they begin to flock on the
telegraph wires, in the chimneys, and among the reeds of the river.
You ought to see the swallows, blackbirds, robins, and bluebirds, as
they flock together for the long southern flight. There are days in
late September and in early October when the very air seems to be half
of birds, especially toward nightfall, if the sun sets full and clear:
birds going over; birds diving and darting about you; birds along the
rails and ridge-poles; birds in the grass under your feet--birds
everywhere. You should be out among them where you can see them. And
especially you should see--without fail, this autumn and every
autumn--the wedge of wild geese cleaving the dull gray sky in their
thrilling journey down from the far-off frozen North.




CHAPTER V

WHIPPED BY EAGLES


As you head into Maurice River Cove from Delaware Bay by boat, the
great eagle’s nest of Garren’s Neck Swamp soon looms into view. It is
a famous nest, and an ancient nest; for it has a place in the chart of
every boat that sails up the river, and has had for I don’t know how
many years. From the river side of the long swamp the nest is in sight
the year round, but from the land side, and from the house where we
lived, the nest could be seen only after the leaves of the swamp had
fallen. Then all winter long we could see it towering over the swamp;
and often, in the distance, we could see the eagles coming and going
or soaring in mighty circles high up in the air above it.

That nest had a strange attraction for me. It was the home of eagles,
the monarchs of this wide land of swamp and marsh and river.

Between me and the great nest lay a gloomy gum swamp, wet and wild,
untouched by the axe and untraveled, except in winter by the
coon-hunters. The swamp began just across the road that ran in front
of the house; and often at night I would hear the scream of a wild cat
in the dark hollows; and once I heard the _pat, pat_ of its feet as it
went leaping along the road.

Then beyond the swamp and the nest stretched a vast wild marsh-land,
where the reeds grew, and the tides came in, and the mud-hens lived.
And beyond that flowed the river, and beyond the river lay another
marsh, and beyond the marsh another swamp. And over all this vast wild
world towered the nest of the eagles, like some ancient castle; and
over it all--swamp and marsh and river--ruled the eagles, as bold and
free as the mighty barons of old.

Is it any wonder that I often found myself gazing away at that nest on
the horizon and longing for wings?--for wings with which to soar above
the swamp and the bay and the marsh and the river, to circle about and
about that lofty eyrie, as wild as the eagles and as free? Is it any
wonder that I determined some day to stand up in that nest, wings or
no wings, while the eagles should scream about me, and away below me
should stretch river and marsh and swamp?

To stand up in that nest, to yell and wave my arms with the eagles
wheeling and screaming over me, became the very peak of my boy
ambitions.

And I did it. I actually had the eggs of those eagles in my hands. I
got into the nest; but I am glad even now that I got out of the nest
and reached the ground.

It must have been in the spring of my fourteenth year when, at last, I
found myself beneath the eagle tree. It was a stark old white oak,
almost limbless, and standing out alone on the marsh some distance
from the swamp. The eagle’s nest capped its very top.

The nest, I knew, must be big; but not until I had climbed up close
under it did I realize that it was the size of a small haystack. There
was certainly half a cord of wood in it. I think that it must
originally have been built by fish hawks.

Holding to the forking top upon which the nest was placed, I reached
out, but could not touch the edge from any side.

I had come determined to get up into it, however, at any hazard; and
so I set to work. I never thought of how I was to get down; nor had I
dreamed, either, of fearing the eagles. A bald eagle is a bully. I
would as soon have thought of fearing our hissing old gander at home.

As I could not get out to the edge of the nest and scale the walls,
the only possible way up, apparently, was through the nest. The sticks
here in the bottom were old and quite rotten. Digging was easy, and I
soon had a good beginning.

The structure was somewhat cone-shaped, the smaller end down. It had
grown in circumference as it grew in years and in height, probably
because at the bottom the building materials had decayed and gradually
fallen away, until now there was a decided outward slant from bottom
to top. It had grown lopsided, too, there being a big bulge on one
side of the nest near the middle.

The smallness of the bottom at first helped me; there was less of the
stuff to be pulled out. I easily broke away the dead timbers and
pushed aside the tougher sticks. I intended to cut a channel clear to
the top and go up through the nest. Already my head and shoulders were
well into it.

Now the work became more difficult. The sticks were newer, some of
them being of seasoned oak and hickory, which the birds had taken from
cord-wood piles.

I had cut my channel up the side of the nest nearly halfway when I
came to a forked branch that I could neither break off nor push aside.
I soon found that it was not loose, but that it belonged to the oak
tree itself. It ran out through the nest horizontally, extending a
little more than a foot beyond the rough walls.

Backing down, I saw that this fork was the support of the bulge that
had given the nest its lopsided appearance. A few large timbers had
been rested across it, small loose pieces had gradually lodged upon
these, and thus in time brought about the big bulge.

I pushed off this loose stuff and the few heavy timbers and found that
the fork would bear my weight. It now projected a little way from the
walls of the nest. I got a firm hold on the forks out at their ends,
swung clear, and drew myself up between them. After a lively scramble,
I got carefully to my feet, and, clutching the sticks protruding from
the side, stood up, with my eyes almost on a level with the rim of the
great nest. This was better than cutting a channel, certainly--at
least for the ascent, and I was not then thinking of the descent.

I looked over the protruding sticks of the rim. I caught a glimpse of
large dull white eggs!

Eggs of shining gold could not have so fascinated me. There were
thousands of persons who could have gold eggs if they cared. But
eagles’ eggs! Money could not buy such a sight as this.

I was more than ever eager now to get into the nest. Working my
fingers among the sticks of the rim for a firm grip, I stuck my toes
into the rough wall and began to climb. At some considerable hazard
and at the cost of many rents in my clothing, I wriggled up over the
edge and into the hollow of the nest where the coveted eggs lay.

The eagles were wheeling and screaming overhead. The weird _cac, cac,
cac_ of the male came down from far above me; while the female,
circling closer, would swoop and shrill her menacing, maniacal
half-laugh almost in my ears.

Their wild cries thrilled me, and their mighty wings, wheeling so
close around me, seemed to catch me in their majestic sweep and almost
to carry me in swift, swinging circles through the empty air. An
ecstasy of excitement overcame me. I felt no body, no weight of
anything. I lost my head completely, and, seizing the eggs, rose to my
feet and stood upright in the nest.

The eagles swept nearer. I could feel the wind from their wings. I
could see the rolling of their gleaming eyes, and the glint of the sun
on their snow-white necks. And as they dipped and turned and careened
over me, I came perilously near trying to fly myself.

What a scene lay under me and rolled wide and free to the very edge of
the world! The level marsh, the blue, hazy bay, the far-off, unblurred
horizon beyond the bending hill of the sea! The wild, free wind from
the bay blew in upon my face, the old tree trembled and rocked beneath
me, the screaming eagles wove a mazy spell of double circles about me,
till I screamed back at them in wild delight.

The sound of my voice seemed to infuriate the birds. The male turned
suddenly in his round and swooped directly at me. The movement was
instantly understood by his mate, who, thus emboldened, cut under him
and hurled herself downward, passing with a vicious grab at my face. I
dodged, or she would have hit me.

For the moment I had forgotten where I stood; and, in dodging the
eagle, I almost stepped over the edge of the nest. I caught my balance
and dropped quickly to my knees, completely unnerved.

Fear like a panic took instant hold on me. Only one desire possessed
me--to get down. I crept to the edge and looked over. The sight made
me dizzy. Sixty feet of almost empty air! Far down, a few small limbs
intervened between me and the ground. But there was nothing by which
to descend.

I was dismayed; and my expression, my posture--something, betrayed my
confusion to the eagles. They immediately lost all dread of me. While
I was looking over, one of them struck me a stinging blow on the head,
knocking my cap off into the air.

That started me. I must climb down or be knocked over. If only I had
continued with my channel to the top! If only that forked branch by
which I ascended were within reach! But how could I back over the
flaring rim to my whole length and swing my body under against the
inward-slanting nest until my feet could touch the fork? But if I ever
got down, that was what I must do; for the eagles gave me no chance to
cut a channel now.

Laying the eggs back for the time in the hollow, I began tearing away
the rim of the nest in order to clear a place over which to back down.

I was momentarily in danger of being hurled off by the birds; for I
could not watch them and work, too. And they were growing bolder with
every dash. One of them, driving fearfully from behind, flattened me
out on the nest. Had the blow been delivered from the front, I should
have been knocked headlong to the ground.

I was afraid to delay longer. A good-sized breach was opened in the
rim of the nest by this time. And now, if the sticks would not pull
out, I might let myself over and reach the fork. Once my feet touched
that, I could manage the rest, I knew.

Digging my hands deep into the nest for a firm hold, I began
cautiously to back over the rough, stubby rim, reaching with my feet
toward the fork.

The eagles seemed to appreciate the opportunity my awkward position
offered them. I could not have arranged myself more conveniently to
their minds, I am sure. And they made the most of it. I can laugh now;
but the memory of it can still make me shiver, too.

I had wriggled over just so that I could bend my body at the waist and
bring my legs against the nest when a sharp stub caught in my clothes
and held me. I could get neither up nor down. My handhold was of the
most precarious kind, and I dared not let go for a moment to get off
the snag.

I tried to back out and push off from it, but it seemed to come out
with me. It must be broken; and pulling myself up, I dropped with all
the force I could put into my body. That loosened, but did not break
it. Suddenly, while I was resting between the efforts, the thing gave
way.

I was wholly unprepared. All my weight was instantly thrown upon my
hands. The jagged sticks cut into my wrists, my grip was pried off,
and I fell.

Once, twice, the stubs in the wall of the nest caught and partly
stopped me, then broke. I clutched frantically at them, but could not
hold. Then, almost before I realized that I was falling, I hung
suspended between two limbs--the forks of the white oak branch in the
side of the nest.

I had been directly above it when the stub broke, and had fallen
through it; and the two branches had caught me right under both of my
arms.

For a second I was too dazed to think. Then a swish of wings, a hard
blow on the neck, and a shooting pain made my position clear. I was
not down yet nor out of danger. The angry birds still had me in reach.

Hanging with one arm, I twisted round until the other arm was free,
then seized the branches and swung under, but not before the eagles
had given me another raking dab.

Here beneath the branches, close up to the bottom of the nest, I was
quite out of the reach of the birds; and through the channel I had cut
in my ascent, I climbed quickly down into the tree.

It was now a mere matter of sliding to the ground. But I was so
battered and faint that I nearly tumbled. I was a sorry-looking
boy--my clothing torn, my hands bleeding, my head and neck clawed in a
dozen places.

But what did I do with the eagles’ eggs? Why, I allowed the old eagles
to hatch them. What else could I do? or what better?




CHAPTER VI

THANKSGIVING AT GRANDFATHER’S FARM


Thanksgiving at Grandfather’s farm was more than a holiday. It was a
great date on the calendar, for it divided the year in halves as no
other single day of the three hundred and sixty-five did. It marked
the end of the outdoors, and the beginning of the indoors--the day
when everybody came home; when along with them into the house came all
the outdoors, too, as if the whole farm were brought in to toast its
toes before the great hearth fire!

For the hearth fire was big enough and cheery enough. And so was the
farmhouse--that is, if you added the big barn and the crib-house and
the wagon-house and the dog-house and the hen-house and the
“spring-house!”

Oh, there was plenty of room inside for everybody and for everything!
And there needed to be; for did not everybody come home to
Grandfather’s for Thanksgiving? And did not everything that anybody
could need for the winter, grow on Grandfather’s farm?

And it all had to be brought in by Thanksgiving Day--everything
brought in, everything housed and stored and battened down tight. The
preparations began along in late October, continuing with more speed
as the days shortened and darkened and hurried us into November. And
they continued with still more speed as the gray lowering clouds
thickened in the sky, and the wind began to whistle through the oak
grove. Then, with the first real cold snap, the first swift flurry of
snow, how the husking and the stacking and the chopping went on!

Thanksgiving must find us ready for winter indoors and out.

The hay-mows were full to the beams where the swallows built; the
north and west sides of the barnyard were flanked with a deep
wind-break of corn-fodder that ran on down the old worm-fence each
side of the lane in yellow zigzag walls; the big wooden pump under the
turn-o’-lane tree by the barn was bundled up and buttoned to the tip
of its dripping nose; the bees by the currant bushes were
doubled-hived, the strawberries covered with hay, the wood all split
and piled, the cellar windows packed, and the storm-doors put on.

The very cows had put on an extra coat, and turned their collars up
about their ears; the turkeys had changed their roost from the
ridge-pole of the corn-crib to the pearmain tree on the sunny side of
the wagon-house; the squirrels had finished their bulky nests in the
oaks; the muskrats of the lower pasture had completed their lodges;
the whole farm--house, barn, fields, and wood-lot--had shuffled into
its greatcoat and muffler and settled comfortably down for the winter.

The old farmhouse was an invitation to winter. It looked its joy at
the prospect of the coming cold. Low, weather-worn, mossy-shingled,
secluded in its wayward garden of box and bleeding-hearts, sheltered
by its tall pines, grape-vined, hop-vined, clung to by creeper and
honeysuckle, it stood where the roads divided, halfway between
everywhere, unpainted, unpretentious, as much a part of the landscape
as the muskrat-lodge, and, like the lodge, roomy, warm, and
hospitable.

Round at the back, under the wide, open shed, a door led into the
kitchen; another led into the living-room; another, into the
store-room; and two big, slanting double-doors, scoured and slippery
with four generations of sliders, covered the cavernous way into
the cellar. But they let the smell of apples up, as the garret door
let the smell of sage and thyme come down; while from the door of the
store-room, mingling with the odor of apples and herbs, filling the
whole house and all my early memories, came the smell of broom-corn,
came the sound of Grandfather’s loom.

[Illustration: “THE LANTERN FLICKERS, THE MILK FOAMS, THE STORIES
FLOW”]

For Grandfather in the winter made brooms--the best brooms, I think,
that ever were made. The tall broom-corn was grown on the farm in the
summer, ripened and cut and seeded, and then, as soon as winter set
in, was loomed and wired and sewed into brooms.

But the cured and seeded broom-corn was not the main thing, after all,
that was brought in for the winter. Behind the stove in the kitchen,
stood the sweet-potato box (a sweet potato, you know, must be kept dry
and warm). An ample, ten-barrel box it was, fresh-papered like the
walls, full of Jersey sweets that _were_ sweet--long, golden, syrupy
potatoes, such as grow only in the warm sandy soil of southern New
Jersey.

Against that big box in Grandmother’s kitchen stood the sea-chest,
fresh with the same kitchen paper and piled with wood. There was
another such chest in the living-room near the old fireplace, and
still another in Grandfather’s work-room behind the “template” stove.

But wood and warmth and sweet smells were not all. There was music
also, the music of life, of young life and of old life--grandparents,
grandchildren (about twenty-eight of the latter). There were seven of
us alone--a girl at each end of the seven and one in the middle.
Thanksgiving always found us all at Grandfather’s and brimming full of
thanks.

That, of course, was long, long ago. Things are different nowadays.
There are as many grandfathers, I suppose, as ever; but they don’t
make brooms in the winter and live on farms.

They live in flats. The old farm with its open acres has become a city
street; the generous old farmhouse has become a speaking-tube,
kitchenette, and bath--all the “modern conveniences”; the cows have
evaporated into convenient cans of condensed “milk”; the ten-barrel
box of potatoes has changed into a convenient ten-pound bag, the
wood-pile into a convenient five-cent bundle of blocks tied up with a
tarred string, the fireplace into a convenient gas log, the seven
children into one or none, or into a little bull-terrier pup.

But is it so? No, it is not so--not so of a million homes. For there
is many an old-fashioned farmhouse still in the country, and many a
new-fashioned city house where there are more human children than
little bull-terrier pups.

And it is not so in my home, which is neither a real farm nor yet a
city home. For here are some small boys who live very much as I did
when I was a boy. No, they are not farmer’s boys; for I am not a
farmer, but only a “commuter”--if you know what that is. I go into a
great city for my work; and when the day’s work is done, I turn
homeward here to Mullein Hill--far out in the country. And when the
dark November nights come, I hang the lantern high in the stable, as
my father used to do, while four shining faces gather round, as four
small boys seat themselves on upturned buckets behind the cow. The
lantern flickers, the milk foams, the stories flow--“Bucksy” stories
of the noble red-man; and stories of the heroes of old; and marvelous
stories of that greatest hero of all--their father, far away yonder
when he was a boy, when there were so many interesting things to do on
Grandfather’s farm just before Thanksgiving Day.




CHAPTER VII

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO DO THIS FALL


I

You ought to go out into the fields and woods as many as six times
this fall, even though you have to take a long street-car ride to get
out of the city. Let me give you just six bits of sound advice about
going afield:--

First, go often to the same place, so that you can travel over and
over the same ground and become very familiar with it. The first trip
you will not see much but woods and fields. But after that, each
succeeding walk will show you _particular_ things--this dead tree with
the flicker’s hole, that old rail-pile with its rabbit-hole--until, by
and by, you will know every turn and dip, every pile of stones, every
hole and nest; and you will find a thousand things that on the first
trip you didn’t dream were there.

Secondly, when you go into the woods, go _expecting_ to see something
in particular--always looking for some particular nest, bird, beast,
or plant. You may not find that particular thing, but your eyes will
be sharpened by your expectation and purpose, and you will be pretty
sure therefore to see something. At worst you will come back with a
disappointment, and that is better than coming back without a thing!

Thirdly, go off when you can alone. Don’t be selfish, unsociable,
offish--by no means that. But you must learn to use your own eyes and
ears, think your own thoughts, make your own discoveries, and follow
the hints and hopes that you alone can have. Go with the school class
for a picnic, but for woodcraft go alone.

Fourthly, learn first of all in the woods to be as silent as an Indian
and as patient as a granite rock. Practice standing still when the
mosquitoes sing, and fixing your mind on the hole under the stump
instead of the hole the mosquito is boring between your eyes.

Fifthly, go out in every variety of weather, and at night, as well as
during the day. There are three scenes to every day--morning, noon,
and early evening--when the very actors themselves are changed. To one
who has never been in the fields at daybreak, the world is so new, so
fresh and strange, as to seem like a different planet. And then the
evening--the hour of dusk and the deeper, darker night! Go once this
autumn into the woods at night.

And lastly, don’t go into the woods as if they were a kind of Noah’s
Ark; for you cannot enter the door and find all the animals standing
in a row. You will go a great many times before seeing them all. Don’t
be disappointed if they are not so plentiful there as they are in your
books. Nature books are like menageries--the animals are caught and
caged for you. The woods are better than books and just as full of
things, as soon as you learn to take a hint, to read the signs, to put
two and two together and get--four--four paws--black paws, with a long
black snout, a big ringed and bushy tail--a coon!


II

Whether you live in the heart of a great city or in the open country,
you ought to begin this fall to learn the names and habits of the
birds and beasts (snakes, lizards, turtles, toads!) that live wild in
your region. Even when all the summer birds have gone south for the
winter, there will remain in your woods and fields crows, jays,
juncos, tree sparrows, chickadees, kinglets, nuthatches, screech owls,
barred owls,--perhaps even snowy owls,--quails, partridges,
goldfinches, with now and then a flock of crossbills, snow buntings,
and other northern visitors, and even a flicker, robin, and bluebird
left over from the fall migrations. These are plenty to begin on; and
yet, as they are so few, compared with the numbers of the summer, the
beginner’s work is thus all the easier in the autumn.


III

You should go out one of these frosty mornings for chestnuts, if they
grow in your woods; or for “shagbarks,” if you live in New England;
for black walnuts, if you live in the Middle States; for pecan nuts,
if you live in the Gulf States; for butternuts, if you live in the
states of the Middle West; for--what kind of nuts can you not go for,
if you live in California where they make everything grow! It matters
little whether you go for paper-shelled English walnuts or for
plate-armored pignuts so long as you _go_. It is the going that is
worth while.


IV

You ought to go “cocooning” this fall--to sharpen your eyes. But do
not go often; for once you begin to look for cocoons, you are in
danger of seeing nothing else--except brown leaves. And how many brown
leaves, that look like cocoons, there are! They tease you to vexation.
But a day now and then “cocooning” will do you no harm; indeed, it
will cultivate your habit of concentration and close seeing as will no
other kind of hunting I know.

Bring home with you the big brown silky cocoons of cecropia--the
largest cocoon you will find, lashed all along its length to its twig,
and usually near the ground. Look on the black cherry, the barberry,
sassafras, and roadside and garden trees for the harder, whiter cocoon
of the promethea moth. This hangs by its tip, because the caterpillar
has begun his house by using the leaf, spinning it into the cocoon as
part of its walls, much as does the wretched “brown-tail.” The gray
cocoons, or rather nests, of this “brown-tail” moth you must bring
home to burn, for they are one of our greatest pests. You will find
them full of tiny caterpillars as you tear them open.

Bring home your collection and, with the help of such a book as “Moths
and Butterflies” by Mary C. Dickerson, identify them and hang them up
for their “coming out” in the spring.


V

If you live in the city, you ought to go up frequently to your roof
and watch for the birds that fly over. If in one of our many cities
near the water, you will have a chance that those in the country
seldom have, of seeing the seabirds--the white herring gulls (the
young gulls are brown, and look like a different species), as they
pass over whistling plaintively, and others of the wild seafowl, that
merely to hear and see in the smoky air of the city, is almost as
refreshing as an ocean voyage. Then there are the parks and public
gardens--never without their birds and, at the fall migrating time,
often sheltering the very rarest of visitors.


VI

In order to give point and purpose to one of these autumn outings, you
should take your basket, or botanizing can, and scour the woods and
fields for autumn berries. No bunch of flowers in June could be
lovelier than the bunch of autumn berries that you can gather from
thicket and wayside to carry home. And then, in order to enjoy the
trip all over again, read James Buckham’s exquisite story, “A Quest
for Fall Berries,” in his book, “Where Town and Country Meet.”


VII

Take your botany can on a trip toward the end of November and see how
many blossoming flowers you can bring home from the woods. Wild
flowers _after_ Thanksgiving in any northern state? Make the search,
on all the southern slopes and in all the sheltered corners and see
for yourselves. When you get back, you will want to read Mr. Bradford
Torrey’s account of the flowers that he found blossoming out of doors
in New England in the month of November. But who is Mr. Bradford
Torrey? and where can you find this account of his November walk? You
do not know? Well, then there is something more for you to do this
fall.


VIII

While you are finding out who Mr. Torrey is and what he has written,
you should also get acquainted with John Burroughs, Olive Thorne
Miller, Thoreau, Frank Bolles, William Hamilton Gibson, C. C. Abbott,
Edward Breck, Gilbert White, and--but these will do for _this_ fall.
Don’t fail to read dear old Gilbert White’s “Natural History of
Selborne”; though perhaps we grown-ups like it better than you may
this fall. If you don’t understand Gilbert White, then read this year
“The Life of a Scotch Naturalist” by Samuel Smiles, and Arabella
Buckley’s two books, “Life and Her Children,” and “Winners in Life’s
Race.”


IX

You ought to tie up a piece of suet for the birds; keep your cat in
the house, except during the middle of the day, and--but I shall tell
you no more. There is no end to the interesting things to do in your
study of the out of doors and in your tramps afield this autumn.




CHAPTER VIII

THE MUSKRATS ARE BUILDING


We have had a week of almost unbroken rain, and the water is standing
over the swampy meadow. It is a dreary stretch,--this wet, sedgy land
in the cold twilight,--drearier than any part of the woods or the
upland pastures. They are empty; but the meadow is flat and wet, it is
naked and all unsheltered. And a November night is falling.

The darkness deepens. A raw wind is rising. At nine o’clock the moon
swings round and full to the crest of the ridge, and pours softly
over. I button my heavy ulster close, and in my rubber boots go down
to the stream and follow it out to the middle of the meadow, where it
meets the main ditch. There is a sharp turn here toward the swamp;
and here at the bend, behind a clump of black alders, I sit quietly
down and wait.

I have come out to the bend to watch the muskrats building; for that
small mound up the ditch is not an old haycock, but a half-finished
muskrat house.

As I wait, the moon climbs higher over the woods. The water on the
meadow shivers in the light. The wind bites through my heavy coat and
drives me back, but not before I have seen one, two, three little
creatures scaling the walls of the house with loads of mud-and-reed
mortar. I am driven back by the cold, but not before I know that here
in the desolate meadow is being rounded off a lodge, thick-walled and
warm, and proof against the longest, bitterest of winters.

This is near the end of November. My fire-wood is in the cellar; I am
about ready to put on the double-windows and the storm-doors. The
muskrats are even now putting on theirs, for their house is all but
finished. Winter is at hand: but we are prepared, the muskrats and I.

Throughout the summer the muskrats had no house, only their tunnels
into the sides of the ditch, their roadways out into the grass, and
their beds under the tussocks or among the roots of the old stumps.
All those months the water was low in the ditch, and the beds among
the tussocks were safe and dry enough.

[Illustration: “TO-NIGHT THERE IS NO LOAFING ABOUT THE LODGE”]

Now the November rains have filled river and ditch, flooded the
tunnels, and crept up into the beds under the tussocks. Even a muskrat
will creep out of his bed when cold, wet water creeps in. What shall
he do for shelter? He knows. And long before the rains begin, he picks
out the place for a house. He does not want to leave his meadow,
therefore the only thing to do is to build,--move from under the
tussock out upon the top of the tussock; and here, in its deep, wiry
grass, make a new bed high and dry above the rising water; and close
this new bed in with walls that circle and dome, and defy the very
winter.

Such a house will require a great deal of work to build. Why should
not two or three muskrats combine--make the house big enough to hold
them all, save labor and warmth, too, and, withal, live sociably
together? So they left, each one his single bed, and, joining efforts,
started, about the middle of October, to build this winter house.

Slowly, night after night, the domed walls have been rising, although
for several nights at a time I could see no apparent progress with the
work. The builders were in no hurry. The cold was far off. But it is
coming, and to-night it feels near and keen. And to-night there is no
loafing about the lodge.

When this house is done, when the last hod of mud plaster has been
laid on,--then the rains may descend and the floods come, but it will
not fall. It is built upon a tussock; and a tussock--did you ever try
to pull up a tussock?

Winter may descend, and boys and foxes may come--and they will come,
but not before the walls are frozen. Then, let them come. The house
will stand. It is boy-proof, almost; it is entirely rain-, cold-, and
fox-proof. I have often seen where the fox has gone round and round
the house in the snow, and where, at places, he has attempted to dig
into the frozen mortar. But it was a foot thick, as hard as flint, and
utterly impossible for his pick and shovel.

I said the floods, as well as the fox, may come. So they may,
ordinarily; but along in March, when one comes as a freshet and rises
to the dome of the house, then it fills the bed-chamber to the ceiling
and drowns the dwellers out. I remember a freshet once in the end of
February that flooded Lupton’s Pond and drove the muskrats of the
whole pond village to their ridgepoles, to the bushes, and to whatever
wreckage the waters brought along.

    “The best-laid schemes o’ mice and men
    Gang aft agley”

--and of muskrats, too.

But not very often do the muskrats’ plans go thus agley. For muskrats
and wood mice and birds and bees, and even the very trees of the
forest, have a kind of natural foresight. They all look ahead, at the
approach of autumn, and begin to provide against the coming cold.
Yet, weather-wise as a muskrat may be, still he cannot know all that
may happen; he cannot be ready for everything. And so, if now and
then, he should prove foresight to be vain, he only shows that his
plans and our plans, his life and our lives, are very much alike.

Usually, however, the muskrat’s plans work out as he would have them.
His foresight proves to be equal to all that the winter can bring. On
the coldest winter days I shall look out over the bleak white waste to
where his house shows, a tiny mound in the snow, and think of him safe
and warm inside, as safe and warm as I am, in my house, here on the
hilltop.

Indeed, I think the muskrat will be the warmer; for my big house here
on Mullein Hill is sometimes cold. And the wind! If only I could drive
the winter wind away from the corners of the house! But the house down
in the meadow has no corners. It has walls, mud walls, so thick and
round that the shrieking wind sweeps past unheard by the dwellers
within; and all unheeded the cold creeps over and over the low thatch,
to crawl back and stiffen upon the meadow.

The doors of this meadow house swing wide open throughout the winter;
for they are in the bottom of the house, beneath the water, where only
the muskrat can enter. Just outside the doors, down under the water
and the roof of ice that covers all the flooded meadow, are fresh
calamus roots, and iris and arum--food in abundance, no matter how
long the winter lasts.

No, the winter has not yet come; but it is coming, for the muskrats
are building. Let it come. Let the cold crawl stiff and gray across
the meadow. Let the whirling snow curl like smoke about the pointed
top of the little tepee down by the meadow ditch. Let the north wind
do its worst. For what care the dwellers in that thick-walled lodge
beneath the snow? Down under the water their doors are open; their
roadways up the ditches as free as in the summer; and the stems of the
sedges just as juicy and pink and tender.

The muskrats are building. The buds are leaving. Winter is coming. I
must get out my own storm-windows and double-doors; for even now a
fire is blazing cheerily on my wide, warm hearth.




CHAPTER IX

THE NORTH WIND DOTH BLOW


    “The north wind doth blow,
    And we shall have snow,
    And what will poor Robin do then,
            Poor thing?”

And what will Muskrat do? and Chipmunk? and Whitefoot, the wood mouse?
and Chickadee? and the whole world of poor things out of doors?

Never fear. Robin knows as well as you that the north wind doth blow,
and is now far away on his journey to the South; Muskrat knows, too,
and is building his warm winter lodge; Chipmunk has already made his
bed deep down under the stone wall, where zero weather is unheard of;
Whitefoot, the wood mouse, has stored his hollow poplar stub full of
acorns, and, taking possession of Robin’s deserted nest near by, has
roofed it and lined it and turned it into a cosey, cold-proof house,
while Chickadee, dear thing--has done nothing at all. Not so much as
a bug or a single beetle’s egg has he stored up for the winter. But he
knows where there is a big piece of suet for him on a certain lilac
bush. And he knows where there is a snug little hole in a certain elm
tree limb. The north wind may blow, blow, blow! It cannot get through
Chickadee’s feathers, nor daunt for one moment his brave little heart.

The north wind sweeping the bare stubble fields and winding its
shivering horn through the leafless trees does sometimes pierce my
warm coat and strike a chill into my heart. Then how empty and cold
seems the outdoor world! How deadly the touch of the winter! How
fearful the prospect of the coming cold!

Does Muskrat think so? Does Whitefoot? Does Chickadee? Not at all, for
they are ready.

The preparations for hard weather may be seen going on all through the
autumn, beginning as far back as the flocking of the swallows late in
July. Up to that time no one had thought of a coming winter, it would
seem; but, one day, there upon the telegraph-wires were the
swallows--the first sign that the getting ready for winter has begun.

The great migratory movements of the birds are very mysterious; but
they were in the beginning, I think, and are still, for the most part,
mere shifts to escape the cold. Yet not so much to escape the cold
itself do the birds migrate, as to find a land of food. When the
northland freezes, when river and lake are sealed beneath the ice and
the soil is made hard as flint, then the food supplies for most of the
birds are utterly cut off, causing them to move southward ahead of the
cold, or starve.

There are, however, a few of the seed-eating birds, like the quail,
and some of the insect-eaters, like the chickadee, who are so well
provided for that they can stay and survive the winter. But the great
majority of the birds, because they have no storehouse nor barn, must
take wing and fly away from the lean and hungry cold.

And I am glad to see them go. The thrilling honk of the flying wild
geese out of the November sky tells me that the hollow forests and
closing bays of the vast desolate North are empty now, except for the
few creatures that find food and shelter in the snow.

Here in my own small woods and marshes there is much getting ready,
much comforting assurance that Nature is quite equal to herself, that
winter is not approaching unawares. There will be great lack, no
doubt, before there is plenty again; there will be suffering and
death. But what with the building, the strange deep sleeping, and the
harvesting, there will be also much comfortable, much joyous and
sociable, living.

Long before the muskrats began to build, even before the swallows
commenced to flock, my chipmunks started their winter stores. I don’t
know which began his work first, which kept harder at it, Chipmunk or
the provident ant. The ant has a great reputation for thrift, and
verses have been written about her. But Chipmunk is just as thrifty.
So is the busy bee.

It is the thought of approaching winter that keeps the bee busy far
beyond her summer needs. Much of her labor is entirely for the winter.
By the first of August she has filled the brood chamber of the hive
with honey--forty pounds of it, enough for the hatching bees and for
the whole colony until the willows tassel again. But who knows what
the winter may be? how cold and long drawn out into the coming May? So
the harvesting is pushed with vigor on, until the frosts kill the last
of the autumn asters--on, until fifty, a hundred, or even three
hundred pounds of honey are sealed in the combs, and the colony is
safe should the sun not shine again for a year and a day.

The last of the asters have long since gone; so have the witch-hazels.
All is quiet about the hives. The bees have formed into their warm
winter clusters upon the combs; and except “when come the calm, mild
days,” they will fly no more until March or April. I will half close
their entrances--and so help them to put on their storm-doors.

The whole out of doors around me is like a great beehive, stored and
sealed for the winter, its swarming life close-clustered, and safe and
warm against the coming cold.

I stand along the edge of the hillside here and look down the length
of its frozen slope. There is no sign of life. The brown leaves have
drifted into the mouths of the woodchuck holes, as if every burrow
were forsaken; sand and sticks have washed in, too, littering and
choking the doorways. A stranger would find it hard to believe that
all of my forty-six woodchucks are gently snoring at the bottoms of
these old uninteresting holes. Yet here they are, and quite out of
danger, sleeping the sleep of the furry, the fat, and the forgetful.

The woodchuck’s manner of providing for winter is very curious. Winter
spreads far and fast, and Woodchuck, in order to keep ahead, out of
danger, would need wings. But wings weren’t given him. Must he perish
then? Winter spreads far, but it does not go deep--down only about
four feet; and Woodchuck, if he cannot escape overland, can, perhaps,
escape _under_land. So down he goes _through_ the winter, down into a
mild and even temperature, _five feet away_--only five feet, but as
far away from the snow and the cold as Bobolink among the reeds of the
distant Orinoco.

Indeed, Woodchuck’s is a farther journey and even more wonderful than
Bobolink’s; for these five feet carry him to the very gates of death.
That he will return with Bobolink, that he will come up alive with the
spring out of this dark way, is passing strange.

Muskrat built him a house, and under the spreading ice turned all the
meadow into a well-stocked cellar. Beaver built him a dam, cut and
anchored under water a plenty of green sticks near his lodge, so that
he too would be under cover when the ice formed, with an abundance of
tender bark at hand. Chipmunk spent half of his summer laying up food
near his underground nest. But Woodchuck simply digged him a hole,--a
grave,--then ate until no particle more of fat could be got within his
baggy hide, then crawled into his bed to sleep until the dawn of
spring!

This is his shift! This is the length to which he goes, because he has
no wings, and because he cannot cut, cure, and store away, in the
depths of the stony hillside, clover hay enough to last him through
the winter. The beaver cans his fresh food in cold water; the chipmunk
selects long-keeping things and buries them; but the woodchuck simply
fattens himself, then buries himself, and sleeps--and lives!

    “The north wind doth blow,
    And we shall have snow,”

but what good reason is there for our being daunted at the prospect?
Robin and all the others are well prepared. Even the wingless frog,
who is also without fur or feathers or fat, even he has no fear at the
sound of the cold winds. Nature provides for him, too, in her own
motherly way. All he has to do is to dig into the mud at the bottom of
the ditch and sleep--and sometimes freeze!

No matter. If the cold works down and freezes him into the mud, he
never knows. He will thaw out as good as new; he will sing again for
joy and love as soon as his heart warms up enough to beat. I have seen
frogs frozen into the middle of solid lumps of ice. Drop the lump on
the floor, and the frog would break out like a fragment of the ice
itself. And this has happened more than once to the same frog without
causing him the least ache or pain. He would gradually limber up, and
croak, and look as wise as ever.

The north wind _may_ blow, for it is by no means a cheerless prospect,
this wood-and-meadow world of mine in the gray November light. The
grass-blades are wilting, the old leaves are falling; but no square
foot of greensward will the winter kill, nor a single tree perhaps in
all my wood-lot. There will be little less of life next April because
of this winter. The winter birds will suffer most, and a few may die.

Last February, I came upon two partridges in the snow, dead of hunger
and cold. It was after an extremely long “severe spell”; but this was
not the only cause. These two birds since fall had been feeding
regularly in the dried fodder corn that stood shocked over the field.
One day all the corn was carted away. The birds found their supply of
food suddenly cut off, and, unused to foraging the fence-rows and
tangles for wild seeds, they seem to have given up the struggle at
once, although within easy reach of plenty.

Hardly a minute’s flight away was a great thicket of dwarf sumac
covered with berries. There were bayberries, rosehips, greenbrier,
bittersweet, black alder, and checkerberries that they might have
found. These berries would have been hard fare, doubtless, after an
unstinted supply of sweet corn; but still they were plentiful and
would have been sufficient had the birds made use of them.

The smaller birds that stay through the winter, like the tree sparrow
and the junco, feed upon the weeds and grasses that ripen unmolested
along the roadsides and in the waste places. A mixed flock of these
small birds lived several days last winter upon the seeds of the
ragweed in my mowing-field.

The weeds came up in the early fall after the field was sowed to
clover and timothy. They threatened to choke out the grass. I looked
at them and thought with dismay of how they would cover the field by
another fall. After a time the snow came, a foot and a half of it,
till only the tops of the seedy ragweeds showed above the level white.
Then the juncos, goldfinches, and tree sparrows came; and there was a
five-day shucking of ragweed seed on the crusty snow--five days of
life and plenty for the birds.

Then I looked again, and thought that weeds and winters, which were
made when the world was made--that even ragweeds and winters have a
part in the beautiful divine scheme of things.

    “The north wind doth blow
    And we shall have snow”--

but the wild geese are going over; the wild mice have harvested their
acorns; the bees have clustered; the woodchucks have gone to sleep;
the muskrats have nearly finished their lodge; the sap in the big
hickory tree by the side of the house has crept down out of reach of
the fingers of the frost. And what has become of Robin, poor thing?




CHAPTER X

AN OUTDOOR LESSON


I have had many a person ask me, “What is the best way to learn about
the out of doors?” and I always answer, “Don’t try to learn _about_
it, but first go out of the house and get into the out of doors. Then
open both eyes, use both of your ears, and stand in one place stock
still as long as you can; and you will soon know the out of doors
itself, which is better than knowing about it.”

“But,” says my learner, “if I go out of the house, I don’t get into
the out of doors at all, but into a city street!”

Look there--in the middle of the street! What is it? An English
sparrow? Yes, an English sparrow--six English sparrows. Are they not a
part of the out of doors? And look up there, over your head--a strip
of sky? Yes--is not a strip of blue sky a part of the out of doors?

Now let me tell you how I learned an outdoor lesson one night along a
crowded city street.

It was a cold, wet night; and the thick, foggy twilight, settling down
into the narrow streets, was full of smoke and smell and chill. A raw
wind blew in from the sea and sent a shiver past every corner. The
street lights blinked, the street mud glistened, the street noises
clashed and rattled, and the street crowds poured up and down and bore
me along with them.

I was homesick--homesick for the country. I longed to hear the sound
of the wind in the pine trees; I longed to hear the single far-away
bark of the dog on the neighboring farm, or the bang of a barndoor, or
the clack of a guinea going to roost. It was half-past five, and
thousands of clerks were pouring from the closing stores; but I was
lonely, homesick for the quiet, the wideness, the trees and sky of the
country.

Feeling thus, and seeing only the strange faces all about me, and the
steep narrow walls of the street high above me, I drifted along, until
suddenly I caught the sound of bird voices shrill and sharp through
the din.

I stopped, but was instantly jostled out of the street, up against a
grim iron fence, to find myself peering through the pickets into an
ancient cemetery in the very heart of Boston.

As I looked, there loomed up in the fog and rain overhead the outlines
of three or four gaunt trees, whose limbs were as thick with sparrows
as they had ever been with leaves. A sparrow roost! Birds, ten
thousand birds, gone to roost in the business section of a great city,
with ten thousand human beings passing under them as they slept!

I got in behind a big waste-barrel by the iron fence and let the crowd
surge past. It was such a sight as I had never seen. I had seen
thousands of chimney swallows go to roost in the deserted chimneys of
a great country house; I had many a time gone down at night to the
great crow-roost in the pines at Cubby Hollow; but I had never
stumbled upon a bird-roost on a crowded city street before!

The hurrying throng behind me thinned and straggled while I waited,
watching by the iron fence. The wind freshened, the mist thickened
into fine rain that came slanting down through the half-lighted trees;
the sleeping sparrows twittered and shifted uneasily on the limbs.

The streets were being deserted. It was going to be a wild night on
the water, and a wild night in the swaying, creaking tops of these old
elm trees. I shivered at the thought of the sparrows sleeping out in
such a night as this, and turned away toward my own snug roost hardly
two blocks away.

The night grew wilder. The wind rattled down our street past a hundred
loose shutters; the rain slapped against the windows, and then stopped
as a heavy gust curled over the line of roofs opposite. I thought of
the sparrows. Had they been driven from the tossing limbs? Could they
cling fast in such a wind, and could they sleep?

Going to the window I looked down into the street. Only the electric
light at the corner showed through the blur of the storm. The street
was empty.

I slipped into my coat and went out; not even a policeman was in
sight. Only the whirling sheets of rain, only the wild sounds of the
wind were with me. The lights flared, but only to fill the streets
with fantastic shadows and to open up a yawning cavern in every deep,
dark doorway.

Keeping in the lee of the shuttered buildings, I made my way to the
sparrow roost. I shall never forget the sight! Not a sparrow had left
his perch, but every bird had now turned, facing the wind--breasting
the wind, I should say; for every head was under a wing, as near as I
could make out, and every breast was toward the storm. Here, on the
limbs, as close as beads on a string, they clung and rocked in the
arms of the wind, every one with his feathers tight to his body, his
tail lying out flat on the storm.

Now there is the outdoor lesson I learned, and that is how I learned
it. And what was the lesson? Why, this: that you are not shut away
from Nature even in the heart of a great city; that the out of doors
lies very close about you, as you hurry down a crowded city street.




CHAPTER XI

LEAFING


No, you never went “leafing”--not unless you are simon-pure
country-bred. You do not know what the word means. You cannot find it
in the unabridged dictionary--not in the sense in which I am using it.
But there are many good words we country people use that are not,
perhaps, in the dictionary.

And what do I mean by “leafing”? Get down that bundle of meal sacks,
hitch into the one-horse hay-rig, throw in the rakes, and come. We are
going into the woods for pig-bedding, for leaves to keep the pigs dry
and warm this winter!

You never went after leaves for the pigs? Perhaps you never even had a
pig. But a pig is worth having, if only to see the comfort he takes in
the big bed of dry leaves you give him in the sunny corner of his pen.
And if leafing had no other reward, the thought of the snoozing,
snoring pig buried to his winking snout in the bed, would give joy and
zest enough to the labor.

But leafing, like every other humble labor, has its own rewards, not
the least of them being the leaves themselves and the getting of them!

We jolt across the bumpy field, strike into the back wood-road, and
turn off upon an old stumpy track over which cord wood was carted
years ago. Here in the hollow at the foot of a high wooded hill, the
winds have whirled the oak and maple leaves into drifts almost
knee-deep.

We are off the main road, far into the heart of the woods. We straddle
stumps; bend down saplings; stop while the horse takes a bite of sweet
birch; tack and tip and tumble and back through the tight squeezes
between the trees; and finally, after a prodigious amount of whoa-ing
and oh-ing and squealing and screeching, we land right side up and so
headed that we can start the load out toward the open road.

You can yell all you want to when you go leafing; yell at every stump
you hit; yell every time a limb knocks off your hat or catches you
under the chin; yell when the horse stops suddenly to browse on the
twigs and stands you meekly on your head in the bottom of the rig. You
can screech and howl and yell like the wild Indian that you are, you
can dive and wrestle in the piles of leaves and cut all the crazy
capers you know; for this is a Saturday, these are the wild woods and
the noisy leaves, and who is there looking on besides the mocking jays
and the crows?

The leaves pile up. The wind blows keen among the tall, naked trees;
the dull cloud hangs low above the ridge; and through the cold gray of
the maple swamp below you, peers the face of Winter.

You start up the ridge with your rake and draw down another pile,
thinking, as you work, of the pig. The thought is pleasing. The warm
glow all over your body strikes into your heart. You rake away as if
it were your own bed you were gathering--as really it is. He that
rakes for his pig, rakes also for himself. A merciful man is merciful
to his beast; and he that gathers leaves for his pig spreads a blanket
of down over his own winter bed.

Is it to warm my feet on winter nights that I pull on my boots at ten
o’clock and go my round at the barn? Yet it warms my feet through and
through to look into the stalls and see the cow chewing her cud, and
the horse cleaning up his supper hay, standing to his fetlocks in his
golden bed of new rye-straw; and then, going to the pig’s pen, to hear
him snoring louder than the north wind, somewhere in the depths of his
leaf-bed, far out of sight. It warms my heart, too!

So the leaves pile up. How good a thing it is to have a pig to work
for! What zest and purpose it lends to one’s raking and piling and
storing! If I could get nothing else to spend myself on, I should
surely get me a pig. Then, when I went to walk in the woods, I should
be obliged, occasionally, to carry a rake and a bag with me--much
better things to take into the woods than empty hands, and sure to
scratch into light a number of objects that would never come within
the range of opera-glass or gun or walking stick. To see things
through a twenty-four-toothed rake is to see them very close, as
through a microscope magnifying twenty-four diameters.

And so, as the leaves pile up, we keep a sharp lookout for what the
rake uncovers--here, under a rotten stump, a hatful of acorns,
probably gathered by the white-footed wood mouse. For the stump gives
at the touch of the rake, and a light kick topples it down the hill,
spilling out a big nest of feathers and three dainty little creatures
that scurry into the leaf-piles like streaks of daylight. They are the
white-footed wood mice, long-tailed, big-eared, and as clean and
high-bred looking as greyhounds.

Combing down the steep hillside with our rakes, we dislodge a large
stone, exposing a black patch of fibrous roots and leaf mould, in
which something moves and disappears. Scooping up a double handful of
the mould, we capture a little red-backed salamander.

This is not the “red” salamander that Mr. Burroughs tells us is “the
author of that fine plaintive piping to be heard more or less
frequently, according to the weather, in our summer and autumn woods.”
His “red” salamander is really a “dull orange, variegated with minute
specks or spots,” a species I have never found here in my New England
woods.

Nor have I ever suspected my red-backed salamander of piping; though
he may do it, as may the angleworms, for aught I am able to hear, so
filled with whir of iron wheels are my dull ears. But listen!
Something piping! Above the rustle of the leaves we also hear a “fine
plaintive” sound--no, a shrill and ringing little racket, rather,
about the bigness of a penny whistle.

Dropping the rake, we cautiously follow up the call--it seems to speak
out of every tree trunk--and find the piper clinging to a twig, no
salamander at all, but a tiny tree-frog, Pickering’s hyla, his little
bagpipe blown almost to bursting as he tries to rally the scattered
summer by his tiny, mighty “skirl.” Take him nose and toes, he is
surely as much as an inch long, not very large to pipe against the
north wind turned loose in the leafless woods.

We go back to our raking. Above us, among the stones of the slope,
hang bunches of Christmas fern; around the foot of the trees we
uncover trailing clusters of gray-green partridge vine, glowing with
crimson berries; we rake up the prince’s pine, pipsissewa, creeping
jennie, and wintergreen red with ripe berries,--a whole bouquet of
evergreens,--exquisite, fairy-like forms, that later shall gladden our
Christmas table.

[Illustration: “BUT COME, BOYS, GET AFTER THOSE BAGS!”]

But how they gladden and cheer the October woods! Summer dead? Hope
all gone? Life vanished away? See here, under this big pine, a whole
garden of arbutus, green and budded, almost ready to bloom! The snows
shall come before their sweet eyes open; but open they will at the
very first touch of spring. We will gather a few, and let them wake up
in saucers of clean water in our sunny south windows.

Leaves for the pig, and arbutus for us! We make a clean sweep down the
hillside, “jumping” a rabbit from its form, or bed, under a
brush-pile; discovering where a partridge roosts in a low-spreading
hemlock; coming upon a snail cemetery, in a hollow hickory stump;
turning up a yellow-jacket’s nest, built two-thirds underground;
tracing the tunnel of a bobtailed mouse in its purposeless windings in
the leaf mould; digging into a woodchuck’s--

“But come, boys, get after those bags! It is leaves in the hay-rig
that we want, not woodchucks at the bottom of woodchuck holes.” Two
small boys catch up a bag and hold it open, while the third boy stuffs
in the crackling leaves. Then I come along with my big feet and pack
the leaves in tight, and onto the rig goes the bulging thing!

Exciting? If you can’t believe it exciting, hop up on the load and let
us jog you home. Swish! bang! thump! tip! turn! joggle! jolt!--Hold on
to your ribs! Look out for the stump! Isn’t it fun to go leafing?
Isn’t it fun to do anything that your heart does with you--even though
you do it for a pig?

Just watch the pig as we shake out the bags of leaves. See him caper,
spin on his toes, shake himself, and curl his tail. That curl is his
laugh. We double up and weep when we laugh hard; but the pig can’t
weep, and he can’t double himself up, so he doubles up his tail. There
is where his laugh comes off, curling and kinking in little spasms of
pure pig joy!

_Boosh! Boosh!_ he snorts, and darts around the pen like a whirlwind,
scattering the leaves in forty ways, to stop short--the shortest
stop!--and fall to rooting for acorns.

He was once a long-tusked boar of the forest,--this snow-white,
sawed-off, pug-faced little porker of mine--ages and ages ago. But he
still remembers the smell of the forest leaves; he still knows the
taste of the acorn-mast; he is still wild pig in his soul.

And we were once long-haired, strong-limbed savages who roamed the
forest hunting him--ages and ages ago. And we, too, like him, remember
the smell of the fallen leaves, and the taste of the forest
fruits--and of pig, _roast_ pig! And if the pig in his heart is still
a wild boar, no less are we, at times, wild savages in our hearts.

Anyhow, for one day in the fall I want to go “leafing.” I want to give
my pig a taste of acorns, and a big pile of leaves to dive so deep
into that he cannot see his pen. I can feel the joy of it myself. No,
I do not live in a pen; but then, I might, if once in a while I did
not go leafing, did not escape now and then from my little daily round
into the wide, wild woods--my ancestral home.




CHAPTER XII

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO HEAR THIS FALL


I

You ought to hear the scream of the hen-hawks circling high in the
air. In August and September and late into October, if you listen in
the open country, you will hear their piercing whistle,--shrill,
exultant _scream_ comes nearer to describing it,--as they sail and
sail a mile away in the sky.


II

You ought to go out upon some mowing hill or field of stubble and hear
the crickets, then into the apple orchard and hear the katydids, then
into the high grass and bushes along the fence and hear the whole
stringed chorus of green grasshoppers, katydids, and crickets. You
have heard them all your life; but the trouble is that, because you
have heard them so constantly in the autumn, and because one player
after another has come gradually into the orchestra, you have taken
them as part of the natural course of things and have never really
heard them individually, to know what parts they play. Now anybody can
hear a lion roar, or a mule bray, or a loon laugh his wild crazy laugh
over a silent mountain lake, and know what sound it is; but who can
hear a cricket out of doors, or a grasshopper, and know which is
which?


III

Did you ever hear a loon laugh? You ought to. I would go a hundred
miles to hear that weird, meaningless, melancholy, maniacal laughter
of the loon, or great northern diver, as the dusk comes down over some
lonely lake in the wilderness of the far North. From Maine westward to
northern Illinois you may listen for him in early autumn; then, when
the migration begins, anywhere south to the Gulf of Mexico. You may
never hear the call of the bull moose in the northern woods, nor the
howl of a coyote on the western prairies, nor the wild _cac_, _cac_,
_cac_ of the soaring eagles, nor the husky _yap_, _yap_, _yap_ of the
fox. But, if you do, “make a note of it,” as Captain Cuttle would say;
for the tongues that utter this wild language are fast ceasing to
speak to us.


IV

One strangely sweet, strangely wild voice that you still may hear in
our old apple orchards, is the whimpering, whinnying voice of the
little screech owl. “When night comes,” says the bird book, “one may
hear the screech owl’s tremulous, wailing whistle. It is a weird,
melancholy call, welcomed only by those who love Nature’s voice,
whatever be the medium through which she speaks.” Now listen this
autumn for the screech owl; listen until the weird, melancholy call
_is_ welcomed by you, until the shiver that creeps up your back turns
off through your hair, as you hear the low plaintive voice speaking to
you out of the hollow darkness, out of the softness and the silence of
night.


V

You ought to hear the brown leaves rustling under your feet.

    “Heaped in the hollows of the grove, the autumn leaves lie dead;
    They rustle to the eddying gust, and to the rabbit’s tread.”

And they should rustle to your tread as well. Scuff along in them
where they lie in deep windrows by the side of the road; and hear them
also, as the wind gathers them into a whirling flurry and sends them
rattling over the fields.


VI

You ought to hear the cry of the blue jay and the caw of the crow in
the autumn woods.

    “The robin and the wren are flown, but from the shrub the jay,
    And from the wood-top calls the crow through all the gloomy day.”

Everybody knows those lines of Bryant, because everybody has heard
that loud scream of the jay in the lonesome woods, and the _caw_,
_caw_, _caw_ of the sentinel crow from the top of some tall tree. The
robins may not be all gone, for I heard and saw a flock of them this
year in January; but they are silent now, and so many of the birds
have gone, and the woods have become so empty, that the cries of the
jay and the crow seem, on a gloomy day, to be the only sounds in all
the hollow woods. There could hardly be an autumn for me if I did not
hear these two voices speaking--the one with a kind of warning in its
shrill, half-plaintive cry; the other with a message slow and solemn,
like the color of its sable coat.


VII

You ought to hear, you ought to _catch_, I should say, a good round
scolding from the red squirrel this fall. A red squirrel is always
ready to scold you (and doubtless you are always in need of his
scolding), but he is never so breathless and emphatic as in the fall.
“Whose nuts are these in the woods?” he asks, as you come up with your
stick and bag. “Who found this tree first? Come, get out of here! Get
right back to the city and eat peanuts! Come, do you hear? Get out of
this!”

No, don’t be afraid; he won’t “eat you alive”--though I think he might
if he were big enough. He won’t blow up, either, and burst! He is the
kind of fire-cracker that you call a “sizzler”--all sputter and no
explosion. But isn’t he a tempest! Isn’t he a whirlwind! Isn’t he a
red-coated cyclone! Let him blow! The little scamp, he steals birds’
eggs in the summer, they say; but there are none now for him to steal,
and the woods are very empty. We need a dash of him on these autumn
days, as we need a dash of spice in our food.

In the far western mountains he has a cousin called the Douglas
squirrel; and Mr. John Muir calls him “the brightest of all the
squirrels I have ever seen, a hot spark of life, making every tree
tingle with his prickly toes, a condensed nugget of fresh mountain
vigor and valor, as free from disease as a sunbeam. How he scolds, and
what faces he makes, all eyes, teeth, and whiskers!”

You must hear him this fall and take your scolding, whether you
deserve it or not.


VIII

You ought to hear in the cedars, pines, or spruces the small thin
_cheep_, _cheep_, _cheep_ of the chickadees or the kinglets. You must
take a quiet day on the very edge of winter and, in some sunny dip or
glade, hear them as they feed and flit about you. They speak in a
language different from that of the crow and the jay. This tiny talk
of the kinglet is all friendly and cheerful and personal and
confidential, as if you were one of the party and liked spiders’ eggs
and sunshine and didn’t care a snap for the coming winter! In all the
vast gray out of doors what bits of winged bravery, what crumbs of
feathered courage, they seem! One is hardly ready for the winter
until he has heard them in the cedars and has been assured that they
will stay, no matter how it snows and blows.


IX

You ought to hear, some quiet day or moonlit night in October or
November, the baying of the hounds as they course the swamps and
meadows on the heels of the fox. Strange advice, you say? No, not
strange. It is a wild, fierce cry that your fathers heard, and their
fathers, and theirs--away on back to the cave days, when life was
hardly anything but the hunt, and the dogs were the only tame animal,
and the most useful possession, man had. Their deep bass voices have
echoed through all the wild forests of our past, and stir within us
nowadays wild memories that are good for us again to feel. Stand
still, as the baying pack comes bringing the quarry through the forest
toward you. The blood will leap in your veins, as the ringing cries
lift and fall in the chorus that echoes back from every hollow and
hill around; and you will on with the panting pack--will on in the
fierce, wild exultation of the chase; for instinctively we are
hunters, just as all our ancestors were.

No, don’t be afraid. You won’t catch the fox.


X

You ought to hear by day--or better, by night--the call of the
migrating birds as they pass over, through the sky, on their way to
the South. East or west, on the Atlantic or on the Pacific shore, or
in the vast valley of the Mississippi, you may hear at night, so high
in air that you cannot see the birds, these voices of the passing
migrants. _Chink_, _chink_, _chink!_ will drop the calls of the
bobolinks--fine, metallic, starry notes; _honk_, _honk_, _honk!_ the
clarion cry of the wild geese will ring along the aërial way, as they
shout to one another and to you, listening far below them on the
steadfast earth.

Far away, yonder in the starry vault, far beyond the reach of human
eyes, a multitude of feathered folk, myriads of them, are streaming
over; armies of them winging down the long highway of the sky from the
frozen North, down to the rice fields of the Carolinas, down to the
deep tangled jungles of the Amazon, down beyond the cold, cruel reach
of winter.

Listen as they hail you from the sky.




CHAPTER XIII

HONK, HONK, HONK!


_Honk_, _honk_, _honk!_ Out of the silence of the November night, down
through the depths of the darkened sky, rang the thrilling call of the
passing geese.

_Honk_, _honk_, _honk!_ I was out of bed in an instant; but before I
had touched the floor, there was a patter of feet in the boys’ room,
the creak of windows going up, and--silence.

_Honk_, _honk_, _honk!_ A mighty flock was coming. The stars shone
clear in the far blue; the trees stood dark on the rim of the North;
and somewhere between the trees and the stars, somewhere along a
pathway running north and south, close up against the distant sky, the
wild geese were winging.

_Honk_, _honk_, _honk!_ They were overhead. Clear as bugles, round and
mellow as falling flute notes, ordered as the tramp of soldiers, fell
the _honk_, _honk_, _honk_, as the flock in single line, or double
like the letter V, swept over and was gone.

We had not seen them. Out of a sound sleep they had summoned us, out
of beds with four wooden legs and no wings; and we had heard the wild
sky-call, had heard and followed through our open windows, through the
dark of the night, up into the blue vault under the light of the
stars.

Round and dim swung the earth below us, hushed and asleep in the soft
arms of the night. Hill and valley lay close together, farm-land and
wood-land, all wrapped in the coverlet of the dark. City and town,
like watch fires along the edge of a sleeping camp, burned bright on
the rivers and brighter still on the ragged line of shore and sea, for
we were far away near the stars. The mountains rose up, but they could
not reach us; the white lakes beckoned, but they could not call us
down. For the stars were bright, the sky-coast was clear, the wind in
our wings was the keen, wild wind of the North, and the call that we
heard--ah! who knows the call? Yet, who does not know it--that distant
haunting call to fly, fly, fly?

I found myself in my bed the next morning. I found the small boys in
their beds. I found the big round sun in the sky that morning and not
a star in sight! There was nothing unusual to be seen up there,
nothing mysterious at all. But there was something unusual, something
mysterious to be seen in the four small faces at the breakfast-table
that morning--eyes all full of stars and deep with the far, dark
depths of the midnight sky into which they had gazed--into which those
four small boys had flown!

We had often heard the geese go over before, but never such a flock as
this, never such wild waking clangor, so clear, so far away, so
measured, swift, and--gone!

I love the sound of the ocean surf, the roar of a winter gale in the
leafless woods, the sough of the moss-hung cypress in the dark
southern swamps. But no other voice of Nature is so strangely, deeply
thrilling to me as the _honk_, _honk_, _honk_ of the passing geese.

For what other voice, heard nowadays, of beast or bird is so wild and
free and far-resounding? Heard in the solemn silence of the night, the
notes fall as from the stars, a faint and far-off salutation, like the
call of sentinels down the picket line--“All’s well! All’s well!”
Heard in the open day, when you can see the winged wedge splitting
through the dull gray sky, the notes seem to cleave the dun clouds,
driven down by the powerful wing-beats where the travelers are passing
high and far beyond the reach of our guns.

The sight of the geese going over in the day, and the sound of their
trumpetings, turn the whole world of cloud and sky into a wilderness,
as wild and primeval a wilderness as that distant forest of the far
Northwest where the howl of wolves is still heard by the trappers.
Even that wilderness, however, is passing; and perhaps no one of us
will ever hear the howl of wolves in the hollow snow-filled forests,
as many of our parents have heard. But the _honk_ of the wild geese
going over we should all hear, and our children should hear; for this
flock of wild creatures we have in our hands to preserve.

The wild geese breed in the low, wet marshes of the half-frozen North,
where, for a thousand years to come they will not interfere with the
needs of man. They pass over our northern and middle states and spend
the winter in the rivers, marshes, and lagoons of the South, where,
for another thousand years to come, they can do little, if any, harm
to man, but rather good.

But North and South, and all along their journey back and forth, they
are shot for sport and food. For the wild geese cannot make this
thousand-mile flight without coming down to rest and eat; and wherever
that descent is made, there is pretty sure to be a man with a gun on
the watch.

Here, close to my home, are four ponds; and around the sides of each
of them are “goose blinds”--screens made of cedar and pine boughs
fixed into the shore, behind which the gunners lie in wait. More than
that, out upon the surface of the pond are geese swimming, but tied so
that they cannot escape--geese that have been raised in captivity and
placed there to lure the flying wild flocks down. Others, known as
“flyers,” are kept within the blind to be let loose when a big flock
is seen approaching--to fly out and mingle with them and decoy them
to the pond. These “flyers” are usually young birds and, when thrown
out upon their wings, naturally come back, bringing the wild flock
with them, to their fellows fastened in the pond.

A weary flock comes winging over, hungry, and looking for a place to
rest. Instantly the captive geese out on the pond see them and set up
a loud honking. The flying flock hear them and begin to descend. Then
they see one (tossed from the blind) coming on to meet them, and they
circle lower to the pond, only to fall before a fury of shots that
pour from behind the blind.

Those of the flock that are not killed rise frightened and bewildered
to fly to the opposite shore, where other guns riddle them, the whole
flock sometimes perishing within the ring of fire!

Such shooting is a crime because it is unfair, giving the creature no
chance to exercise his native wit and caution. The fun of hunting, as
of any sport, is in playing the game--the danger, the exercise, the
pitting of limb against limb, wit against wit, patience against
patience; not in a heap of carcasses, the dead and bloody weight of
mere meat!

If the hunter would only play fair with the wild goose, shoot him (the
wild Canada goose) only along the North Carolina coast, where he
passes the winter, then there would be no danger of the noble bird’s
becoming extinct. And the hunter then would know what real sport is,
and what a long-headed, far-sighted goose the wild goose really
is--for there are few birds with his cunning and alertness.

Along the Carolina shore the geese congregate in vast numbers; and
when the day is calm, they ride out into the ocean after feeding, so
far off shore that no hunter could approach them. At night they come
in for shelter across the bars, sailing into the safety of the inlets
and bays for a place to sleep. If the wind rises, and a storm blows
up, then they must remain in the pools and water-holes, where the
hunter has a chance to take them. Only here, where the odds, never
even, are not all against the birds, should the wild geese be hunted.

With the coming of March there is a new note in the clamor of the
flocks, a new restlessness in their movements; and, before the month
is gone, many mated pairs of the birds have flocked together and are
off on their far northern journey to the icy lakes of Newfoundland and
the wild, bleak marshes of Labrador.

_Honk_, _honk_, _honk!_ Shall I hear them going over,--going
northward,--as I have heard them going southward this fall? Winter
comes down in their wake. There is the clang of the cold in their
trumpeting, the closing of iron gates, the bolting of iron doors for
the long boreal night. They pass and leave the forests empty, the
meadows brown and sodden, the rivers silent, the bays and lakes close
sealed. Spring will come up with them on their return; and their
_honk_, _honk_, _honk_ will waken the frogs from their oozy slumbers
and stir every winter sleeper to the very circle of the Pole.

_Honk_, _honk_, _honk!_ Oh, may I be awake to hear you, ye
strong-winged travelers on the sky, when ye go over northward, calling
the sleeping earth to waken, calling all the South to follow you
through the broken ice-gates of the North!

_Honk_, _honk_, _honk!_ The wild geese are passing--southward!



    AMY LOVEMAN

    The Minstrel Made His Tune of Hours and Seasons


    Dewfall, moonrise, high sweet clover,
      Chimney swifts at their twilight play;
    Quail call, owl hoot, moth a-hover,
      Midnight pale at the step of day.

    Star wane, cobweb, brown-plumed bracken;
      Morning laughs, with the frost in flower;
    Duck flight, hound cry; wild grapes blacken.
      Day leaps up at the amber hour.

    Sun dark, snowcloud, eaves ice cumbered,
      Gray sand piled on a carmine West;
    Faint wing, flake dance; winds unnumbered
      Swing the cradles where leaf-buds rest.

    Wide light, bough flush, gold-fringed meadows,
      Berries red in the rippled grass;
    Stream song, nest note, dream deep shadows
      Drawn back slowly for noon to pass.




CONTENTS

CHAP.                                       PAGE

I.    Faces of Janus                           1

II.   A Woodland Valentine                     7

III.  Ways of the March Hare                  13

IV.   The April Moment                        19

V.    The Crest of Spring                     25

VI.   Hay Harvest Time                        31

VII.  The Month of Yellow Flowers             37

VIII. The Mood of August                      43

IX.   Summer Pauses                           48

X.    When the Oaks Wear Damson               54

XI.   November Traits                         60

XII.  The Christmas Woods                     66

XIII. Landscapes Seen in Dreams               72

XIV.  Hiding Places                           78

XV.   The Play of Leaves                      84

XVI.  The Brown Frontier                      90

XVII. Far Altars                              96




ILLUSTRATIONS


The Milky Way Revealed to Lonely Herdsmen       _Frontispiece_

The Comforting Symbolism of Firelight
  at Play upon Clean Hearths                   _Facing p._   4

The Powers of Light                                 "       10

On the Topmost Boughs the Fairies Sleep             "       26

The Rejoicing Shout of Coming Summer                "       28

The Swooping Bat Darts Noiselessly                  "       34

Now the Mountaineer’s Girl Hurries Indoors
  at Nightfall from the Hallooing Specter
  of the Wild Huntsman in the Clouds                "       54

Baldwins Mellow by Twelfth-night                    "       58

December Acknowledges an Unpitying
  Fate—Anything May Happen                          "       68




MINSTREL WEATHER




CHAPTER I.

FACES OF JANUS


[Illustration]

Though January has days that dress in saffron for their going, and noons
of yellow light, foretelling crocuses, the month is yet not altogether
friendly. The year is moving now toward its most unpitying season.
Nights that came on kindly may turn the meadows to iron, tear off the
last faithful leaves from oaks, drive thick clouds across the moon, to
end in a violent dawn. January holds gentle weather in one hand and
blizzards in the other, and what a blizzard can be only dwellers on
prairies or among the mountains know. Snow gone mad, its legions
rushing across the land with daggers drawn, furious, bearing no malice,
but certainly no compassion, and overwhelming all creatures abroad:
bewildered flocks, birds half frozen on their twigs, cattle unwisely
left on shelterless ranges, and people who lose the way long before
animals give up. Snow hardly seems made of fairy stars and flowers when
its full terror sweeps Northern valleys or the interminable solitudes of
the plains. The gale so armed for attack owns something of the wicked
intention which Conrad says that sailors often perceive in a storm at
sea. The rider pursued by a blizzard may feel, like the tossed mariner,
that “these elemental forces are coming at him with a purpose, with an
unbridled cruelty which means to sweep the whole precious world away by
the simple and appalling act of taking his life.” We do not smile at the
pathetic fallacy when we are alone with cold. The overtaken mountaineer
understands—it means to get him. These things happen in places where
weather is not obedient to wraps and furnaces, but where it must be
fought hand to hand and where the pretty snow tangles its victim’s feet
and slowly puts him to sleep in a delicious dream of warmth. Tropical
lightning has not the calm omnipotence of cold when it walks lonely
ways.

January knows days on which the haze of spring and the dim tenderness of
the sunshine tempt the rabbit to try another nap _al fresco_, indiscreet
though he knows it to be. Even the woodchuck must turn over and sniff in
his sleep as the thaw creeps downward; and the muskrat takes his safe
way by water once more, while the steel trap waits on the bank, to be
sprung humanely by a falling cone. The lithe red fox glides across the
upper pastures and weaves among the hardhack unchallenged, for this is
not hunting weather. A fleeting respite comes to the tormented mink.
Toward the last of the month, innocent of the February and March to
come, pussy willows, ingenuously deceived by the brief mildness, come
out inquisitively and stand in expectation beside the brook, convinced
that this ice is only left over—what can have delayed the garnet-veined
skunk’s cabbage, always on hand the first of all? So many willows are
needed by the florists that perhaps they do not pay heavily for their
premature debut. But they are all gray now. In March they show a cloudy
crimson and yellow not alone of the final blossom, but of their fur.
There are plenty of scarlet rose hips in uplifted clusters, for the
birds somehow neglect them while they pursue other delicacies of the
same color and contour. Nature has probably told the winter chippies
that rose hips are no good—spring decorations must not be pilfered by
the snow sprites. Puffballs have broken off from old logs, and in
walking through low woods you may step on one here and there, awakening
the fancy that the world is burning, under its sad cloak of sepia
leaves, and sending up small puffs of smoke to warn those who have
trodden it in love and comprehension.

When the winsome skies turn stony, and melancholy winter rain ends in
chill mist, January has days to breathe whose air is like breathing
under water, down in spring-cold lake, where the incredible,
pleasureless fishes move through their gray element, finding pallid
amusement perhaps in nudging frogs and turtles, well tucked up under a
blanket of mud. They are cold-blooded, of course, and not supposed to
mind the oppressiveness of the liquid atmosphere. But after ourselves
moving in such an environment it is marvelous to ponder that any
creatures prefer it, and good to foreknow that our own world will swim
out into a splendid frosty weather.

[Illustration]

For its days of quiet sparkle we would remember January, not for lashing
tempests, April delusions, or brooding fog. Unbroken snow with blazing
spangles shifting as the sun moves, and above it twittering sparrows
clinging by one claw to stalks of yarrow or mustard while they shake the
seeds loose with the other; old stone walls suddenly demonstrating that
they have color, when the foreground is white, and showing bluish,
brown, earthen red, and gray alight with mica; streams covered with
pearly ice that floods into brilliant orange at sunset; spruce and
hemlock imperiously outlined on even far-off hills; skating-time without
and kindled logs within—that is the midwinter we remember when the
sterner messengers sped from the Pole have gone again. Were it not for
the blizzard we might fail to know so well the comforting symbolism of
firelight at play upon clean hearths. Many go all their lives, aware
only of the coziness or inconvenience of winter, never facing the
daggered gale alone, nor struck by the terror of a hostile Nature or the
awe of cold that may not soon relent. What one perceives in the volcano,
tidal wave, or blizzard, another is spared; the lesson, perhaps, being
postponed until he is ready for it. Spring comes sweetly to the
milliners’ this month. To the wilderness with rapid and menacing step
comes full winter.





CHAPTER II.

A WOODLAND VALENTINE


[Illustration]

Forces astir in the deepest roots grow restless beneath the lock of
frost. Bulbs try the door. February’s stillness is charged with a faint
anxiety, as if the powers of light, pressing up from the earth’s center
and streaming down from the stronger sun, had troubled the buried seeds,
who strive to answer their liberator, so that the guarding mother must
whisper over and over, “Not yet, not yet!” Better to stay behind the
frozen gate than to come too early up into realms where the wolves of
cold are still aprowl. Wisely the snow places a white hand over
eager—life unseen, but perceived in February’s woods as a swimmer feels
the changing moods of water in a lake fed by springs. Only the thick
stars, closer and more companionable than in months of foliage, burn
alert and serene. In February the Milky Way is revealed divinely lucent
to lonely peoples—herdsmen, mountaineers, fishermen, trappers—who are
abroad in the starlight hours of this grave and silent time of year. It
is in the long, frozen nights that the sky has most red flowers.

February knows the beat of twilight wings. Drifting north again come
birds who only pretended to forsake us—adventurers, not so fond of
safety but that they dare risk finding how snow bunting and pine finch
have plundered the cones of the evergreens, while chickadees, sparrows,
and crows are supervising from established stations all the more
domestic supplies available; a sparrow often making it possible to annoy
even a duck out of her share of cracked corn. Ranged along a
brown-draped oak branch in the waxing light, crows show a lordly
glistening of feathers. (Sun on a sweeping wing in flight has the
quality of sun on a ripple.) Where hemlocks gather, deep in somber
woods, the great horned owl has thus soon, perhaps working amid snows at
her task, built a nest wherein March will find sturdy balls of fluff.
The thunderous love song of her mate sounds through the timber. By the
time the wren has nested these winter babies will be solemn with the
wisdom of their famous race.

There is no season like the end of February for cleaning out brooks.
Hastening yellow waters toss a dreary wreckage of torn or ashen leaves,
twigs, acorn cups, stranded rafts of bark, and buttonballs from the
sycamore, never to come to seed. Standing on one bank or both, according
to the sundering flood’s ambition, the knight with staff and bold
forefinger sets the water princess free. She goes then curtsying and
dimpling over the shining gravel, sliding from beneath the ice that
roofs her on the uplands down to the softer valleys, where her quickened
step will be heard by the frogs in their mansions of mud, and the fish,
recluses in rayless pools, will rise to the light she brings.

Down from the frozen mountains, in summer, birds and winds must bear
the seed of alpine flowers—lilies that lean against unmelting snows,
poppies, bright-colored herbs, and the palely gleaming, fringed beauties
that change names with countries. How just and reasonable it would seem
to be that flowers which edge the ice in July should consent to bloom in
lowlands no colder in February! The pageant of blue, magenta, and
scarlet on the austere upper slopes of the Rockies, where nights are
bitter to the summer wanderer—why should it not flourish to leeward of a
valley barn in months when icicles hang from the eaves in this tamer
setting? But no. Mountain tempests are endurable to the silken-petaled.
The treacherous lowland winter, with its coaxing suns followed by
roaring desolation, is for blooms bred in a different tradition.

[Illustration]

The light is clear but hesitant, a delicate wine, by no means the mighty
vintage of April. February has no intoxication; the vague eagerness that
gives the air a pulse where fields lie voiceless comes from the secret
stirring of imprisoned life. Spring and sunrise are forever miracles,
but the early hour of the wonder hardly hints the exuberance of its
fulfillment. Even the forest dwellers move gravely, thankful for any
promise of kindness from the lord of day as he hangs above a sea-gray
landscape, but knowing well that their long duress is not yet to end.
Deer pathetically haunt the outskirts of farms, gazing upon cattle
feeding in winter pasture from the stack, and often, after dark,
clearing the fences and robbing the same disheveled storehouse. Not a
chipmunk winks from the top rail. The woodchuck, after his single
expeditionary effort on Candlemas, which he is obliged to make for
mankind’s enlightenment, has retired without being seen, in sunshine or
shadow, and has not the slightest intention of disturbing himself just
yet. Though snowdrops may feel uneasy, he knows too much about the Ides
of March! Quietest of all Northern woods creatures, the otter slides
from one ice-hung waterfall to the next. The solitary scamperer left is
the cottontail, appealing because he is the most pursued and politest of
the furry; faithfully trying to give no offense, except when starvation
points to winter cabbage, he is none the less fey. So is the mink,
though he moves like a phantom.

Mosses, whereon March in coming treads first, show one hue brighter in
the swamps. Pussy willows have made a gray dawn in viny caverns where
the day’s own dawn looks in but faintly, and the flushing of the red
willow betrays reveries of a not impossible cowslip upon the bank
beneath. The blue jay has mentioned it in the course of his voluble
recollections. He is unwilling to prophesy arbutus, but he will just
hint that when the leaves in the wood lot show through snow as early as
this ... Once he found a hepatica bud the last day of February ...
Speaking with his old friend, the muskrat, last week ... And when you
can see red pebbles in the creek at five o’clock in the afternoon ...
But it is no use to expect yellow orchids on the west knoll this spring,
for some people found them there last year, and after that you might as
well ... Of course cowslips beside red willows are remarkably pretty,
just as blue jays in a cedar with blue berries.... He is interminable,
but then he has seen a great deal of life. And February needs her blue
jays’ unwearied and conquering faith.




CHAPTER III.

WAYS OF THE MARCH HARE


[Illustration]

Follow him to the woods and you know his fascination, but never give the
March hare a reference for sobriety. His reputation cannot be
rehabilitated, yet his intimates love him in spite of it. He is such an
accomplished tease! He wakens, playful and ingratiating, with the sun;
he skips cajolingly among the crocuses; and before an hour passes he is
rushing about the fields in a fury, scattering the worn-out, brown
grasses, scaring the first robins, and bouncing over the garden fence to
break the necks of any tulips deceived by his morning mood. Impossible
animal, he is an eccentric born, glorying in his queerness; and none the
less, there are some who think he knows the zest of life better than
April’s infatuated starling or the woodchuck drowsing in May clover. He
loves to kick the chilly brooks into foam and fluster them until they
run over their unthawed banks and tear downhill and through the swamp to
alarm the rivers, so that they, too, come out on land and the whole
world looks as though it had gone back to the watery beginning. He
chases north the snowy owl, ornament of our winter woods, and
fraternizes with the sinful sparrow. Shrike and grosbeak leave, saying
that really it is growing quite warm, and, glancing behind them, they
behold the March hare turning somersaults in snowdrifts. He freezes the
mud that the shore lark was enjoying. No one depends upon him. Yet, to
see swift and enchanting changes of sky, lake, and woodland, go forth
with the March hare and find with him, better than quiet, the earth
astir.

Trees lose the archaic outline as leaf buds swell. Reddened maples and
black ash twigs, yellow flowers on the willow, begin the coloring of a
landscape that will not fade to gray and dun again until December
comes. The lilacs are growing impatient, for already the sophisticated
city lilac bush is wearing costly bloom, careless that a debut made so
early early ends. The crocuses, spring’s opening ballet, dressed in
pastel tints, take their places on the lawn, standing delicately erect,
waiting for bird music. Unknown to March’s gales, the still swamp pools
are fringed with shooting green, full of hints of cowslips; and
arbutus—few know on what hillsides—is lifting the warm leaf blanket,
trusting that vandal admirers are far away. The March violet is sung
more than seen, visiting Northern slopes and woods hollows only by
caprice, but all the legends lingering over it, and the magic beauty it
gives to maidens who gather it at dawn, make the violet still, for
lyrical needs, the flower of March. Cuddled close to sun-warmed stones,
cloaked by quaint leaves lined with sapphire and maroon, sometimes now
the hepatica has come; and bloodroot nested under bowlders, and in fence
corners where the sun is faithful, lifts praying, exquisite petals that
open swiftly from the slim bud and are scattered by a touch. The dark
blue grape hyacinth stands calm in winds and bitter weather; waist-deep
in snow, it proudly holds its ground. Sap is visibly climbing to the
highest limbs. It seems even to be mounting in the ancient wild-grape
vines that swing from the roof of the wood, bearing no buds and looking
dead a hundred years, though there is life beneath the somber and shaggy
bark. Sap called back through the ducts of the winter-warped thorn,
solitary in the clearing where the cruel nor’easter raced, will cover
the sad branches, once the soft days are here, with shining blossoms.
The year turns when the sap runs. Little boys who have their sugar
maples picked out and under guard, being more forehanded about some
things than others, are whittling intensely.

Loneliest of all sounds, the “peepers” take up their forsaken song in
flooded meadows, silenced in ghostly fashion by a footstep that comes
near. Heartbroken chant, it is more elegy than spring song, hard to hear
at dusk, yet it is certain that those peepers are delighted that March
is here—as content with their fate, while they utter the poignant notes,
as the emphatic old frogs by the deeper water. Wander-birds, almost
unresting, are posting north again through the twilights. Bold wild
geese are awing for Canada. Quiet returning hawks cross the valleys, and
the pine grosbeak hastens past. Spring dowers the devoted but undesired
starling with a pleasant voice which will change by summer into an
exasperating croak, and so many of our birds suffer this unfair loss
that a feathered critic would have good reason to declare that poets
ought to be slain in youth. The terrifying little screech owl wails from
shadowy woods, and from the venerable timber sounds the horned owl’s
obscure threat. The chickadee repeats with natural pride his charming
repertoire of two notes—“Spring soon!” Nothing is refused this fortunate
one, born with a sweet disposition and a winsome song, while sparrows,
angrily conducting their courtships, remain on earth solely by dint of
original cleverness.

Meadow mole and turtle, woodchuck and chipmunk, are recovering from a
three months’ nap, waiting patiently in the sunshine for the season to
begin. Snakes come out with the rest of the yawning company. Fish
glitter again in the hurrying streams, building their nests and houses
like the others—often obeying a spring impulse to rush from lake to
outlet or from quiet water to streamhead, ending their journey suddenly
and forever amid wire meshes. The brooks are icy on the mildest days
with melted snow from the mountains, where hemlocks green as arctic
waters, shutting out the sun, keep a white floor long after the valley
wears grasses.

Whoever has a touch of madness to lend him sympathy with the March hare
likes the bewildering days through which he scampers to vanish at the
edge of April. Rebellious, whitening ponds and wind-bent trees; defiant
buds and all the kindled life of marsh, hill, and woodland, set free
once more from cold, but not from dread—hear at the coming of the mighty
month their promise of release. But only to comrades who will run with
him through muddy lanes and tangled brush does he show his treasures:
forest creatures sped like the couriers, petals lifted like the banners,
of life resurgent.




CHAPTER IV.

THE APRIL MOMENT


[Illustration]

Survivor of so much that her fear is gone, triumphant April answers the
dark powers as if they could never speak again. Spring after spring she
stands among flying petals and smiles at the last bitter winds. She will
not grant that the green earth was ever vanquished, fiercely alive as
now it is. Scornfully the new silver bloom on the clover sheds the
relentless rain. Undaunted, reaffirming, she summons all beauty of
color, music, and fragrance beneath her banners, with a vitality so
profound and impregnable that more than other months she is careless of
man’s sympathy. April, preoccupied, hastens from crumbling furrow to
meadows that shout the coming of the green. Intense and too eager for
tenderness, she craves no admiration. Quite without excuse, the song
sparrow sits on a wine-colored willow twig and sings frantically. Anyone
has as good a reason for ecstasy as he—merely that the dumb struggle is
ended and the long suns have returned in splendor.

Contemplative between their dark exotic leaves, dogtooth violets fill
the light-flecked hollows. Spring beauties open warily at daybreak to
show stamens of deep rose. Where imperious amber waters go foaming
through the swamp, spendthrift gold of cowslips is swept down to the
rivers, and budded branches that leaned too close above the ripple are
shut out from the sun world for a while. Mauve and canary slippers are
waiting for the fairy queen where our wild orchid of the North dangles
them on remote knolls, but they are usually found and borne off by some
one for whom they are in no way suitable. Translucent young leaves
glitter beside the stream’s path. Dandelion rosettes appear with serene
impartiality on guarded lawn and mountain pasture, where steal also the
polite but persistent “pussy tiptoes,” asserting the right to display
white leaves in spring, if so a plant should choose. The snail has
deserted his shell and gone forth to take the air at the risk of being
plowed under. None of April’s children remember or foresee. The vivid
present is enough.

The apple boughs are inlaid with coral. The peach is a cloud of dawn,
and petals of the forward cherry and pear are floating reluctantly down.
Wild-fruit trees, mysteriously planted, are misty white above the
woodland thicket—scented crabapple and twisted branch of plum. This is
the month of blossoms, as May is the month of shimmering leaves and June
of the fruitless flower.

The blackbird swings at the foamy crest of the haw, disturbed by a
thousand delights, and notes too few to tell them. The crow hoarsely
mentions his rapture as he flaps above the moving harrow, and the new
lambs look on in a tremulous, wounded manner while the famished
woodchuck makes away with the cloverheads they were just about to
endeavor to bite off. Uncertainly the wondering calves proceed about the
pasture, not yet at the stage in life where they will skip with touching
curiosity after every object that stirs. At dusk and glistening morning
there are bird songs such as only April hears—the outburst of welcome to
the light, and the sleepy fluting of the robins when the sky turns to a
soft prism in the west. Fainter, more melancholy even than in March, is
the twilight lament of the peepers. They are alien to the aria of April.

New England’s forget-me-nots are fleet turquoise in the grasses; New
England’s arbutus flowers lie flushed pearls among the ancient leaves;
but everywhere are the violets of three colors—yellow for the pool’s
edge, white among the bog lands, and blue as pervasive as the sunlight
on hill slope, road bank, and forest floor. And there are violets of an
unfathomable blue, sprinkled with white like wisps of cloud against far
mountains. Some grow close to earth, taught by past dismay; others,
long-stemmed and sweet, will live and suffer and mend their ways next
year. The windflower meets the breeze, a slim princess, incredibly
fragile, yet broken less easily than the strong tulip, vaguely touched
with rose or white as bloodroot. Tulips dwell not only on the ground;
they have parted great, opaque petals at the tops of trees, startling to
see in the leafless wood. Watercress glitters in the cold streams where
trout, winter-weary, are on patrol for those flies now magnificent in
their jeweled dress of spring. The first oak leaves are delicately
crimson at the end of the bough. Disregard, amid this pageantry of _la
vita nuova_, the outrageous satire of brown skeleton “fingers” that
point stiffly up through the shining blades of grass. If they seem to be
a chilling cynicism of Nature, who has not found an April dandelion
telling a braver story through winter snow?

Cedar and balsam twig are golden-tipped. Nothing is unchanged. Immortal
wings that beat through February gales to reach this land of their
tradition are fluttering now about the building of the nest. The smooth
chimney swift flashes above the barn and is gone. With drooping wings he
hangs poised against the daffodil sky in his evening play. Peaceably
among the lilacs the contented bluebird sits, though through bulb, root,
and chrysalis has passed the irresistible current that will let no
sharer of the earth be still—not stone nor seed nor man. Into this
forced march April steps with gladness, hailing the order, predestined
to change. Joining her unresisting, take for your own the moment of
escape which the singer in the blossoms freely claims. Life’s fullness
is measured by these salvaged April moments when suddenly joy becomes a
simple and close-dwelling thing, when for a merciful, lighted instant
the impersonal and endless beauty of the world seems enough.




CHAPTER V.

THE CREST OF SPRING


[Illustration]

Flickering soft leaves spangled with sunlit rain give May a robe
diamond-sown, as lighted spray may weave for the sea. Skimming wings
catch sunrise colors. The grass blade is borne down by the exquisite
burden of one translucent pearl. This is the luminous youth of the year,
and its splendor lies deeper than the glitter of dew-and-rain jewels,
for it is visible in the forbidding strongholds of hemlock and pine,
where a sunless world still shines with May. In one month only Nature
lights her unquenchable lamp. Look down upon the orchard from a hill:
the young leaves are lanterns of sheer green silk, not the richly
draped and shadowy foliage of full summer. Lustrous is the new red of
poison ivy and woodbine, of swamp maple and slowly budding oak. Where in
July the hard light will play as upon metal, lake and stream are faintly
shimmering gray. Rain cannot dim the radiant freshness, for trees thus
queenly clothed in blossoms never bend submissive to the pelting skies.
Let that fragment of creation which bears umbrellas prostrate its spirit
before the “blossom storm,” seven times renewed—the answer of the
flowered thorn is always exultant. Amid departing petals which have
played their role and gone, voyaging on raindrops, “the May month flaps
its glad green leaves like wings.”

[Illustration]

Wild shrubs upon the mountain slopes are in thronging bloom. Delicately
pink and nectar-laden, the prodigal azalea calls to the honeybees,
always bitterly industrious and severely intent upon duty amid a general
festival. It is a great satisfaction sometimes to find a bee overtaken
by intoxication and night within a water lily or hollyhock, his
obtrusive good example smothered sweetly. For once he was not at the
hive in time to murmur of his heavy day of posting from garden to
meadow! Dowered with a white simplicity beyond the pensive moonflower’s,
the bracts of the dogwood seem afloat among gray branches—misty, seen
far off; clear cut to nearer view; eloquent of spring; without fragrance
as without pretense. The mountain laurel holds above gleaming leaves its
marvelously carven cups, faint pink or white, amber-flecked. All winter
it has kept the green, when ground pine lay snowbound and spruces sagged
with sleet. The victor may find his wreath at any time of year, for our
laurel has it ready. High toward the stars in regal manner the tulip
trees lift their broader chalices. It is probably in these, on the
topmost boughs, that the fairies sleep where mortals never climb up to
look in. Bilberry, shadbush, and brier stand in May marriage robes of
white, quiet and beautiful, scented at dusk when the sun warmth begins
to leave the blossoms. The red haw wears a little fine golden lace.
Farther south the rhododendron is gorgeously displayed—magenta verging
on damson.

The air is precious with the plentiful sweetness of lilac and magnolia,
of the memorial lavender lilac that summons homesickness to city parks
on evenings of May. The carmine glow of the flowering quince is here,
brought from its tropic wilderness. The long flushed curve of the almond
spray bends meekly toward the sod. Opulent is every bush, though its
blossoming may be secret. In colors beloved of kings, the velvet,
minutely perfect iris commands the garden path. Beside it in despair the
old-time bleeding-heart laments, and the bells of the valley lily hang,
chiming fragrance. Impatient climb the red-stalked peonies. The currant
is in green but pleadingly sweet blossom.

High, thick grass and clover in May fields are only the setting for the
dazzling buttercup, who shakes the dews from her closed petals before
daybreak and folds them prayerfully at about the time the birds turn
home. First white daisies, supremely fresh and lucid as all May’s
glories are, show a few misleading foam flecks of the flood with which
they intend to overwhelm the crop of hay. Feathery yellow of the wild
mustard nods beside the road as if it were not anchored to immovable
roots. Already the sapphire star grass is hiding in the meadows. Gone
are the blossoms of the wild strawberry. The canary-colored five-finger
vine would lace itself over the world, given but half an opportunity. So
would the bramble of the fair white blossom and maroon-bordered leaf.

[Illustration]

Still are restless wings now upon the guarded nest. Some flash along the
turned furrow, circle near the eaves, dip sharply to the ripple. Willow
fronds are startled by the glinting blue of the kingfisher, scarlet of
the tanager. Once more the chimneys of old houses know the flickering
swallow. The oriole has come to the orchard again, the wren to the grape
arbor. Tiny rabbits, beholding for the first time what white clover can
be, twitch their noses in content. Tired children, returning from rifled
woodlands with too many posies, drop them in the path, like flower girls
intrusted to strew the way of summer. It is more comfortable not to
grant flowers the capacity for pain, but we demand, nevertheless, that
they enjoy giving pleasure to us, so doubtless they are glad to be of
service even in this thwarted fashion. Yet May’s store is manifold; her
waiting buds can replace the scattered ones.

The face of Nature wears in the shining month a beauty something less
than mature, but more than the mischief and troubling intensity of
April. The wonder of the hour—the adieu of spring and the rejoicing
shout of coming summer—dwells there, a subdued, impassioned note. The
crest of the year’s youth merges like all crests into the wave beyond,
renewed forever like the waves. To man alone has been given the
difficult task of keeping on without a spring. That singular adversity
is ours in common with inanimate things: May rose and lilac come back
each year to the forsaken house, but to the house May brings no change.
About it a world of snow becomes a world of blossoms, as for us, and the
sun creates. But the house needs aid of human hands, man of earth’s
quickened beauty in luminous May.




CHAPTER VI.

HAY HARVEST TIME


[Illustration]

By the manifold hayfields only, were her wild-rose token banished, a
traveler returning from another land to our June, not knowing the time
of year, might name the month. In days just before hay harvest the
glistening dance of meadow grasses is most splendid, their soft
obedience to the winds is readiest. Deep rose plumes of sorrel, the
wine-colored red-top, smoky heads of timothy, are forever aripple, and,
though overstrewn with flowers, they reveal when bent beneath the step
of the southwest breeze a thousand lowlier flowers near the roots. Here
the “wild morning-glory,” the tiny fields convolvulus, hides perilously
in the mowing; white clover and yellow five-finger are spread; the
grassflower holds up its single jewel. The swaying stems are trellises
to many a wandering vine; there are fairy arbors where a tired elf might
sleep guarded from the sun as well as in a jungle. Here, too, the wild
strawberries are ripening, not breathing yet the bouquet of July; but
the white wild strawberry, lover of the shades, has already reached its
pallid ripeness. Far beneath the moving surface of the grass ocean lies
a dim and mysterious world, lined with track and countertrack of the
beetle, caverns of the mole, and the unremaining castle of the ant. Here
the sleek woodchuck passes imperceptibly, the ingenuous cottontail finds
his brief paradise; small moths fold their wings and sleep.

Above are light, motion, and the clearest, strongest colors of the year,
untarnished by hot suns, unmixed with the later browns. The dark-eyed
yellow daisy, sun worshiper, rises amid the fresh brilliance of that
other starry-petaled weed which only sheep will eat. Celestial-blue
chicory wanders in from the roadside and will not thereafter be denied.
Yarrow with its balsam fragrance and fernlike leaf, the first delicate
wild carrot asway, goldfinch yellow of the moth mullein, cloverheads of
the Tyrian dye, sunny spray of mustard, lie scattered on the crests of
hayfield waves.

In the lowgrounds, on bowldered hillsides, far in the woods, wherever
the mowing machine will grant it a summer, spreads the exquisite wild
rose, dowered like other flowers of June—the water lily, the wild-grape
blossom, the syringa—with a perfume as wistfully sweet as the form and
hue of its chalice. That fragrance, unearthly, never fails to bring a
catch of the breath, a start of memory, when in whatever place it is
encountered again. You seldom find a wild rose withered; they cast their
petals down without a struggle, and a throng of ardent pink buds are
waiting on the bush. So it is with the water lily—when the hour strikes
she draws her green cloak once more about her and retires from the sun.

The meadow rue has shaken out veil upon floating veil in the woodlands.
The shaded knolls are sprinkled lavender with wild geraniums, willing
to be background for the May windflower or the buttercups of June. Among
the rocks, twinkling red and yellow in the sandy, sunny places, the
columbine swings her cups of honey impartially for glittering humming
bird and blunt-nosed, serious bee. Columbines are delicious—could anyone
regard them sensibly, and not as something animate and almost winged.
The claret-colored milkweed (a natural paradox) holds flowing nectar,
too, but there is a paler milkweed, so softly tinted of pink, yellow,
and white as to be no color at all, whereto the little yellow
butterflies drift to sip at dusk. The blossomed elder rests like white
fog in the hollows, scenting all the country ways and promising
elder-blossom wine, the dryad’s draught. In moist and dark
retreats—under hemlocks and at the doors of caves—the ghost lamp is
lighted. In the brightest spot it can find the small blackberry lily
paints against the ledge its speckled orange star.

It is the time of perfect ferns, uncurled quickly from the brown balls,
and making our Northern woods tropical with the sumptuous brake and
temperate imitations of the tree fern. They fill the glades and scale
the cliffs. They mingle enchantingly along creeks and at the edge of the
pond with the regal hosts of the blue flag—the lavishly sown iris of the
meadows. They are matted close in the swamps, plumy on the hilltops.
From mosses on old logs spring ferns almost as faery as the fronds of
the moss itself.

[Illustration]

Into the whispering twilight of June come many creatures to play strange
games and sing such songs as even the many-stringed orchestra of the
sunlit hayfield does not know. The swooping bat darts from thick-hung
woodbine and noiselessly crosses the garden, brushes the hollyhocks, and
speeds toward the moon. Moths, white and pallid green, wander like
spirits among the peonies. Sometimes the humming bird shakes the trumpet
vine in the dark, queerly restless, though he is Apollo’s acolyte. The
fireflies are lambently awing. The cricket’s pleading, interrupted song
is half silenced by the steady, hot throb of the locust’s. The tree
toad’s eerie note comes faint and sweet, but from what cranny of the
bark he only knows. The mother bird, guardian even in sleep, speaks
drowsily to her children. From the brooding timber the owl sends his
call of despair across acres of friendly fields placid in the dew. June
nights are wakeful. Then enchantment deepens, for there comes no pause
in darkness for the joy of earth.




CHAPTER VII.

THE MONTH OF YELLOW FLOWERS


[Illustration]

From valley after valley dies away the drowsy croon of the mowing
machine, leaving to the grasshoppers the fragrant drying hay. Now comes
July in many hues of yellow, spreading her gold beside dark, hidden
beaver backwaters and along the sun-warmed stubble, whose various,
singing life is loudest through these shimmering afternoons. Tawny
beauties are abroad in woodways and sea marshes. Where the hot air
shines and quivers over shallow pools yellow water lilies float sleepily
beneath curved canopies, while the lucent pallors of the white water
lily one by one are dimmed. Moving serenely toward its climax, the
season drinks the sun and takes the color of its slanting light.

The flame lily lifts a burnt-orange cup straight toward the sky. The
yellow meadow lily bends down over the damp mold it seeks. But both love
deep woods, and, blazing suddenly above a fern bed, the rich flowers
startle, like a butterfly of the Andes adrift in Canadian forests. They
are princesses of the tropics, incongruously banished to Northern
swamps, but scornfully at ease. The false Solomon’s-seal in proud
assemblies wears with an oddly holiday air its freckled coral beads,
always a lure to the errant cow; and jack-in-the-pulpit, having been
invested with some churchly rank which demands the red robe, is ready to
cast off his cassock of lustrous striped green for one of scarlet. The
pendent-flowered jewelweed, plant with temperament and therefore called,
too, touch-me-not, droops its dew-lined leaves along the traveled lanes,
for it is making ready small surprise packages of seed that snap
ferociously open at a touch; and thus intriguing every passer-by into
sowing its crop, it earns the name unfairly borne by the innocent yellow
toadflax—snapdragon, which snaps only at bumblebees.

Gayly in possession of the fields, black-eyed Susan, known to the farmer
as “that confounded yellow bull’s-eye,” is holding her own, prepared to
resist to the utmost the onslaught of the goldenrod, which presumes to
unfurl in summer the banners of fall. The clear yellow evening primrose,
scion of one of our very best old English families, associates
democratically with a peasant mullein stalk, canary-flecked, since they
both fancy sun and sand. Magnificent sometimes upon the sand banks rises
a clump of that copper-in-the-sunshine flower, the butterfly weed, soon
to become as fugitive as our fair, lost trailing arbutus, the cardinal,
and the fringed gentian, if its lovers do not woo it less selfishly. All
beauty refuses captivity. In upland meadows the orange hawkweed is
afoot, waving its delirious-colored “paint brush” wantonly amid the
pasture grass in the light hours, but folding it at sunset, no sipper of
the dews. Brook sunflowers have come to the edge of the stream, but not
to look into the waters; their sunward-gazing petals are delicately
scented, surpassing their sisters of the fenced garden. The half-tamed
tiger lily, haunter of deserted dooryards and faithful even to abandoned
mountain farms long since given over to the wildcat and the owl,
wanderer by dusty roadsides, offers each morning new buds, and by
twilight they have bloomed and withered. Like the May rose, this is an
elegiac flower, clinging to lost gardens when all the rest have
vanished, though patches of tansy, herb of witchlore, will show pungent
golden buttons for long years untended, let the forgotten gardener but
plant it once. How many a little cabin, built in eagerness and hope, is
remembered at last only by the tiger lily, May rose, and chimney swift!
Yellow sweet clover, catching a roothold anywhere, declaring the gravel
bed a garden, makes it happiness to breathe the entranced air. The
yellow butterflies, like leaves of autumn, tremble and flurry where the
sun-steeped field meets the sweet dark wood. Among the rocks gleam ebony
seeds of the blackberry lily, whose star of orange and umber is about
to set.

Who knows, besides the birds, that embroidered on the moss new scarlet
partridge berries are ripe, hung from the vagrant vine of pale-veined
leaf that does not fear the snow? Only a month ago in this fairy
greenery lay the furry white partridge blossom, almost invisible, but
with a fragrance like that of just-opened water lilies, and now the
green fruit colors to the Christmas hue. There are no flowers like
these. The wood fairies wear them with their gowns of spangled cobweb
trimmed with moonlight.

Bough apples, with a sweetness like that of flowers distilled by the
intense sun, show the first brown seeds. From the high-piled loads of
hay journeying slowly to the mow fall the dried buttercups and daisies
that danced in the mowing grass. Ceaseless are locusts; heavy is the air
above the garden, where phlox and strawberry shrub tinge it
Persian-sweet. Clustered blueberries are drooped upon the mountains, and
in the swamps, sometimes over quicksands, shows the darkling sheen of
the high-bush huckleberry. The odor of the balsam fir is drawn out and
spread far by the heat. Now the pursued brambles become the blackberry
patch. The waste lands shine yellow with the blooms of the marching
hardhack. It is the triumph of the sun, and his priest, the white day
lily of the cloistral leaf, worships in fragrance.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE MOOD OF AUGUST


[Illustration]

The wild cherries are no longer garnet; they have darkened to their
harvest and hang in somber ripeness from the twig. Drowsy lie the grain
fields and slowly purpling vineyards. The robin in the apple orchard is
hardly to be seen among the red-fruited boughs from which the first
Astrakhans are dropping. Days of uncertain suns and exultant growing are
over. A languorous pause has come to the year. Even the crows, flapping
away across the windy blue, caw in a sleepy fashion, not yet hoarse with
anxiety because the huskers are hurrying the corn to cover with that
penurious vigilance which a crow finds so objectionable. The rabbits,
scampering and wary in the new clover time, sit out in the hot sun a
good deal now, like convalescent patients; they will keep this up until
the faint noons of November, storing the warmth that lets them sleep,
come winter, through many a hunting party overhead. The woodpecker
knocks with less ferocity. Stately on his favorite dead branch at the
lake’s edge the blue-armored kingfisher sits to watch the ripple. Only
the grasshopper persists with tragical intensity in his futile rehearsal
for the role of humming bird. A satirical Italian compares man to the
grasshopper, but no man is capable of such devotion to baffled
aspirations. Practice in grace makes him more and more imperfect. Young
wood duck, with portentous dignity, follow their mother down the topaz
creek in single file, an attentive field class, observing the demented
lucky bugs, the red-lined lily pads of the coves, the turtles sound
asleep on the warm stones. For the wood’s feathered children this is no
month of play and slumber; it will soon be autumn, and they must attempt
the long flight.

The aspect of the buckwheat fields is August’s signet. From their
goldenrod borders reaches a world of happy whiteness, against sky the
color of the pickerelweed flower, waving softly, shadowed only by the
plumy clouds. The corn is out in topgallant, and if you look from a
mountain path into the planted valley, the écru tassels have hidden the
lustrous ribbon leaves. Cornfields are never silent. Always there is a
low swish, like that of little summer waves on a lake shore.

Lavender and purple thistles, brimmed with nectar, are besought by
imperious bees and the great blue-black butterfly, but already their
pale-lit ships drift, unreturning, under sealed orders, to some far
harbor in the port of spring. More silvery still, the milkweed is
adrift. Fleets of white butterflies rise and fall with the sunset
breeze, and slow, twilight moths come from under the brakes at the hour
of dew. White-flowered, the clematis and wild cucumber, the creamy
honeysuckle of the amorous fragrance, cover fence rail and stone wall,
give petals to the barren underbrush, twine fearlessly around barbed
wire, and festoon deserted barns. Healing herbs of long ago that once
were hung every fall from attic rafters—the “wild isep,” or mountain
mint, and the gray-blooming boneset—stand profuse but unregarded in the
lowgrounds. We buy our magic potions now. Once they were brewed above
the back log, as occasion came. In ferny shadows glimmers the ivory
Indian pipe. The wild carrot, with delicate insistence, takes the field.

Ironweed of royal purple, maroon-shot, mingles in illogical harmony with
the blue vervain and magenta trumpet-weeds. The note makers name over
for us a score of flowers that Shakespeare meant by “long purples”; but
surely he foresaw our Northern swamps in August, on fire with those
exuberant, torchlike weeds that rise tall above the bogs and earn, by
their arresting splendor against a crimson sky, the need of immortality
in song. They bloom before the katydids begin and survive the first
frost. A few violets—a seed crop, not intended for men’s gaze, and
hidden cautiously beneath the leaves, are timidly aflower. They will not
go unwed, but would crave to die obscure.

The last of the new-tasting bough apples lie in the orchard grass. The
later apple trees, like the sunning rabbit and the thought-worn crow,
wait for the harvest moon. Already the unresting twigs are preparing
their winter mail of cork and gum, which will not be unfastened by the
fiercest assaults of the sleet. Short-stemmed flowers have arisen to
clothe the sharp wheat stubble. Along the mountain road grow vagabond
peach trees, to whose fruit cling eager blue wasps, whose aromatic gum
traps many a climbing robber. Other wanderers from the tended
orchard—cruelly sour plums and rouge-cheeked pears—growing among the
cornel bushes, drop down for the field mouse and woodchuck their harvest
of the wilderness. Some of them, companioned by the faithful phlox and
sunflower, once grew in dooryards now desolate. The surpassing rose
mallow like sunrise lights the marshes.

It is not a month of growth. Fruit and grain are only expanding—weeks
ago the marvel of formation was complete. It is the time of warm,
untroubled slumber that ends with the reveille of frost.




CHAPTER IX.

SUMMER PAUSES


[Illustration]

Where the slow creek is putting out to sea, freighted with seed and wan
leaf, cardinal-flowers watch the waters reddened by their image. Old
gold and ocher, the ferns beneath move listlessly up and down with the
ripple. As spring walks first along the stream, autumn, too, comes early
to the waterside, to kindle swamp maples and give the alder colors of
onyx. The lustrous indigo of the silky cornel hangs there in profusion.
Scented white balls of the river bush have lost their golden haloes, and
even the red-grounded purple of the ironweed is turning umber. The
fruited sweetbrier shows rust. Fall’s ancient tapestry, the browns of
decay worked over with carmine, olive, maroon, and buff, is being hung,
but where the blue lobelia is clustered in the lowground summer pauses.
A parting sun catches the clear yellow of curtsying, transfigured birch
leaves, and looks back, waiting, to give September’s landscape a
hesitant farewell. It seems early to go. Pickerelweed is azure still.
Among the green bogs the fragrant lady’s-tresses wear the white timidity
of April, and the three petals of the enameled arrowhead flower are
dusty with gold. But seeds wrapped up in brown are scattering.
Remembrance yields to prophecy.

The harvesters of grain and grass have gone, and the tinted stubble is
full of crickets and monotonous cicadas. Now the crumbling furrow is
folded back behind the plow and corn knives are swinging close to the
solemn pumpkins, for in cornfield, vineyard, and orchard and in the
squirrel’s domain the last harvests of all are hastening to ripeness as
the sunset chill gives warning of a disaster foretold since August by
the katydid. The honey-colored pippins, cracked and mellow in the
brooding heat, encounter the windfalls of October’s trees—deepening red,
soft yellow, and polished green. Great, sheltering leaves are dropping
from the burdened vine. Every breath tells of fruits, drying herbs, and
the late flowers that in deserted gardens are most pungent in
September—marigolds, tansy, and the cinnamon pink. Pennyroyal and mint
are betrayed. Thorn apples, not near ripened, are knocked from the twig
by south-bound birds.

Still, among wine-colored and vermilion foliage, the acorn is green,
though flushed wintergreen berry and red-gemmed partridge vine proclaim
autumn along the forest floor. The auburn splendors are upon the sumac
and the burning-bush of old-fashioned dooryards, where, too, the smoke
tree holds its haze of seeds. Sometimes a gentian stands erect among
dead grasses—a slim señora with a fringed mantilla swirled close about
her shoulders in the chilly dusk. The closed gentian keeps its darkly
impenetrable blue beside the pink-tipped companion stalks of the
snake’s-head. Fair are the sheathed berries of the prickly ash—but
daggers to the taste. Often they grow among wild cherries, which,
juiceless now, are sweet as dried fruits from Persia. And there are the
black nannyberries with their watermelon flavor, and the first spicy
wild grapes.

Immortelles are bleached paper white on sandy hills. The nightshade
holds berries of three colors, passing from brilliant green to clouded
amber and deep crimson lake, and still upon it hangs the mysterious blue
blossom, shunned. Dogwood boughs are gorgeous as a sunset, and the thick
scarlet clusters droop from the mountain ash. The last humming birds
haunt tanned honeysuckles. Languid, but clinging yet to the sun world,
the yellow lily dies on weedy streams. If the all-conquering goldenrod
hangs the way for summer’s passing with the color of regret, it has made
every meadow El Dorado with its plumes, sprays, clumps, and spears.
Spray upon delicate spray, the fairy lavender aster has taken possession
of the roadsides and fields, and before it, far into the shade, goes the
white wood aster, mingling with the flamboyant leaves of dwarf oaks and
the glistening red seeds of the wild turnip. To make September’s pageant
the scented, pale petals of spring, the drowsy contentedness of summer’s
fulfillment and the Tyrian dyes of fall are joined.

The pallid clematis, in flower along rail fences, still hides the
blacksnake, chipmunk, and red squirrel—sometimes even the unsylphlike
woodchuck—but the marshes and the branches of the lakeside pines have
felt for days past the brief touch of many a strange bird’s feet as the
vanguard migrants seek regions of longer days. Finely dressed visitors
have come to the blue-berried juniper and the monstrous pokeweed of the
terra-cotta stem. The heron breaks his profound meditation to engulf a
meadow frog, for he will not leave until the wild geese “with mingled
sound of horn and bells” press south above the watercourses. Starling
and blue jay stay awhile to oblige with their clatter to the dawn. The
fur has thickened on the woods creatures.

The blind might hear September in the uproarious arguments of the crow,
the despondent cries of katydid, tree toad, and hoot owl. In the air is
reluctance, pause. Flaming festoons of woodbine and poison ivy begarland
the stone wall. Summer cannot wait. Elegiac purples of the aster beckon,
and the butterfly sleeps long upon the thistle, but she would not go
now, in the month of the first bittersweet and the last sweet pea.




CHAPTER X.

WHEN THE OAKS WEAR DAMSON


[Illustration]

The wild ducks are streaming south upon their journey of uncounted days.
Resting a little after sunset upon the cedar-bordered pond, they are
startled into flight again by some hound hunting in the night, and with
beating wing and eerie cry go on. The later flying geese rise clamorous
from among the cat-tails, and in silent haste the blue heron and the
pair of sad old cranes that had roosted in a dead elm alongshore take
the chill, invisible trail. When day comes in spreading fire the crows
will humorously watch these wander-birds from the forest edges. They
feel no southward impulse. Circling the clearing, they comment in uproar
upon the most advisable oak for their afternoon symposium, expand their
polished feathers, and, seated in a derisive row, caw a farewell to the
wader’s long, departing legs. Now the mountaineer’s girl, remembering
Old World peasant tales that never have been told her, hurries indoors
at nightfall from the hallooing specter of the Wild Huntsman in the
clouds, who is but the anxious leader of the flying wedge.

[Illustration]

Buckwheat stubble in October is such a crimson as no Fiesolan rose
garden ever unfurled. Gray hill slopes of the North are festal with its
color, insistent even through rains, glowing from rose madder to maroon.
Lower stretches out the pale yellow of oats stubble, which breaks into
flashing splinters under the noon sun. The wheat fields show ocher, and
darker—burnt sienna at the roots—lie the reaped fields of barley. Small
rash flowers, fancying that the ground between the grain stalks has been
cultivated especially for them, now that they see the sun freely again,
put on the petals of spring amid this fair desolation. Strawberry
blossoms, visibly fey, appear; long-stemmed and scanty-flowered fall
dandelions; an ill-timed display of April’s buttercups. The blackberry
vines go richly dyed—superb red-velvet settings for the jewels of frost.

Down in the valley, through the wood-smoke haze, move the slow apple
wagons through the lanes. This is appleland. Northern Spy and Lemon
Pippin are ripe to cracking; Baldwins will be mellow by Twelfth-night,
the russet at Easter. Gorgeous and ephemeral hangs the Maiden’s Blush.
The strawberry apples are like embers on the little trees, rubies of the
orchard. Lady Sweets and Dominies are respectfully being urged into the
cellar, and for those who will pay to learn the falseness of this
world’s shows the freight cars are receiving Ben Davises. Sheep-noses,
left often on the boughs, will hold cold nectar after the black frosts
have killed the last marigold. They lie, dull red, by the orchard fence
in the early snow, their blunt expression revealing no secrets. You have
to know about them. Nothing is more inscrutable than a sheep-nose.

Fast above the indigo crests stir the light clouds, harried by the west
wind whereon the hawk floats across the valley. In the afternoon
October’s lover takes the hill path, mica-gemmed, that leads between
birches of the translucent yellow leaf and maples still green but
wearing scarlet woodbine like a gypsy’s sash. For here the sunset
lingers till the stars, though from the valley’s goblet evening has
sipped the waning sunlight like a clear amber wine. But take at morning
the path through brown lowgrounds, or close along the wood where frost
sleeps late, for here that flower of desire, the fringed gentian, grows.
Its blue is less mysterious and deep than the closed gentian’s, and yet
how many name it the cup of autumn delight!

In the woods where leafless boughs give them blue sky at last are
revealed in quaint perfection the ferneries of the moss: palm trees
towering higher than a snail’s house, gallant green plumes with
cornelians at the tip, vast tropical forests spreading for long inches,
gray trailing rivers and orange cliffs of lichen, leagues of delicate
jungle lost under a fallen leaf. A beetle clad in shining mail presses
through the wilderness. A cobalt dragonfly lights on a shaken palm.
Pursuing a rolling hickory nut, the chipmunk brings a hurricane—but
these are elastic trees.

That same mischief maker, incurably curious, chases every stranger,
shooting along the stone wall and pausing to peer out from the crevices
with unregenerate eyes. The handsome but vain woodpecker pounds at the
grub-dowered tree he has chosen to persecute. Enormously ingenuous, the
wayside cow lumbers reproachfully out of the path, knocking the grains
of excellent make-believe coffee from the withered dock. The drumming of
a partridge in his solitary transport sounds where reddened dogwood
glorifies a clump of firs. Sometimes the kittle pheasant, hardly at
home in our woods, ducks her head and vanishes in the briers.

[Illustration]

Now the harvest moon, yellower than the hunter’s moon of ending autumn
or the strawberry moon that looks upon June’s roses, rises for husking
time. It is the last harvest; when the corn is in, winter comes. Piled,
tumbling ears, their grain set in many a curious pattern, go by to the
sorting floor and crib, with pumpkins, the satraps of New England,
perched in rickety fashion on the gleaming load. The mountain ash hangs
flamboyant clusters along the road from the field. Obedient to the
frost, the acorns are dropping, and the first chestnuts lie, polished
mahogany, in the whitened grass at sunrise. The shagbark has scattered
its largess, the butternut its dainties in their staining coats. Against
the slopes the tinted fern patches show bronze, russet, and pansy brown.
Speaking October and our own purple East, the tall asters, darkening
from lavender to the ultimate shadowy violet, join the goldenrod. Sumacs
are thronging, with their proudly blazoned crests; the haw is hung with
Chinese scarlet lanterns; sweetbrier, stem and leaf, is scented of
menthol and spices of the Orient. The oaks stand regal in umber and
damson. Who that has known October could ever forget? How quiet the
nights are after frost!




CHAPTER XI.

NOVEMBER TRAITS


[Illustration]

By the time November comes the year is used to the caprices of the sun
and no longer frantically brings out flowers for his gaze or hides them
in hurt surprise from his indifference. Now the year is resigned,
untroubled of hope, far off from impatient April with her craving and
effort. Experienced month, November waits ready to face the snows. She
wraps up the buds too warmly for sleet to pierce their overcoats,
comforts the roots in the woods with mats of wrecked leaves, spreads a
little jewelry of frost as a warning before the black frosts come, and
for all else lives in the moment. November has been through this before.
But sometimes, in a reverie, she delights the blue jays and persistent
wild asters by a day of Indian summer.

There has been a great deal of ill feeling about Indian summer, and the
kinder way is not to persecute those who have since youth believed and
will maintain forever that it comes in October. Victims of this
perverted fancy, they will go through life calling the first hot spell
after Labor Day Indian summer. Every fall one explains to them that this
brief season of perfection may come as late as Thanksgiving, but the
very next year they will be heard to murmur, under frostless skies,
“Well, we are having our Indian summer.” Let them go their indoors way,
or follow the deserting robins down to Paraguay! Indian summer could
just as well come when the oaks have turned forlorn if it wanted to. In
truth, it comes and goes, by no means exhausted in a solitary burst of
flaring sumacs, fringed gentians lighted by frost along the rims,
damson-colored alder leaves and old yellow pumpkins, perilously exposed
among forgotten furrows, now that the corn is being drawn in. It goes,
and comes again, which is its charm—the one time of year that cannot be
calendared.

There is in all the world a small, choice coterie of people who like
November and March best of the months, and it must be admitted that
these are often a bit arrogant about their refined perceptions. They
manage to look down upon the many of us who prefer the daisy fields to
the time “when hills take on the noble lines of death.” But whims of the
worshiper steal no splendor from the god. June has nothing to place
beside a moonlit November night, whose shadow dance of multiform boughs
is never seen through leaves, while shadows on the snow are hard of
outline, unlike the illusive phantoms running over autumn’s brown grass.
June has no flowers so quaint, pathetic, and austere as the trembling
weeds of November. What does the goldenrod, white with age, care for
frost? All winter it will shake out seeds unthriftily upon the snow,
standing with a calm brotherhood who have gone beyond dependence on the
day. June’s forests do not take a thousand colors under a low sun.
June’s gray dews have no magnificence of frost. June’s incorrigible
sparrows are not the brave, flitting “snowbirds” whose sins we forgive,
once we hear them chirping in a blizzard. June is a lyric, November a
hymn.

The squirrels have put away enough nuts to last through the holidays,
and after that they come out and get something else—no one ever knows
what. They have gone off with most of the acorns, leaving the fairies
their usual autumn supply of cupless saucers. No birds worth fighting
with are left, for the crows will not notice them, so they go for the
chipmunks. Sometimes at the wood’s edge a bird that came only with the
blossoms and that should long since have gone sits lost, half grotesque,
on a stark twig—spent and beautiful singer, belated by perversity or by
untimely faintness of wing! The muskrat’s winter house is ready, but no
happy quiet such as his good citizenship deserves is in store for him,
because soon the trappers will begin their patrol of the forest, and his
skin, called wild Patagonian ox, the exquisite new fur, will bring a
good price. Emotional wild geese still pass overhead in the dawns and
sunsets—the crows can scarcely conceal their amusement: “What nonsense,
to be always coming or going!” The crow does not remain in the pale
North simply out of devotion to us. He is above mortal vicissitudes;
behind his demoniac eye dwells a critique of humanity which he would not
be bothered to utter if he could. The soul of the satirist once abode in
a crow.

Forsaken nests and rattling reeds along the stream, pools in the hollows
edged with thin ice, ragged leaves clutched at by the winds, desperate
buds of hepatica and cowslip where a sloping bank catches warmth at
noon, fences stripped of vines and ghostly with dead clematis, a few
frozen apples swinging on the top boughs, trampled fields and pelting
rain—and with it all a grandeur more serene than melancholy. November’s
lovers are not perverse, declaring this. They see half-indicated colors
and hear low sounds. They love the mellow light better than the blaze of
rich July, and they are loyal to November because she speaks in quiet
tones not heard through the eagerness or snow silence of other months.
It is the sentimentalist who sees only gloom and the weariness of
departure now. November is ruddier than many a day of spring and the
sharp air forbids languor. Indian summer, her gift and our most fleeting
season, is like the autumn ecstasy of the partridge, passionate and
irresistible, but not ending in despondency because he knows it will
return, and it is like joy in that it cannot be foreseen nor detained.
The bacchanal may have dreaded November, not the dryad.




CHAPTER XII.

THE CHRISTMAS WOODS


[Illustration]

The Southern woods hang their Christmas trimmings high. Laurel and
rhododendron, mistletoe and holly, reach up against the walls of tinted
bark. Our Northern forests trail greens along the floor, and roped
ground pine, pricking through the prone leaves or a gentle snow, appears
as a procession of tiny palm trees, come North for the holiday,
surprised and lost, but determined to keep together. Under the haw
bushes and over spruce roots, wherever shade was thick last summer,
partridge vines twine red-berried wreaths and the little plants of
wintergreen flavor and of that wandering name hold their rubies low on
the mountain side. After the enduring snows have come, these glimmering
fruits will be requisitioned—dug out by the furry owners of such
plantations on days when even covered roots seem barren of sap, and nuts
should really be saved awhile longer. Clumps of sword fern, beaten down
by November rains, are round green mats; other ferns long ago were
brown. But seldom save in its sunsets and woodlands has December color.
Ponds, fanged with ice, lie sullen or stir resentfully into whitecaps.
The sky is stony and often vanishes in brooding fog. Uncloaked, but
courageous in their gray armor, the trees wait tensely for the
intolerable onslaught of the cold: the blizzard with knives of sleet.

Over the marshes at the hour of dusk when the bronze and topaz are
quenched passes the breath of foreboding. December acknowledges an
unpitying fate—anything may happen. It is not the fireside month, softly
white outdoors and candlelit within. Time of miracles, it stands
expectant, and the thronging stars of the Christmas midnight wear a
restless look. Rutted paths answer harshly to the step. Delayed snow is
a menace in the air, but lands beyond the cities would be grateful
should it hasten, bringing safety to the soil and winter peace. Yet snow
is a betrayer, a sheet of paper upon which the feet of rabbit, mink, and
fox write a guide to their dwellings and to the whole plan of their
days.

Snow for Christmas there must be—on the lighted trees indoors, on our
far-scattered, similar cards. But save as a convenience to the reindeer
and a compliment to their driver, who cannot create his stocking stock
unless he is snowbound, and who must feel sadly languid as he tears
through Florida heavens, city people would quite willingly manage with
alum. Early in school life, however, comes the dangerous knowledge that
nothing is so easy to draw as Christmas Eve: a white hillside, a path of
one unchanging curve, a steeple or a chimney with smoke, a fir tree or a
star. Thus snow eases art for the credulous who think it white.
Glittering under starlight, shadowed with purple, lemon, or deep blue
as sunset turns to evening, taking on daffodil hues at noon, snow is
harder to paint. Fretted with windy tracery and drawn out into streaming
lines where the gale races along by a fence, snow is not, on Christmas
greetings, permitted to be seen.

[Illustration]

The first snowstorm of the year should be sent from Labrador on
Christmas Eve and sprinkled impartially and ornamentally over all the
land. Then, the Yule atmosphere once provided, the distribution should
be confined to the rural clientele until the next December, for on
streets the hoar frost is indeed like ashes. But why, in somber justice,
should the far South pretend to holiday snow at all? Why not Christmas
cards pranked with live oaks, alligators, lagoons, and other beauties of
an Everglade scene—an inspiring escape from tradition and sentiment? For
the antlered steeds must prance above hibiscus flowers as well as round
the Pole. Yet it must seem dull to hang stockings by a fireplace that
needs fire merely as a decoration and never to have loved a sleigh!

Abandoned, but still no downcast company, slanting corn shocks not
honored with winter shelter stand patient sentinels in the field.
Abandoned they may seem, yet could you suddenly tip one over there would
be a startled scurrying, for these are the choice snow-time residences
of field mice, cottontails, weasels, and meadow moles—not, of course,
together in harmony, but in their separate establishments. Let the
blizzard come; it only makes warmer a house of cornstalks properly
built, which bears, nevertheless, some of the dangers of a gingerbread
home—passing cows may feel tempted.

Vermilion heraldry of the wild rose is waved undimmed. Witch-hazel with
her yellow blossoms, last flowers of the year, gazes upon the vanquished
shrubs about her with a smile. Why, she will not even sow her seed until
February! There is plenty of time for hardy petals.

Massed against the stern horizon, the forest stands an unresponsive
gray; entered, the twigs are seen sleek brown, dark red, and a fawn soft
as the tan orchid. In towns December shows the iron mood. But in the
open places, where pools of light and shadow lie, it is a water-color
month, made fine with no gorgeous velvets of autumn, but hung with
blending veils of dawn mist and of new snow, so that the subdued day
rises in flushed, drifting vapors, like April’s awakening, and when the
sun comes, pale, we wonder that there is no summons in his light.




CHAPTER XIII.

LANDSCAPES SEEN IN DREAMS


[Illustration]

The painter of landscapes seen in dreams must be a memory that knows
fantastic woods and faery seas all strange to the waking memory. Or else
the artist is only a weariness with the day just past that gives us in
sleep sight of the country which, so Mr. Maugham and other story-tellers
say, is the real home that men may go their whole lives long without
finding, because we are not always born at home, nor even brought up
there, and we might for years be homesick for a land unseen. Once
beheld, the recognition is instant, and in the foreign place begins a
_vita nuova_—relief and an intensity of living never known before the
new and familiar harbor came down to meet us at the shore. So sometimes
it is in dreams. Recurrent and vivid, a scene of sheerest unreality will
take on an earthly air, or landscapes flamboyantly exotic will hold the
peace denied by every country it has been our daily fortune to know.

Dream landscapes come back again and again, as if they waited there
forever, substantial, and we were the transient comers. Some, in ether
dreams, shrink always from the same green waves, the same black, open
mine, and two have now and then been found who saw on sleep journeys
places that words repictured curiously alike. The fantasies may be
patchwork of poems, plays, and paintings long forgotten, but when they
rise in their compelling fusion they owe no debt to the lumber attic of
the subconscious. The world they fashion is their own, and they do offer
by their ethereal pathway a compensation for the insufficiencies of
life.

There is a long, uncurving sea strand whose gray immensity of sands lies
smooth for miles along the upper beach, but is feathered near the water
by the stroking of little afterwaves, and draped unendingly with umber
bands of kelp. Here as in no place seen the seaweed laces are edged with
colors ground in unlighted depths, as if the tide cast carvings of lapis
lazuli and feldspar up with the argent pebbles, and all the drifting
algæ are incrusted with yellow shells. Shoreward the palms climb up
until they make a green horizon, and their unnatural fronds sink down
again like green chiffon that veils the entrance to the pensive forest.
Vines with scented flowers as intangible as fog creep over root and
trunk, and among them now and then with soundless foot and molten eye a
leopard winds. Perpetual sunset wanes and glows behind the palms. There
is never any wind. The violence of the ocean, the beasts, the tempest,
is held in languorous leash while the treader of the sands goes on with
unfelt steps toward rocks where the waters break importunate and sink
moaning back. They hang black above a cave, and waves come in to prowl
and snakes with scales like gems twine back and forth, glittering in the
half light, with narcotic and effortless motion, until they with the
rocks and all the scene fade.

A tiny stream, a pixy’s river, slips from beneath a bowlder in a wood
long known, and leads through thicket, glade, and clearing to a
terrifying land, desolated by ancient fires and strewn with blackened
stones and charred boughs. The place itself is athirst, and the dreamer
kneels to drink. The tiny stream is dark, like a deep water, and bitter
cold as if it flowed through ice. A staff thrust down cannot sound its
depths. A finger’s span across and bottomless! Nothing could dam its
flow. Old embers at its borders are suddenly scattered when a gleaming
hand parts the current and waves back toward the way just traced, but
the flame-blasted firs have closed behind into a forbidding wall. Other
pallid fingers rise from the portal of the abyss in warning gesture, but
the narrow gulf opens underfoot.

There is a town where gay people in white dress promenade in a plaza
shaded by orange trees, and they are always humming tunes. Little white
streets lead to shuttered houses. A glory of buginvillæa overflows
trellis and bower in splendid war with the hibiscus hedges and the
dropping yellow fruit. Down the hill and over cobblestones, pursued by
music and laughter, ministered to by odors of the lemon blossom, he whom
sleep leads here may go toward a lake of fluent amethyst. The way is
past the market place where brown women crouch by baskets of brilliant
wares and venders of glistening lizards sit drowsily bent, and then at a
step the forest dense and brooding is above him and its low boughs sweep
the ripple of the lake. Immense leaves hang like curtains, and among
them men with unquiet eyes move and hold monotoned speech while they hew
sparkling rock into monstrous shapes. They are circling round a pit.
They cast in ornaments of opal and dark gold and garlands of venomous
forest growths, gray and blood-red, tied with withered vines. Cries come
from the pit, but the chant never stops.

Marching from a stronghold far up on a mountain of cedars, men in mail
come at dusk with standards flickering crimson, fringed with gold, down
to a valley full of blossomed iris where there is a wide pool with
torches at its rim. Their flare streams out toward the circling cliffs.
Each marcher dips his silken flag into the quiet waters, and lights rise
upon the battlements above as one by one all the black plumes are lost
in the meadow’s darkness and the torches burn low and fall into the
pool.

A garden planted only with dark-red nasturtiums that lift for the
dreamer’s touch a flower’s velvet cheek lies filmed with dew and
fragrant as a noon breath from Ceylon spice groves. The miracle of color
is spread along a hillside up to a high wall of great gray stones, and
inside the gate is a house grown all over with grapevines, some borne
down by blue clusters with shadowy bloom, some by clusters of topaz and
ripe green. There is a pond among the grasses, where broad, wan lilies
float, and purple pansies border all the walks. Very slowly the paneled
door opens and the sun floods the central hall. It is hung with silver
draperies, and an old woman stands there with a candle, mumbling and
peering in a cataract of light.




CHAPTER XIV.

HIDING PLACES


[Illustration]

Childhood remembers a secret place—refuge, confessional, and couch of
dreams—where through the years that bring the first bewildering hints of
creation’s loneliness he goes to hide and to rebuild the joyous world
that every now and then is laid in flowery ruins beneath the trampling
necessities of growing up. These little nooks where we confronted so
many puzzles, wondered over incomprehension, and looked into the hard
eyes of derision, abide caressingly for memory, who flies to them still
from cities of dreadful light. The need for those small havens is
lifelong. They are rarely at hand in later days, but no locked door and
no walled chamber of the mind can take their place.

The suns of midsummer, tempered by spruce boughs, flicker and play upon
a broad-backed rock where fairy pools made by the late rain in its
crannies are frequented by waxwing and woodpecker, even though an
intruder sleeps upon that dryad’s couch. Brakes and sweet fern crowd
around it. Tasseled alders are its curtains. Here one might be forever
at rest. It is to such a place that rebel wishes turn when the early
grass and clover thicken in the pastures or when the summer birds begin
their slow recessional. The longing to lie upon a sun-warmed rock in the
woods comes back desperately in April and October to them who once have
known that place of healing and stillness.

Yellow bells from the wands of circling forsythia bushes drop into a
deep hollow lined with velvet grass. Pale butterflies of new-come May
flutter among the dandelions that bejewel this emerald cup of Gæa, and
sometimes drowsy wings are folded sleepily upon a gold rosette. Light
beams pass and repass in jubilance over the grass blades. The sun is
enchanted in the clear yellow of the flowers. Glints, movement, gayety,
and withal peace and silence were in that place of exultant color and
radiant life. It was a rare spot, and unvisited save by birds in quest
of screening branches for their nests and perhaps by some one who hid
there and always had to laugh before he left.

A round space of soft sward is guarded by strawberry shrub and by the
bridal-wreath spiræa that droops white branches lowly to the ground.
Here you could lie on a moonlit summer night, with arms outstretched and
face pressed into the soft grass, and beneath your fingers you could
feel the world turn on and on, immensely, soothingly, and everlastingly,
the only sound the bats’ wings above, or a baby robin protesting
musically at the slowness of the night’s divine pace. Here the smell of
the sod is keen and sweet. Here dew would cool a throbbing brow. Here
the undertones of earth vibrate through the body, and all its nerves,
strung to intense perception, yet would be wrapped in persuasive peace.

An old balm-o’-Gilead tree, growing on a hillside, kindly lets down one
mighty limb as pathway to a leafy hiding place incomparably remote and
dimly lighted even at noon. The branches make an armchair far back
against the trunk, and that glossy foliage, always cool, swishes like
waves at low tide. The tree has much to tell, but never an intrusive
word. You may sit there with a book or in the distracting company of
secret happiness or tears, and it will ignore you courteously, going on
about its daylong task of gathering greenness from the sun, and only
from time to time touching your hand with an inquiring leaf. Sometimes a
red squirrel looks in and departs in shocked fashion through the air.
Sometimes the sheep pass far below on their way home. But the refuge is
secure, and the balm-o’-Gilead’s cradling arms wait peacefully to hold
an asking child.

A foamy brown brook that flashes and dallies, is captured and breaks
free again, down along the mountain has been coaxed by some wood nymph
to furnish sparkling water for her round rock bath. Dutifully it pours
in every moment its curveting freshness, bringing now and then the
tribute of a laurel leaf or a petal from some flower that bent too
close. This bath is gemmed with glittering quartz and floored with red
and white pebbles. Gray mosses broider it where the sun lies, and dark
green where the water drips. The nymph has been at some pains to train
the five-finger ivy and nightshade heavily all about, and the great
brakes carpet the path her gleaming feet must tread at sunrise. Now at
noon you may come there, troubling no living drapery, and dangle your
feet over the moss into the dimpling coolness of that mountain pool. A
trout might dart in, a red lizard appear upon a ledge, but nothing else.
The wild-cherry clusters hang within reach.

In the corner of a meadow where dispassionate cows graze and snort
scornfully at the collie who comes to get them in the late afternoon
stands a great red oak that has somehow inspired the grass underneath it
to grow to tropic heights. But between two of its wandering ancient
roots is short grass, woven with canary-flowered cinquefoil vines, and
into this nook you may creep, screened by wind-ruffled blades beyond,
and taste of the white wild strawberries that reach their eerie ripeness
in the shade. A woodchuck may sit up and gaze at you across the barrier,
or a bright-eyed chipmunk scuttle out on a limb for a better view. They
leave you alone soon, and at twilight even the cow bell is quiet.

A balsam fir that grows on a bowlder leaning out halfway down a ravine
hospitably spreads its aromatic boughs flat upon the rock, after the
inviting manner of this slumber-giving Northern tree. The very breath of
the hills is shed here. It is almost dark by day, and at night the stars
show yellow above the upper firs. The wind goes murmuring between gray
walls, and the sound of the stream, far down, comes vaguely save in the
freshet month. This is the farthest hiding place of all. Only the daring
would find the perilous way to its solitude.




CHAPTER XV.

THE PLAY OF LEAVES


[Illustration]

For fox and partridge, fawn and squirrel—all the wood dwellers that run
or fly—youth, like the rest of life, is a time of stress and effort.
They have a short babyhood and little childhood. Once they begin to move
they must take up for themselves the burden of those that prey and are
preyed upon. They step from nest or den into a world in arms against
them, and while they sensibly fail to worry over this, undoubtedly it
complicates their fun. Baby foxes playing are winsome innocents, but
they have become sly and wary while lambs, colts, and calves are still
making themselves admirably ridiculous in fenced meadows. And neither
hunter, hawk, nor wildcat makes allowances for the youth and
inexperience of debutante game.

It is different with little leaves. They are as playful as kittens, with
their dances, poses, flutters, their delicate bursts of glee. Unless
involved with flowers, or with timber or real estate, they are safe, not
alone in winter babyhood, but through spring and summer, that minister
to them with baths of dew and rain and with the somnolent wine of the
sun. Only when old age has brought weariness with winds and heat, and
even with the drawing of sap, are they confronted by their enemy, frost.
You will say, caterpillars, forest fires, but they are the fault of man
and an unanticipated flaw in nature’s plan for letting the leaves off
easily. We brought foreign trees that had their own mysterious
protection at home into lands where that immunity vanished, and so the
chestnut has left us, and apple and rose are threatened by foes whom
their mother had not foreseen. Were it not for man’s mistakes the leaves
would have had an outrageously gay time by comparison with the darkling
lives of the creatures that move among them and beneath them.

All winter long in its leaf bud the baby tulip leaf drowses, curled up
tight. It is completely ready to spring full formed into the light as
soon as the frost line has been driven back by the triumphant lances of
the sun, and there it dips and laughs and nods, and sometimes goes quite
wild when a running breeze comes by at the hour wherein morning makes
opals of July’s heavy dew. The poplars, the maidenhair trees, shake out
spangles then. The maples show their silver sides. Always the forest
lives and breathes, but when the new leaves come it draws long,
shuddering breaths of delight. Whoever has dwelt with trees knows how
differently the small leaves of May talk from the draped and weighted
boughs of August.

Stepping along the rustling wood road, you can hear the reveries of the
leaves around you. They whisper and sigh in youth; they reach out to
touch the friendly stranger’s cheek. In summer they hang their patterned
curtains tenderly about him, in a silence made vocal only by a teasing
gale. In autumn they are loud beneath his tread. Snow alone can hush
them. When they are voiceless they are dead at last, but already their
successors, snugly cradled and blanketed with cotton, are being rocked
to sleep upon the twigs.

The rippling, shimmering birch upon a wind-stroked hill talks with
falling cadence, like a chant. The naiad willow, arching lowland brooks,
speaks as water, very secretly. The oak could not be silent, with his
story of many days to tell, and keeping his leaves throughout the snow
time, his speech is perpetual. Only the pines and kindred evergreens are
now and then melancholy, as if the new needles and leaves looked down
upon the carpet below, forever thickened, of those whose hold grew
faint. Leaves of cherry and apple, born into a world of tinted blossoms,
are gay to the last. The sprays of locust leaves that keep their
yellow-green until the sober tree flowers into clustered fragrance of
white, arboreal sweet peas whisper by night and day of the bats and tree
toads that dwell in their channeled and vine-loved bark. The sycamore’s
voice is cool-toned and light, but the mountain ash murmurs low, and
low the beech.

Watching leaves adrift on November winds, there comes the memory of
Stevenson’s song of another ended life—of days they “lived the better
part. April came to bloom and never dim December breathed its killing
chill.” But the tree that wore them, standing in stripped starkness that
month—if stark means strong—shall enter dazzling splendors when the days
of ice storms come. That miracle of lucent grayness, an elm in the
morning sun, when every branch and every smallest twig is cased in ice
outdoes its green enchantments of June. It is more beautiful than a tree
of coral. It is the color of pussy willows made to shine. It is as gray
as sunrise cobwebs on the grass, as starlight on dew. Its branches,
tossed by January, clash sword on delicate sword, or, left quiet, the
elm stands like a pensive dancer and swings against one another long
strands of crystal beads. And in the city little ice-sheathed maples
along an avenue, glistening under white arc lights, surpass the changing
lusters of gray enamel. Trees robed in ice are the very home of light,
of fire frozen fast in water and turned pale.

Between the going and coming of the leaves the sky is background for the
cunning lacework of twigs. Were it always May, we should never see how
finely wrought is the loom upon which those leafy embroideries are
woven. In autumn the design is more austere, the colors show more
somber, but when the March branches flush with sap, and the buds,
waking, put forth hesitant green fingers, that infinitely complex
tracery of the twigs is a spring charm as moving as the perfume of the
thorn. Outlined against a sunset, it foretells in beauty the months when
the leaf chorus will sound with the birds’.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE BROWN FRONTIER


[Illustration]

One warm March noon a hushing wing is lifted from the piping nest of
earth. Voices of forest floor, tree trunk, and lowground break forth,
never to be silent again until Thanksgiving weather finds a muted world.
Croon and murmur from the swaying grasses, brief lyrics from the top of
the thorn, a sunrise chant from the bee tree, rise and fall through all
the hours of dew and light, intense in the sun-rusted fields, climbing
to an ecstatic swan song when frosts hover close. Whoever walks through
middle realms of the woods, never lying on the mosses nor winning to
skyward branches of the trees, has not shared the earth’s most ardent
life—the pensive songs a bird sings merely for himself; his impulsive,
goalless flights; and rarer still the industry and traffic at the roots
of growth: the epic of the ground.

Cricket follows pickering frog and cicada cricket. That earliest
invisible singer asks only a little warmth in the waters of the pond to
melt the springs of frozen song. He comes with lady’s-tresses, pussy
willows, and unfurling lily pads. The cricket, sleepy-voiced in the
August afternoon, grows gay at twilight, and does his best when the
firefly and bat are abroad, darting out from the creeper-veiled bark and
setting sail upon the placid air. Locusts play persistently a G string
out of tune until, when the first goldenrod peers above the yarrow, the
overwhelming night chorus of the katydids is heard, lifted bravely again
and again within the domains of autumn, not quenched before the
bittersweet berry and the chestnut fling open portals and surrender to
the cold.

Little they know of trees who have not seen spruce and larches against
the deep October sky, looking straight up from a yielding club-moss
pillow. The outlines and colors of the quiet branches are shown most
memorably upon the vault of that arching lapis-lazuli roof, draped with
floating chiffon of the clouds. Climb up among the boughs, and the
carven quality is gone. They are dim and soft. You must go close to
earth to behold tree-top forms. The supine view is magical.

Revealed in uncanny splendor by the death of verdure, brilliant and evil
fungi come from the dark mold in fall, orange and copper, vermilion and
cinnabar, dwelling as vampires upon trees brought low. Some wear the
terra-cotta of the alert little lizards that, inquisitive as squirrels,
will lift their heads from bark or stone and give back gaze for gaze. As
leaves that came from the sap of roots go back to the roots in ashes, so
ants take care that fallen oaks shall be transformed into the soil from
which young oaks will spring, and brown dust, when they have ended, is
all that abides of the tallest tree. Among them pass the bobbing,
glistening beetles. This immortal and thronging activity of the loam
can be heard, if you bend low enough and listen long.

When the air is frost-clear fairy landscapes, hidden since spring came
with mists and masking leaves, rise with an effect of unbeheld creation.
Small pools appear, and avenues among the bracken that still wave
banners of chestnut and old gold. The lonely homes of ground-nesting
birds grow visible. Trinkets are scattered as the forest makes ready for
night—tiny cones, abandoned snail shells, and feathers which the
woodpecker and oriole dropped when they took leave. The sun dapples with
yellow the partridge haunts where once drooped films of maidenhair fern.

The home that the squirrel built for his summer idyl is shattered by the
winds aloft and falls to earth with other finished things. The feathery
wrack of cat-tails sails the waters and is hung upon the grasses of the
marsh. Fallow fields spread a tangle of livid stems, but jewels lie in
the wood road, for berries, the last harvest, are shaken down by bird
gleaners from vine and shrub, where they hang in festal plenty, so that
all hardy creatures that do not fly from winter to the South or to an
underground Nirvana may here find reward. Dark blue beads drop from the
woodbine. The rose keeps her carmine caskets, full of other roses; but
the bayberry is generous with dove-gray pebble seeds. Witch-hazel,
reversing seasons like the eccentric trout—who, after all, probably
enjoys the solitude at the stream-heads after the other fish have
gone—sends wide her mysterious fusillade, and that, too, finds its aim
in the floor of the forest.

Life more remote than that of snowfield or jungle, beneath our tread,
guarded from our glances and our hearing unless we seek it out, the
subtle cycles of the soil go on everlastingly, alien even to those who
know in intimacy the meadows and the woods. Vigorously though it toils,
there is a peace in the vision of continuity delicately given. Most of
the singers in the mowing grass live for a day, yet next morning the
song ascends unbroken. Here on the frontier between the world of the air
and that within the earth passports are granted back and forth—the red
lily is summoned from the depths; the topmost acorn, lifting its cup
toward the sky, obediently falls and passes through the dark barrier, to
return when the life-call bids. Steadily go on arrival and departure.
The gorgeous lichen is hung upon the rotting log. White rue rises and
white snows sink. Fire demons split the rocks, and after them in a
thousand years comes bloodroot. Floods rush down, and windflowers and
cities follow; and leisurely, another spring, the gates that received
them part, and a legion of new cowslips marches out.




CHAPTER XVII.

FAR ALTARS


[Illustration]

Guarded by treacherous green marshes whose murmuring rushes will close
without a change of cadence over the despair of the unwarned, in August
there lives a scene of tender and appealing beauty. The languid creek,
turned the color of iron rust with its plunder—spoil of the wild and
impractical fertility of the roots of bog and bracken—pauses in a pool
that shows now brown, now sorrel, now satiny green as the clouds wait or
hasten above and the supple rushes lean back and forth. This is the
tourney field of gorgeous dragonflies. Emerald, gold, and amethyst, they
hold resplendent play, sparkling above the water like magnets of light,
causing the placid depths to shimmer, and drawing the minnows from their
sunlit rest. Even the bird-dog does not know this pool. No messenger
more personal than a prowling shot comes there from man.

It is a sturdy conceit that wonders why Nature should spend her freshest
art on treasure scenes she decrees invisible, as if the mother of
mountains, tempests, deserts, toiled anxiously for the approval of a
particular generation, keeping one eye on Mr. Gray and the other on Mr.
Emerson in the hope that they will justify her flower blushing unseen
and her excusable rhodora. Nature is far too unmoral to bother about
rendering economists an account for her spendthrift loveliness. She
willfully deserts the imitation Sicilian garden, though she would be
well paid to stay, and rollicks in the jungle, clothing magnificently
the useless snake and leopard, dressing their breakfast in paradise
plumes, puzzling Victorian poets, and badly scaring the urban
manicurist, who returns after her first country vacation with decided
views concerning the cheerful humanity of streets compared with lodges
in the wilderness.

Were Nature careworn and personal, where should we turn for consolation
or rest? Hers is the tonic gift of a strength that, underlying all life,
does not pity or praise. As in the Cave of the Winds the most restless
spirit surely might find peace, so in the eternal changefulness of the
forest under the touch of forces fierce or serene we find the soul of
quiet because the powers at work are beyond our control, control us
utterly, hold us in an immense and soothing grasp where thought and
energy are fused and contend no more. So those who live upon the ocean
come to possess that which they will not barter for ease, and so the
timber cruiser shortens his visit to town. They would not tell what they
gain who relinquish readily the things for which others pour out their
years upon the ground that commerce may grow. It is because words are
not fashioned to speak what shapes the wind takes, the motion whereby
mists climb after the sun out of ravines, or how the tropic orchids lift
at daybreak among their fragrant shadows wings of ivory and fawn that
drooped against ferny trunks.

Many days must bloom and fade between you and the sound of human voices
before, in the wilderness, there can be surrender to the giant arms that
forever hold the body, and to the spirit, supreme and unemotional, that
has sped beyond the utmost outposts the mind ever reached. But after the
homecoming—when the confused echoes of a swarming, blind humanity are
lost in the exalted quiet of wide spaces—the vast impersonality of woods
and plains, swamps, hills, and sea, takes on a tenderness more deep than
lies in human gift and a glorious hostility that calls to combat without
grudge or motive, ennobling because it gives no mercy; challenges alike
the craft of man and the strength of the hills.

The exuberant fancy of a less earnest day made air and fire the
dwellings of creatures formed like ourselves, and, though immortal, shod
with lightning, guarded from common sight, they were afflicted with our
own vexations, our loves and hates. Nymph and naiad, faun and satyr,
were always plotting and gossiping, and little better were the
subsequent gnomes and fairies—more personal and cantankerous than
persons; resorting upon occasion to divorce; tangling skeins, and
teasing kind old horses. These were not the earth deities.

Earth deities wear no human shape. No one has looked upon the sky fire’s
face, the pinions of the gale. Enormously they have wrought, without
regard for man and sharing no passion, yet yielding sometimes their
limitless force to the mind that soared with them. In the age of winged
serpents, in the days when Assyria was mistress, they were the same,
holding an equal welcome for the boy and sage, unchanging and unresting,
free from mortal attributes of good and evil, mighty and healing as no
half-human god could be. Therefore that lavish scattering of beauty
without regard to man. Therefore the wonder given to all who dare call
to them when far from other men.

The disrepute of the pathetic fallacy has come from making the forest
sentimental. Sentient beyond all doubt its lovers know it is. Even as
water visibly rebels, warring with headlands and leaping after the wind,
and as it slumbers dimpling and caresses the swimmer, so the woodlands
are solemn and aloof, or breathe to give the open-hearted their vast
serenity. The nymph or fairy rises at the bidding of imagination, but
the everlasting deities of the elements, past our reckoning elder than
they, need no fiction. They are presences, and accord communion. They
can be gentle as the twilight call of quail. They can be indifferent and
gigantic as the prairie fire and typhoon. But they brood to-day as
yesterday over cities that they will not enter, but which sometimes they
destroy. They march above mountain ridges and loiter among flowered
laurel, impartial as nothing else is, and in their dispassionate
companionship supremely consoling, offering for playthings the ripple
and the gleam.


THE END
INTRODUCTION                                      ix
       I. SPRING! SPRING! SPRING!                      1
      II. THE SPRING RUNNING                           7
     III. AN OLD APPLE TREE                           13
      IV. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO SEE THIS SPRING      26
       V. IF YOU HAD WINGS                            33
      VI. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO DO THIS SPRING       41
     VII. THE PALACE IN THE PIG-PEN                   48
    VIII. IS IT A LIFE OF FEAR?                       60
      IX. THE BUZZARD OF THE BEAR SWAMP               76
       X. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO HEAR THIS SPRING     86
      XI. TURTLE EGGS FOR AGASSIZ                     94
     XII. AN ACCOUNT WITH NATURE                     115
    XIII. WOODS MEDICINE                             127
          NOTES AND SUGGESTIONS                      137




    ILLUSTRATIONS


    SPRING OF THE YEAR--SHADBUSH                  _Frontispiece_
    HYLAS PEEPING “SPRING!”                                    1
    “THE EARLIEST BLOODROOT”                                   4
    THE TURKEY-HEN--“HALF A MILE FROM HOME”                    8
    CATFISH FAMILY                                            12
    SCREECH OWL--“OUT OVER THE MEADOW HE SAILS”               17
    TREE-TOAD--“COMES FORTH TO THE EDGE OF HIS HOLE”          23
    SKUNK-CABBAGE AND BUMBLEBEE                               27
    A SUNFISH OVER ITS NEST                                   29
    CRESTED FLYCATCHER WITH SNAKE-SKIN                        31
    “ONE OF MY LITTLE BAND OF CROWS”                          33
    YOUNG PAINTED TURTLE, FROGS’ EGGS, SNAILS, AND
        WHIRLIGIG BEETLES                                     45
    “ONE LIVE TOAD UNDER YOUR DOORSTEP”                       46
    PHŒBE AND HER YOUNG                                       55
    PIKE AND MINNOWS                                          62
    FOX BARKING--“UPON THE BARE KNOLL NEAR THE HOUSE”         66
    PINE MARTEN AND CHIPMUNK                                  71
    “UPON ONE OF THESE THE BUZZARD SAT HUMPED”                79
    YOUNG TURKEY BUZZARD                                      83
    BROWN THRASHER--“OUR FINEST, MOST GIFTED SONGSTER”        87
    PAINTED TURTLE--“BEGAN TO BURY HERSELF”                  103
    CHIPMUNK EATING JUNE-BUGS                                117
    “TWO TUMBLE-BUGS TRYING TO ROLL THEIR BALL UP HILL”      127
    “THE BOX TURTLES SCUFF CARELESSLY ALONG”                 130




INTRODUCTION


It has been my aim in the thirty-nine chapters of the three books in
this series to carry my readers through the weeks of all the school
year, not however as with a calendar, for that would be more or less
wooden and artificial; but by readings, rather, that catch in a large
way the spirit of the particular season, that give something definite
and specific in the way of suggestions for tramps afield with things
to look for and hear and do. Naturally many of the birds and animals
and flowers mentioned, as well as woods and aspects of sky and field,
are those of my own local environment--of my New England
surrounding--and so must differ in some details from those surrounding
you in your far Southern home or you on your distant Pacific coast, or
you in your rich and varied valley of the Mississippi, or you on your
wide and generous prairie. But the similarities and correspondences,
the things and conditions we have in common, are more than our
differences. Our sun, moon, sky, earth--our land--are the same, our
love for this beautiful world is the same, as is that touch of nature
which we all feel and which makes us all kin. Wherever, then, in these
books of the seasons, the things treated differ from the things
around you, read about those things for information, and in your
journeys afield fill in the gaps with whatever it is that completes
your landscape, or rounds out your cycle of the seasons, or links up
your endless chain of life.

While I have tried to be accurate throughout these books, still it has
not been my object chiefly to write a natural history--volumes of
outdoor facts; but to quicken the imaginations behind the sharp eyes,
behind the keen ears and the eager souls of the multitude of children
who go to school, as I used to go to school, through an open,
stirring, beckoning world of living things that I longed to range and
understand.

The best thing that I can do as writer, that you can do as teacher, if
I may quote from the last paragraph--the keynote of these volumes--is
to “go into the fields and woods, go deep and far and frequently, with
eyes and ears and all your souls alert.”

    MULLEIN HILL, May, 1912




THE SPRING OF THE YEAR




CHAPTER I

“SPRING! SPRING! SPRING!”


Who is your spring messenger? Is it bird or flower or beast that
brings your spring? What sight or sound or smell spells S-P-R-I-N-G to
you, in big, joyous letters?

Perhaps it is the frogs. Certainly I could not have a real spring
without the frogs. They have peeped “Spring!” to me every time I have
had a spring. Perhaps it is the arbutus, or the hepatica, or the
pussy-willow, or the bluebird, or the yellow spice-bush, or, if you
chance to live in New England, perhaps it is the wood pussy that
brings your spring!

Beast, bird, or flower, whatever it is, there comes a day and a
messenger and--spring! You know that spring is here. It may snow again
before night: no matter; your messenger has brought you the news,
brought you the very spring itself, and after all your waiting
through the winter months are you going to be discouraged by a flurry
of snow?

    “All white and still lie stream and hill--
      The winter dread and drear!
    When from the skies a bluebird flies,
      And--spring is here!”

To be sure, it is here, if the bluebird is your herald.

But how much faith in the weather you must have, and how you must long
for the spring before the first bluebird brings it to you! Some sunny
March day he drops down out of the blue sky, saying softly, sweetly,
“Florida, florida!” as if calling the flowers; and then he is
gone!--gone for days at a time, while it snows and blows and rains,
freezes and thaws, thaws, thaws, until the March mud looks fitter for
clams than for flowers.

So it is with the other first signs. If you want springtime ahead of
time, then you must have it in your heart, out of reach of the
weather, just as you must grow cucumbers in a hothouse if you want
them ahead of time. But there comes a day when cucumbers will grow out
of doors; and there comes a day when the bluebird and the song sparrow
and all the other heralds stay, when spring has come whether you have
a heart or not.

What day is that in your out-of-doors, and what sign have you to mark
it? Mr. John Burroughs says his sign is the wake-robin, or trillium.
When I was a school-boy it used to be for me the arbutus; but
nowadays it is the shadbush: I have no sure settled spring until I see
the shadbush beginning to open misty white in the edge of the woods.
Then I can trust the weather; I can open my beehives; I can plough and
plant my garden; I can start into the woods for a day with the birds
and flowers; for when the shadbush opens, the great gate to the woods
and fields swings open--wide open to let everybody in.

But perhaps you do not know what the shadbush is? That does not
matter. You can easily enough find that out. Some call it June-berry;
others call it service-berry; and the botany calls it _A-me-lan’chi-er
ca-na-den’sis_! But that does not matter either. For this is not a
botany lesson. It is an account of how springtime comes to _me_, and
when and what are its signs. And I would have you read it to think how
springtime comes to _you_, and when and what are its signs. So, if the
dandelion, and not the shadbush, is your sign, then you must read
“dandelion” here every time I write “shadbush.”

There is an old saying, “He that would bring home the wealth of the
Indies must carry the wealth of the Indies out”; which is to say,
those who bring home the wealth of the Indies, must carry out some
kind of wealth in exchange. So you who would enjoy or understand what
my shadbush means to me must have a shadbush of your own, or a
dandelion, or something that is a sign to you that spring is here.
Then, you see, my chapter in the book will become your own.

There are so many persons who do not know one bird from another, one
tree from another, one flower from another; who would not know one
season from another did they not see the spring hats in the milliner’s
window or feel the need of a change of coat. I hope you are not one of
them. I hope you are on the watch, instead, for the first phœbe or
the earliest bloodroot, or are listening to catch the shrill, brave
peeping of the little tree-frogs, the hylas.

As for me, I am on the watch for the shadbush. Oh, yes, spring comes
before the shadbush opens, but it is likely not to stay. The wild
geese trumpet spring in the gray March skies as they pass; a February
rain, after a long cold season of snow, spatters your face with
spring; the swelling buds on the maples, the fuzzy kittens on the
pussy-willows, the opening marsh-marigolds in the meadows, the frogs,
the bluebirds--all of these, while they stay, are the spring. But they
are not sure to stay over night, here in New England. You may wake up
and find it snowing--until the shadbush opens. After that, hang up
your sled and skates, put away your overcoat and mittens; for spring
is here, and the honey-bees will buzz every bright day until the
October asters are in bloom.

I said if you want springtime ahead of time you must have it in your
heart. Of course you must. If your heart is warm and your eye is keen,
you can go forth in the dead of winter and gather buds, seeds,
cocoons, and living things enough to make a little spring. For the
fires of summer are never wholly out. They are only banked in the
winter, smouldering always under the snow, and quick to brighten and
burst into blaze. There comes a warm day in January, and across your
thawing path crawls a woolly-bear caterpillar; a mourning-cloak
butterfly flits through the woods, and the juncos sing. That night a
howling snowstorm sweeps out of the north; the coals are covered
again. So they kindle and darken, until they leap from the ashes of
winter a pure, thin blaze in the shadbush, to burn higher and hotter
across the summer, to flicker and die away--a line of yellow
embers--in the weird witch-hazel of the autumn.

At the sign of the shadbush the doors of my springtime swing wide
open. My birds are back, my turtles are out, my long sleeping
woodchucks are wide awake. There is not a stretch of woodland or
meadow now that shows a trace of winter. Over the pasture the bluets
are beginning to drift, as if the haze on the distant hills, floating
down in the night, had been caught in the dew-wet grass. They wash
the field to its borders in their delicate azure hue. At the sign of
the shadbush the doors of my memory, too, swing wide open, and I am a
boy again in the meadows of my old home. The shadbush is in blossom,
and the fish are running--the sturgeon up the Delaware; the shad up
Cohansey Creek; and through the Lower Sluice, these soft, stirring
nights, the catfish are slipping. Is there any real boy now in
Lupton’s Meadows to watch them come? Oh yes, doubtless; and doubtless
there ever shall be. But I would go down for this one night, down in
the May moonlight, and listen, as I used to listen years ago, for the
quiet _splash splash splash_, as the swarming catfish pass through the
shallows of the main ditch, up toward the dam at the pond.

At the sign of the shadbush how swiftly the tides of life begin to
rise! How mysteriously their currents run!--the fish swimming in from
the sea, the birds flying up from the South, the flowers opening fresh
from the soil, the insects coming out from their sleep: life moving
everywhere--across the heavens, over the earth, along the deep, dim
aisles of the sea!




CHAPTER II

THE SPRING RUNNING


This title is Kipling’s; the observations that follow are mine; but
the real spring running is yours and mine and Kipling’s and Mowgli the
wolf-child’s, whose running Kipling has told us about. Indeed, every
child of the earth has felt it, has had the running--every living
thing of the land and the sea.

Everything feels it; everything is restless, everything is moving. The
renter changes houses; the city dweller goes “down to the shore” or up
to the mountains to open his summer cottage; the farmer starts to
break up the land for planting; the schoolchildren begin to squirm in
their seats and long to fly out of the windows; and “Where are you
_going_ this summer?” is on every one’s lips.

They have all caught the spring running, the only infection I know
that you can catch from April skies. The very sun has caught it, too,
and is lengthening out his course, as if he hated to stop and go to
bed at night. And the birds, that are supposed to go to bed most
promptly, they sleep, says the good old poet Chaucer, with open eye,
these April nights, so bad is their case of spring running,--

    “So priketh hem Nature in hir corages.”[1]

[Footnote 1: So nature pricks (stirs) them in their hearts.]

Their long journey northward over sea and land has not cured them yet
of their unrest. Only one thing will do it (and I suppose we all
should be glad), one sovereign remedy, and that is _family cares_. But
they are yet a long way off.

Meantime watch your turkey-hen, how she saunters down the field alone,
how pensive she looks, how lost for something to do and somewhere to
go. She is sick with this disease of spring. Follow her, keeping out
of sight yourself, and lo, a nest, hidden under a pile of brush in a
corner of the pasture fence, half a mile from home!

The turkey-hen has wandered off half a mile to build her nest; but
many wild birds have come on their small wings all the way from the
forests of the Amazon and have gone on to Hudson Bay and the Fur
Countries, just to build their nests and rear their young. A wonderful
case of the spring running, you would say; and still more wonderful is
the annual journey of the golden plover from Patagonia to Alaska and
back, eight thousand miles each way. Yet there is another case that
seems to me more mysterious, and quite as wonderful, as the sea seems
more mysterious than the land.

It is the spring running of the fish. For when the great tidal waves
of bird-life begin to roll northward with the sun, a corresponding
movement begins among the denizens of the sea. The cold-blooded fish
feel the stirring; the spring running seizes them, and in they come
through the pathless wastes of the ocean, waves of them, shoals of
them,--sturgeon, shad, herring,--like the waves and flocks of wild
geese, warblers, and swallows overhead,--into the brackish water of
the bays and rivers and on (the herring) into the fresh water of the
ponds.

To watch the herring come up Weymouth Back River into Herring Run here
near my home, as I do every April, is to watch one of the most
interesting, most mysterious movements of all nature. It was about a
century ago that men of Weymouth brought herring in barrels of water
by ox-teams from Taunton River and liberated them in the pond at the
head of Weymouth Back River. These fish laid their eggs in the grassy
margins of the pond that spring and went out down the river to the
sea. Later on, the young fry, when large enough to care for
themselves, found their way down the river and out to sea.

And where did they go then? and what did they do? Who can tell? for
who can read the dark book of the sea? Yet this one thing we know they
did, for still they are doing it after all these hundred years,--they
came back up the river, when they were full-grown,--up the river, up
the run, up into the pond, to lay their eggs in the waters where they
were hatched, in the waters that to them were _home_.

Something very much like this all the other fish are doing, as are the
birds also. The spell of _home_ is over land and sea, and has been
laid upon them all. The bird companies of the fall went south at the
inexorable command of Hunger; but a greater than Hunger is in command
of the forces of spring. Now our vast bird army of North America, five
billion strong, is moving northward at the call of Home. And the hosts
of the sea, whose shining billions we cannot number,--they, too, are
coming up, some of them far up through the shallow streams to the
wood-walled ponds for a drink of the sweet waters of Home.

As a boy I used to go down to the meadows at night to hear the catfish
coming, as now I go down to the village by day to see the herring
coming. The catfish would swim in from the Cohansey, through the
sluices in the bank, then up by way of the meadow ditches to the dam
over which fall the waters of Lupton’s Pond.

It was a seven-or eight-foot dam, and of course the fish could not
climb it. Down under the splashing water they would crowd by hundreds,
their moving bodies close-packed, pushing forward, all trying to break
through the wooden wall that blocked their way. Slow, stupid things
they looked; but was not each big cat head pointed forward? each
slow, cold brain trying to follow and keep up with each swift, warm
heart? For the homeward-bound heart knows no barrier; it never stops
for a dam.

The herring, too, on their way up the run are stopped by a dam; but
the town, in granting to certain men the sole rights to catch the
fish, stipulated that a number of the live herring, as many as several
barrels full, should be helped over the dam each spring that they
might go on up to the pond to deposit their eggs. If this were not
done annually, the fish would soon cease to come, and the Weymouth
herring would be no more.

There was no such lift for the catfish under Lupton’s dam. I often
tossed them over into the pond, and so helped to continue the line;
but perhaps there was no need, for spring after spring they returned.
They were the young fish, I suppose, new each year, from parent fish
that remain inside the pond the year round.

I cannot say now--I never asked myself before--whether it is Mother or
Father Catfish who stays with the swarm (it is literally a swarm) of
kitten catfish. It may be father, as in the case of Father Stickleback
and Father Toadfish, who cares for the children. If it is--I take off
my hat to him. I have four of my own; and I think if I had eighteen or
twenty more I should have both hands full. But Father Catfish! Did you
ever see his brood?

I should say that there might easily be five hundred young ones in
the family, though I never have counted them. But you might. If you
want to try it, take your small scoop-net of coarse cheesecloth, or
mosquito-netting, and go down to the pond this spring. Close along the
margin you will see holes in the shallow water running up under the
overhanging grass and roots. The holes were made probably by the
muskrats. It is in here that the old catfish is guarding the brood.

As soon as you learn to know the holes, you can cover the entrance
with your net, and then by jumping or stamping hard on the ground
above the hole, you will drive out the old fish with a flop, the
family following in a fine, black cloud. The old fish will swim away,
then come slowly back to the scattered swarm, to the little black
things that look like small tadpoles, who soon cluster about the
parent once more and wiggle away into the deep, dark water of the
pond--the strangest family group that I know in all the spring world.




CHAPTER III

AN OLD APPLE TREE


Beyond the meadow, perhaps half a mile from my window, stands an old
apple tree, the last of an ancient line that once marked the boundary
between the “upper” and the “lower” pastures. It is a bent, broken,
hoary old tree, grizzled with suckers from feet to crown. No one has
pruned it for half a century; no one ever gathers its gnarly
apples--no one but the cattle who love to lie in its shadow and munch
its fruit.

The cows know the tree. One of their winding paths runs under its
low-hung branches; and as I frequently travel the cow-paths, I also
find my way thither. Yet I do not go for apples, nor just because the
cow-path takes me. That old apple tree is hollow, hollow all over,
trunk and branches, as hollow as a lodging-house; and I have never
known it when it was not “putting up” some wayfaring visitor or some
permanent lodger. So I go over, whenever I have a chance, to call upon
my friends or pay my respects to the distinguished guests.

This old tree is on the neighboring farm. It does not belong to me,
and I am glad; for if it did, then I should have to trim it, and
scrape it, and plaster up its holes, and put a burlap petticoat on
it, all because of the gruesome gypsy moths that infest my trees. Oh,
yes, that would make it bear better apples, but what then would become
of its birds and beasts? Everybody ought to have _one_ apple tree that
bears birds and beasts--and Baldwin apples, too, of course, if the
three sorts of fruit can be made to grow on the same tree. But only
the birds and beasts grow well on the untrimmed, unscraped,
unplastered, unpetticoated old tree yonder between the pastures. His
heart is wide open to every small traveler passing by.

Whenever I look over toward the old tree, I think of the old
vine-covered, weather-beaten house in which my grandfather lived,
where many a traveler put up over night--to get a plate of
grandmother’s buckwheat cakes, I think, and a taste of her keen wit.
The old house sat in under a grove of pin oak and pine,--“Underwood”
we called it,--a sheltered, sheltering spot; with a peddler’s stall in
the barn, a peddler’s place at the table, a peddler’s bed in the herby
garret, a boundless, fathomless featherbed, of a piece with the house
and the hospitality. There were larger houses and newer, in the
neighborhood; but no other house in all the region, not even the
tavern, two miles farther down the pike, was half so central, or so
homelike, or so full of sweet and juicy gossip. The old apple tree
yonder between the woods and the meadow is as central, as hospitable,
and, if animals talk with one another, just as full of neighborhood
news as was grandfather’s roof-tree.

Of course you would never suspect it, passing by. But then, no lover
of wild things passes by--never without first stopping, and especially
before an old tree all full of holes. Whenever you see a hole in a
tree, in a sand-bank, in a hillside, under a rail-pile--anywhere out
of doors, stop!

Stop here beside this decrepit apple tree. No, you will find no sign
swinging from the front, no door-plate, no letter-box bearing the name
of the family residing here. The birds and beasts do not advertise
their houses so. They would hide their houses, they would have you
pass by; for most persons are rude in the woods and fields, breaking
into the homes of the wood-folk as they never would dream of doing in
the case of their human neighbors.

There is no need of being rude anywhere, no need of being an unwelcome
visitor even to the shyest and most timid of the little people of the
fields. Come over with me--they know me in the old apple tree. It is
nearly sundown. The evening is near, with night at its heels, for it
is an early March day.

We shall not wait long. The doors will open that we may enter--enter
into a home of the fields, and, a little way at least, into a life of
the fields, for, as I have said, this old tree has a small dweller of
some sort the year round.

On this March day we shall be admitted by my owls. They take
possession late in winter and occupy the tree, with some curious
fellow tenants, until early summer. I can count upon these small
screech owls by February,--the forlorn month, the seasonless,
hopeless, lifeless month of the year, but for its owls, its thaws, its
lengthening days, its cackling pullets, its possible bluebirds, and
its being the year’s end! At least the ancients called February, not
December, the year’s end, maintaining, with some sense, that the
making of the world was begun in March, that is, with the spring. The
owls do not, like the swallows, bring the spring, but they
nevertheless help winter with most seemly haste into an early grave.

If, as the dusk comes down, I cannot go over to the tree, I will go to
my window and watch. I cannot see him, the grim-beaked baron with his
hooked talons, his ghostly wings, his night-seeing eyes, but I know
that he has come to his window in the apple-tree turret yonder against
the darkening sky, and that he watches with me. I cannot see him swoop
downward over the ditches, nor see him quarter the meadow, beating,
dangling, dropping between the flattened tussocks; nor can I hear him,
as, back on the silent shadows, he slants upward again to his tower.
Mine are human eyes, human ears. Even the quick-eared meadow mouse did
not hear until the long talons closed and it was too late.

[Illustration: SCREECH OWL--“OUT OVER THE MEADOW HE SAILS”]

But there have been times when, like some belated traveler, I have
been forced to cross this wild night-land of his; and I have _felt_
him pass--so near at times that he has stirred my hair, by the
wind--dare I say?--of his mysterious wings. At other times I have
heard him. Often on the edge of night I have listened to his
quavering, querulous cry from the elm-tops below me by the meadow. But
oftener I have watched at the casement here in my castle wall.

Away yonder on the borders of night, dim and gloomy, looms his ancient
keep. I wait. Soon on the deepened dusk spread his soft wings, out
over the meadow he sails, up over my wooded height, over my moat, to
my turret tall, as silent and unseen as the soul of a shadow, except
he drift across the face of the full round moon, or with his weird cry
cause the dreaming quiet to stir in its sleep and moan.

Now let us go over again to the old tree, this time in May. It will be
curious enough, as the soft dusk comes on, to see the round face of
the owl in one hole and, out of another hole in the broken limb above,
the flat, weazened face of a little tree-toad.

Both creatures love the dusk; both have come forth to their open doors
to watch the darkening; both will make off under the cover of the
night--one for mice and frogs over the meadow, the other for slugs and
insects over the crooked, tangled limbs of the apple tree.

It is strange enough to see them together, but it is stranger still
to think of them together; for it is just such prey as this little
toad that the owl has gone over the meadow to catch.

Why does he not take the supper ready here on the shelf? There may be
reasons that we, who do not eat tree-toad, know nothing of; but I am
inclined to believe that the owl has never seen his fellow lodger in
the doorway above, though he must often have heard him trilling gently
and lonesomely in the gloaming, when his skin cries for rain!

Small wonder if they have never met! for this gray, squat, disk-toed
little monster in the hole, or flattened on the bark of the tree like
a patch of lichen, may well be one of the things that are hidden from
even the sharp-eyed owl. It is always a source of fresh amazement, the
way that this largest of the hylas, on the moss-marked rind of an old
tree, can utterly blot himself out before your staring eyes.

The common toads and all the frogs have enemies enough, and it would
seem from the comparative scarcity of the tree-toads that they must
have enemies, too; but I do not know who they are. This scarcity of
the tree-toads is something of a puzzle, and all the more to me, that,
to my certain knowledge, this toad has lived in the old Baldwin tree,
now, for five years. Perhaps he has been several toads, you say, not
one; for who can tell one tree-toad from another? Nobody; and for that
reason I made, some time ago, a simple experiment, in order to see
how long a tree-toad might live, unprotected, in his own natural
environment.

Upon moving into this house, about nine years ago, we found a
tree-toad living in the big hickory by the porch. For the next three
springs he reappeared, and all summer long we would find him, now on
the tree, now on the porch, often on the railing and backed tight up
against a post. Was he one or many? we asked. Then we marked him; and
for the next four years we knew that he was himself alone. How many
more years he might have lived in the hickory for us all to pet, I
should like to know; but last summer, to our great sorrow, the gypsy
moth killers, poking in the hole, hit our little friend and left him
dead.

It was very wonderful to me, the instinct for home--the love for home,
I should like to call it--that this humble little creature showed.
Now, a toad is an amphibian to the zoölogist; an ugly gnome with a
jeweled eye, to the poet; but to the naturalist, the lover of life for
its own sake, who lives next door to his toad, who feeds him a fly or
a fat grub now and then, who tickles him to sleep with a rose leaf,
who waits as thirstily as the hilltop for him to call the summer rain,
who knows his going to sleep for the winter, his waking up for the
spring--to such a one, I say, a tree-toad means more than the jeweled
eye and the strange amphibious habits.

This small tree-toad had a home, had it in a tree, too,--in a hickory
tree,--this toad that dwelt by my house.

    “East, west,
    Hame’s best,”

croaked our tree-toad in a tremulous, plaintive song that wakened
memories in the vague twilight of more old, unhappy, far-off things
than any other voice I ever knew.

These two tree-toads could not have been induced to trade houses, the
hickory for the apple, because a house to a toad means home, and a
home is never in the market. There are many more houses in the land
than homes. Most of us are only real-estate dealers. Many of us have
never had a home; and none of us has ever had, perhaps, more than one,
or could have--that home of our childhood.

This toad seemed to feel it all. Here in the hickory for four years
(more nearly seven, I am sure) he lived, single and alone. He would go
down to the meadow when the toads gathered there to lay their eggs;
but back he would come, without mate or companion, to his tree.
Stronger than love of kind, than love of mate, constant and dominant
in his slow cold heart was his instinct for home.

If I go down to the orchard and bring up from an apple tree some other
toad to dwell in the hole of the hickory, I shall fail. He might
remain for the day, but not throughout the night, for with the
gathering twilight there steals upon him an irresistible longing; and
guided by it, as bee and pigeon and dog and man are guided, he makes
his sure way back to his orchard home.

Would my toad of the Baldwin tree go back beyond the orchard, over the
road, over the wide meadow, over to the old tree, half a mile away, if
I brought him from there? We shall see. During the coming summer I
shall mark him in some manner, and bringing him here to the hickory, I
shall then watch the old apple tree yonder to see if he returns. It
will be a hard, perilous journey. But his longing will not let him
rest; and, guided by his mysterious sense of direction,--for that
_one_ place,--he will arrive, I am sure, or he will die on the way.

Suppose he never gets back? Only one toad less? A great deal more than
that. There in the old Baldwin he has made his home for I don’t know
how long, hunting over its world of branches in the summer, sleeping
down in its deep holes during the winter--down under the chips and
punk and castings, beneath the nest of the owls, it may be; for my
toad in the hickory always buried himself so, down in the débris at
the bottom of the hole, where, in a kind of cold storage, he preserved
himself until thawed out by the spring.

I never pass the old apple in the summer but that I stop to pay my
respects to the toad; nor in the winter that I do not pause and think
of him asleep in there. He is no longer mere toad. He has passed into
the Guardian Spirit of the tree, warring in the green leaf against
worm and grub and slug, and in the dry leaf hiding himself, a heart of
life, within the thin ribs, as if to save the old shell of a tree to
another summer.

Often in the dusk, especially the summer dusk, I have gone over to sit
at his feet and learn some of the things that my school-teachers and
college professors did not teach me.

Seating myself comfortably at the foot of the tree, I wait. The toad
comes forth to the edge of his hole above me, settles himself
comfortably, and waits. And the lesson begins. The quiet of the summer
evening steals out with the wood-shadows and softly covers the fields.
We do not stir. An hour passes. We do not stir. Not to stir is the
lesson--one of the primary lessons in this course with the toad.

The dusk thickens. The grasshoppers begin to strum; the owl slips out
and drifts away; a whip-poor-will drops on the bare knoll near me,
clucks and shouts and shouts again, his rapid repetition a thousand
times repeated by the voices that call to one another down the long
empty aisles of the swamp; a big moth whirs about my head and is
gone; a bat flits squeaking past; a firefly blazes, is blotted out by
the darkness, blazes again, and so passes, his tiny lantern flashing
into a night that seems the darker for his quick, unsteady glow.

We do not stir. It is a hard lesson. By all my other teachers I had
been taught every manner of stirring, and this strange exercise of
being still takes me where my body is weakest, and puts me almost out
of breath.

What! out of breath by keeping still? Yes, because I had been hurrying
hither and thither, doing this and that--doing them so fast for so
many years that I no longer understood how to sit down and keep still
and do nothing inside of me as well as outside. Of course _you_ know
how to keep still, for you are children. And so perhaps you do not
need to take lessons of teacher Toad. But I do, for I am grown up, and
a man, with a world of things to do, a great many of which I do not
need to do at all--if only I would let the toad teach me all he knows.

So, when I am tired, I will go over to the toad. I will sit at his
feet, where time is nothing, and the worry of work even less. He has
all time and no task. He sits out the hour silent, thinking--I know
not what, nor need to know. So we will sit in silence, the toad and I,
watching Altair burn along the shore of the horizon, and overhead
Arcturus, and the rival fireflies flickering through the leaves of
the apple tree. And as we watch, I shall have time to rest and to
think. Perhaps I shall have a thought, a thought all my own, a rare
thing for any one to have, and worth many an hour of waiting.




CHAPTER IV

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO SEE THIS SPRING


Out of the multitude of sights, which twelve sights this spring shall
I urge you to see? Why the twelve, of course, that I always look for
most eagerly. And the first of these, I think, is the bluebird.


I

“Have you seen a bluebird yet?” some friend will ask me, as March
comes on. Or it will be, “I have seen my first bluebird!” as if seeing
a first bluebird were something very wonderful and important. And so
it is; for the sight of the first March bluebird is the last sight of
winter and the first sight of spring. The brown of the fertile earth
is on its breast, the blue of the summer sky is on its back, and in
its voice is the clearest, sweetest of all invitations to come out of
doors.

Where has he spent the winter? Look it up. What has brought him back
so early? Guess at it. What does he say as he calls to you? Listen.
What has John Burroughs written about him? Look it up and read.


II

You must see the skunk-cabbage abloom in the swamp. You need not pick
it and carry it home for the table--just see it. But be sure you see
it. Get down and open the big purple-streaked spathe, as it spears the
cold mud, and look at the “spadix” covered with its tiny but perfect
flowers. Now wait a minute. The woods are still bare; ice may still be
found on the northern slopes, while here before you, like a wedge
splitting the frozen soil, like a spear cleaving through the earth
from the other, the summer, side of the world, is this broad blade of
life letting up almost the first cluster of the new spring’s flowers.
Wait a moment longer and you may hear your first bumblebee, as he
comes humming at the door of the cabbage for a taste of new honey and
pollen.


III

Among the other early signs of spring, you should see a flock of
red-winged blackbirds! And what a sight they are upon a snow-covered
field! For often after their return it will snow again, when the
brilliant, shining birds in black with their red epaulets make one of
the most striking sights of the season.


IV

Another bird event that you should witness is the arrival of the
migrating warblers. You will be out one of these early May days when
there will be a stirring of small birds in the bushes at your side, in
the tall trees over your head--everywhere! It is the warblers. You are
in the tide of the tiny migrants--yellow warblers, pine warblers,
myrtle warblers, black-throated green warblers--some of them on their
way from South America to Labrador. You must be in the woods and see
them as they come.


V

You should see the “spice-bush” (wild allspice or fever-bush or
Benjamin-bush) in bloom in the damp March woods. And, besides that,
you should see with your own eyes under some deep, dark forest trees
the blue hepatica and on some bushy hillside the pink arbutus. (For
fear I forget to tell you in the chapter of things to do, let me now
say that you should take a day this spring and go “may-flowering.”)


VI

There are four nests that you should see this spring: a hummingbird’s
nest, saddled upon the horizontal limb of some fruit or forest tree,
and looking more like a wart on the limb than a nest; secondly, the
nest, eggs rather, of a turtle buried in the soft sand along the
margin of a pond or out in some cultivated field; thirdly, the nest of
a sun-fish (pumpkin-seed) in the shallow water close up along the
sandy shore of the pond; and fourthly, the nest of the red squirrel,
made of fine stripped cedar bark, away up in the top of some tall pine
tree! I mean by this that there are many other interesting
nest-builders besides the birds. Of all the difficult nests to find,
the hummingbird’s is the most difficult. When you find one, please
write to me about it.


VII

You should see a “spring peeper,” the tiny Pickering’s frog--_if you
can_. The marsh and the meadows will be vocal with them, but one of
the hardest things that you will try to do this spring will be to see
the shrill little piper, as he plays his bagpipe in the rushes at your
very feet. But hunt until you do see him. It will sharpen your eyes
and steady your patience for finding other things.


VIII

You should see the sun come up on a May morning. The dawn is always a
wonderful sight, but never at other times attended with quite the
glory, with quite the music, with quite the sweet fragrance, with
quite the wonder of a morning in May. Don’t fail to see it. Don’t fail
to rise with it. You will feel as if you had wings--something better
even than wings.


IX

You should see a farmer ploughing in a large field--the long straight
furrows of brown earth; the blackbirds following behind after worms;
the rip of the ploughshare; the roll of the soil from the smooth
mould-board--the wealth of it all. For in just such fields is the
wealth of the world, and the health of it, too. Don’t miss the sight
of the ploughing.


X

Go again to the field, three weeks later, and see it all green with
sprouting corn, or oats, or one of a score of crops. Then--but in “The
Fall of the Year” I ask you to go once more and see that field all
covered with shocks of ripened corn, shocks that are pitched up and
down its long rows of corn-butts like a vast village of Indian tepees,
each tepee full of golden corn.


XI

You should see, hanging from a hole in some old apple tree, a long
thin snake-skin! It is the latch-string of the great crested
flycatcher. Now why does this bird always use a snake-skin in his
nest? and why does he usually leave it hanging loose outside the hole?
Questions, these, for you to think about. And if you will look sharp,
you will see in even the commonest things questions enough to keep you
thinking as long as you live.


XII

You should see a dandelion. A dandelion? Yes, a dandelion, “fringing
the dusty road with harmless gold.” But that almost requires four
eyes--two to see the dandelion and two more to see the gold--the two
eyes in your head, and the two in your imagination. Do you really know
how to see anything? Most persons have eyes, but only a few really
see. This is because they cannot look hard and steadily at anything.
The first great help to real seeing is to go into the woods knowing
what you hope to see--seeing it in your eye, as we say, before you see
it in the out-of-doors. No one would ever see a tree-toad on a mossy
tree or a whip-poor-will among the fallen leaves who did not have
tree-toads and whip-poor-wills in mind. Then, secondly, look at the
thing _hard_ until you see in it something peculiar, something
different from anything like it that you ever saw before. Don’t dream
in the woods; don’t expect the flowers to tell you their names or the
wild things to come up and ask you to wait while they perform for
you.




CHAPTER V

IF YOU HAD WINGS


If you had wings, why of course you would wear feathers instead of
clothes, and you might be a crow! And then of course you would steal
corn, and run the risk of getting three of your big wing feathers shot
away.

All winter long, and occasionally during this spring, I have seen one
of my little band of crows flying about with a big hole in his
wing,--at least three of his large wing feathers gone, shot away
probably last summer,--which causes him to fly with a list or limp,
like an automobile with a flattened tire, or a ship with a shifted
ballast.

Now for nearly a year that crow has been hobbling about on one whole
and one half wing, trusting to luck to escape his enemies, until he
can get three new feathers to take the places of those that are
missing. “Well, why doesn’t he get them?” you ask. If you were that
crow, how would you get them? Can a crow, by taking thought, add three
new feathers to his wing?

Certainly not. That crow must wait until wing-feather season comes
again, just as an apple tree must wait until apple-growing season
comes to hang its boughs with luscious fruit. The crow has nothing to
do with it. His wing feathers are supplied by Nature once a year
(after the nesting-time), and if a crow loses any of them, even if
right after the new feathers had been supplied, that crow will have to
wait until the season for wing feathers comes around once more--if
indeed he can wait and does not fall a prey to hawk or owl or the
heavy odds of winter.

But Nature is not going to be hurried on that account, nor caused to
change one jot or tittle from her wise and methodical course. The
Bible says that the hairs of our heads are numbered. So are the
feathers on a crow’s body. Nature knows just how many there are
altogether; how many there are of each sort--primaries, secondaries,
tertials, greater coverts, middle coverts, lesser coverts, and
scapulars--in the wing; just how each sort is arranged; just when each
sort is to be moulted and renewed. If Master Crow does not take care
of his clothes, then he will have to go without until the time for a
new suit comes; for Mother Nature won’t patch them up as your mother
patches up yours.

But now this is what I want you to notice and think about: that just
as an apple falls according to a great law of Nature, so a bird’s
feathers fall according to a law of Nature. The moon is appointed for
seasons; the sun knoweth his going down; and so light and
insignificant a thing as a bird’s feather not only is appointed to
grow in a certain place at a certain time, but also knoweth its
falling off.

Nothing could look more haphazard, certainly, than the way a hen’s
feathers seem to drop off at moulting time. The most forlorn, undone,
abject creature about the farm is the half-moulted hen. There is one
in the chicken-yard now, so nearly naked that she really is ashamed of
herself, and so miserably helpless that she squats in a corner all
night, unable to reach the low poles of the roost. It is a critical
experience with the hen, this moulting of her feathers; and were it
not for the protection of the yard it would be a fatal experience, so
easily could she be captured. Nature seems to have no hand in the
business at all; if she has, then what a mess she is making of it!

But pick up the hen, study the falling of the feathers carefully, and
lo! here is law and order, every feather as important to Nature as a
star, every quill as a planet, and the old white hen as mightily
looked after by Nature as the round sphere of the universe!

Once a year, usually after the nesting-season, it seems a physical
necessity for most birds to renew their plumage.

We get a new suit (some of us) because our old one wears out. That is
the most apparent cause for the new annual suit of the birds. Yet with
them, as with some of us, the feathers go out of fashion, and then the
change of feathers is a mere matter of style, it seems.

For severe and methodical as Mother Nature must be (and what mother or
teacher or ruler, who has great things to do and a multitude of little
things to attend to, must not be severe and methodical?)--severe, I
say, as Mother Nature must be in looking after her children’s clothes,
she has for all that a real motherly heart, it seems.

For see how she looks after their wedding garments--giving to most of
the birds a new suit, gay and gorgeous, especially to the bridegrooms,
as if fine feathers _did_ make a fine bird! Or does she do all of this
to meet the fancy of the bride, as the scientists tell us? Whether so
or not, it is a fact that among the birds it is the bridegroom who is
adorned for his wife, and sometimes the fine feathers come by a
special moult--an extra suit for him!

Take Bobolink, for instance. He has two complete moults a year, two
new suits, one of them his wedding suit. Now, as I write, I hear him
singing over the meadow--a jet-black, white, and cream-buff lover,
most strikingly adorned. His wife, down in the grass, looks as little
like him as a sparrow looks like a blackbird. But after the
breeding-season he will moult again, changing color so completely that
he and his wife and children will all look alike, all like sparrows,
and will even lose their names, flying south now under the name of
“reed-birds.”

Bobolink passes the winter in Brazil; and in the spring, just before
the long northward journey begins, he lays aside his fall traveling
clothes and puts on his gay wedding garments and starts north for his
bride. But you would hardly know he was so dressed, to look at him;
for, strangely enough, he is not black and white, but still colored
like a sparrow, as he was in the fall. _Apparently_ he is. Look at him
more closely, however, and you will find that the brownish-yellow
color is all caused by a veil of fine fringes hanging from the edges
of the feathers. The bridegroom wearing the wedding veil? Yes!
Underneath is the black and white and cream-buff suit. He starts
northward; and, by the time he reaches Massachusetts, the fringe veil
is worn off and the black and white bobolink appears. Specimens taken
after their arrival here still show traces of the brownish-yellow
veil.

Many birds do not have this early spring moult at all; and with most
of those that do, the great wing feathers are not then renewed as are
bobolink’s, but only at the annual moult after the nesting is done.
The great feathers of the wings are, as you know, the most important
feathers a bird has; and the shedding of them is so serious a matter
that Nature has come to make the change according to the habits and
needs of the birds. With most birds the body feathers begin to go
first, then the wing feathers, and last those of the tail. But the
shedding of the wing feathers is a very slow and carefully regulated
process.

In the wild geese and other water birds the wing feathers drop out
with the feathers of the body, and go so nearly together that the
birds really cannot fly. On land you could catch the birds with your
hands. But they keep near or on the water and thus escape, though
times have been when it was necessary to protect them at this season
by special laws; for bands of men would go into their nesting-marshes
and kill them with clubs by hundreds!

The shedding of the feathers brings many risks to the birds; but
Nature leaves none of her children utterly helpless. The geese at this
time cannot fly because their feathers are gone; but they can swim,
and so get away from most of their natural enemies. On the other hand,
the hawks that hunt by wing, and must have wings always in good
feather, or else perish, lose their feathers so slowly that they never
feel their loss. It takes a hawk nearly a year to get a complete
change of wing feathers, one or two dropping out from each wing at a
time, at long intervals apart.

Then here is the gosling, that goes six weeks in down, before it gets
its first feathers, which it sheds within a few weeks, in the fall.
Whereas the young quail is born with quills so far grown that it is
able to fly almost as soon as it is hatched. These are real mature
feathers; but the bird is young and soon outgrows these first flight
feathers, so they are quickly lost and new ones come. This goes on
till fall, _several_ moults occurring the first summer to meet the
increasing weight of the little quail’s growing body.

I said that Nature was severe and methodical, and so she is, where she
needs to be, so severe that you are glad, perhaps, that you are not a
crow. But Nature, like every wise mother, is severe only where she
needs to be. A crow’s wing feathers are vastly important to him. Let
him then take care of them, for they are the best feathers made and
are put in to stay a year. But a crow’s tail feathers are not so
vastly important to him; he could get on, if, like the rabbit in the
old song, he had no tail at all.

In most birds the tail is a kind of balance or steering-gear, and not
of equal importance with the wings. Nature, consequently, seems to
have attached less importance to the feathers of the tail. They are
not so firmly set, nor are they of the same quality or kind; for,
unlike the wing feathers, if a tail feather is lost through accident,
it is made good, no matter when. How do you explain that? Do you think
I believe that old story of the birds roosting with their tails out,
so that, because of generations of lost tails, those feathers now grow
expecting to be plucked by some enemy, and therefore have only a
temporary hold?

The normal, natural way, of course, is to replace a lost feather with
a new one as soon as possible. But, in order to give extra strength to
the wing feathers, Nature has found it necessary to check their
frequent change; and so complete is the check that the annual moult is
required to replace a single one. The Japanese have discovered the
secret of this check, and are able by it to keep certain feathers in
the tails of their cocks growing until they reach the enormous length
of ten to twelve feet.

My crow, it seems, lost his three feathers last summer just after his
annual moult; the three broken shafts he carries still in his wing,
and must continue to carry, as the stars must continue their courses,
until those three feathers have rounded out their cycle to the annual
moult. The universe of stars and feathers is a universe of law, of
order, and of reason.




CHAPTER VI

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO DO THIS SPRING


I do not know where to begin--there are so many interesting things to
do this spring! But, while we ought to be interested in all of the
out-of-doors, it is very necessary to select some _one_ field, say,
the birds or flowers, for _special_ study. That would help us to
decide what to do this spring.


I

If there is still room under your window, or on the clothes-pole in
your yard, or in a neighboring tree, nail up another bird-house. (Get
“Methods of Attracting Birds” by Gilbert H. Trafton.) If the
bird-house is on a pole or post, invert a large tin pan over the end
of the post and nail the house fast upon it. This will keep cats and
squirrels from disturbing the birds. If the bird-house is in a tree,
saw off a limb, if you can without hurting the tree, and do the same
there. Cats are our birds’ worst enemies.


II

Cats! Begin in your own home and neighborhood a campaign against the
cats, to reduce their number and to educate their owners to the need
of keeping them well fed and shut up in the house from early evening
until after the early morning; for these are the cats’ natural hunting
hours, when they do the greatest harm to the birds.

This does not mean any cruelty to the cat--no stoning, no persecution.
The cat is not at fault. It is the keepers of the cats who need to be
educated. Out of every hundred nests in my neighborhood the cats of
two farmhouses destroy ninety-five! The state must come to the rescue
of the birds by some new rigid law reducing the number of cats.


III

Speaking of birds, let me urge you to begin your watching and study
early--with the first robins and bluebirds--and to select some near-by
park or wood-lot or meadow to which you can go frequently. There is a
good deal in getting intimately acquainted with a locality, so that
you know its trees individually, its rocks, walls, fences, the very
qualities of its soil. Therefore you want a small area, close at hand.
Most observers make the mistake of roaming first here, then there,
spending their time and observation in finding their way around,
instead of upon the birds to be seen. You must get used to your paths
and trees before you can see the birds that flit about them.


IV

In this haunt that you select for your observation, you must study not
only the birds but the trees, and the other forms of life, and the
shape of the ground (the “lay” of the land) as well, so as to know
_all_ that you see. In a letter just received from a teacher, who is
also a college graduate, occurs this strange description: “My window
faces a hill on which straggle brown houses among the deep green of
elms or oaks or maples, I don’t know which.” Perhaps the hill is far
away; but I suspect that the writer, knowing my love for the
out-of-doors, wanted to give me a vivid picture, but, not knowing one
tree from another, put them all in so I could make my own choice!

Learn your common trees, common flowers, common bushes, common
animals, along with the birds.


V

Plant a garden, if only a pot of portulacas, and _care_ for it, and
watch it grow! Learn to dig in the soil and to love it. It is amazing
how much and how many things you can grow in a box on the window-sill,
or in a corner of the dooryard. There are plants for the sun and
plants for the shade, plants for the wall, plants for the very cellar
of your house. Get you a bit of earth and plant it, no matter how busy
you are with other things this spring.


VI

There are four excursions that you should make this spring: one to a
small pond in the woods; one to a deep, wild swamp; one to a wide
salt marsh or fresh-water meadow; and one to the seashore--to a wild
rocky or sandy shore uninhabited by man.

There are particular birds and animals as well as plants and flowers
that dwell only in these haunts; besides, you will get a sight of four
distinct kinds of landscape, four deep impressions of the face of
nature that are altogether as good to have as the sight of four
flowers or birds.


VII

Make a calendar of _your_ spring (read “Nature’s Diary” by Francis H.
Allen)--when and where you find your first bluebird, robin, oriole,
etc.; when and where you find your first hepatica, arbutus, saxifrage,
etc.; and, as the season goes on, when and where the doings of the
various wild things take place.


VIII

Boy or girl, you should go fishing--down to the pond or the river
where you go to watch the birds. Suppose you do not catch any fish.
That doesn’t matter; for you have gone out to the pond with a pole in
your hands (a pole is a _real_ thing); you have gone with the _hope_
(hope is a _real_ thing) of catching _fish_ (fish are _real_ things);
and even if you catch no fish, you will be sure, as you wait for the
fish to bite, to hear a belted kingfisher, or see a painted turtle, or
catch the breath of the sweet leaf-buds and clustered catkins opening
around the wooded pond. It is a very good thing for the young
naturalist to learn to sit still. A fish-pole is a great help in
learning that necessary lesson.


IX

One of the most interesting things you can do for special study is to
collect some frogs’ eggs from the pond and watch them grow into
tadpoles and on into frogs. There are glass vessels made particularly
for such study (an ordinary glass jar will do). If you can afford a
small glass aquarium, get one and with a few green water plants put in
a few minnows, a snail or two, a young turtle, water-beetles, and
frogs’ eggs, and watch them grow.


X

You should get up by half past three o’clock (at the earliest streak
of dawn) and go out into the new morning with the birds! You will
hardly recognize the world as that in which your humdrum days (there
are no such days, really) are spent! All is fresh, all is new, and the
bird-chorus! “Is it possible,” you will exclaim, “that this can be the
earth?”

Early morning and toward sunset are the best times of the day for
bird-study. But if there was not a bird, there would be the sunrise
and the sunset--the wonder of the waking, the peace of the closing,
day.


XI

I am not going to tell you that you should make a collection of
beetles or butterflies (you should _not_ make a collection of birds or
birds’ eggs) or of pressed flowers or of minerals or of arrow-heads or
of--anything. Because, while such a collection is of great interest
and of real value in teaching you names and things, still there are
better ways of studying living nature. For instance, I had rather
have you tame a hop-toad, feed him, watch him evening after evening
all summer, than make any sort of dead or dried or pressed collection
of anything. Live things are better than those things dead. Better
know one live toad under your doorstep than bottle up in alcohol all
the reptiles of your state.


XII

Finally you should remember that kindliness and patience and close
watching are the keys to the out-of-doors; that only sympathy and
gentleness and quiet are welcome in the fields and woods. What, then,
ought I to say that you should do finally?




CHAPTER VII

THE PALACE IN THE PIG-PEN


“You have taken a handful of my wooded acres,” says Nature to me, “and
if you have not improved them, you at least have changed them greatly.
But they are mine still. Be friendly now, go softly, and you shall
have them all--and I shall have them all, too. We will share them
together.”

And we do. Every part of the fourteen acres is mine, yielding some
kind of food or fuel or shelter. And every foot, yes, every foot, is
Nature’s; as entirely hers as when the thick primeval forest stood
here. The apple trees are hers as much as mine, and she has ten
different bird families that I know of, living in them this spring. A
pair of crows and a pair of red-tailed hawks are nesting in the
wood-lot; there are at least three families of chipmunks in as many of
my stone-piles; a fine old tree-toad sleeps on the porch under the
climbing rose; a hornet’s nest hangs in a corner of the eaves; a small
colony of swifts thunder in the chimney; swallows twitter in the
hay-loft; a chipmunk and a half-tame gray squirrel feed in the barn;
and--to bring an end to this bare beginning--under the roof of the
pig-pen dwell a pair of phœbes.

To make a bird-house of a pig-pen, to divide it between the pig and
the bird--this is as far as Nature can go, and this is certainly
enough to redeem the whole farm. For she has not sent an outcast or a
scavenger to dwell in the pen, but a bird of character, however much
he may lack in song or color. Phœbe does not make up well in a
picture; neither does he perform well as a singer; there is little to
him, in fact, but personality--personality of a kind and (may I say?)
quantity, sufficient to make the pig-pen a decent and respectable
neighborhood.

Phœbe is altogether more than his surroundings. Every time I go to
feed the pig, he lights upon a post near by and says to me, “It’s what
you are! Not what you do, but how you do it!”--with a launch into the
air, a whirl, an unerring snap at a cabbage butterfly, and an easy
drop to the post again, by way of illustration. “Not where you live,
but how you live there; not the feathers you wear, but how you wear
them--it is what you are that counts!”

There is a difference between being a “character” and having one. My
phœbe “lives over the pig,” but I cannot feel familiar with a bird
of his air and carriage, who faces the world so squarely, who settles
upon a stake as if he owned it, who lives a prince in my pig-pen.

Look at him! How alert, able, free! Notice the limber drop of his
tail, the ready energy it suggests. By that one sign you would know
the bird had force. He is afraid of nothing, not even the cold; and he
migrates only because he is a flycatcher, and is thus compelled to.
The earliest spring day, however, that you find the flies buzzing in
the sun, look for phœbe. He is back, coming alone and long before
it is safe. He was one of the first of my birds to return this spring.

And it was a fearful spring, this of which I am telling you. How
Phœbe managed to exist those miserable March days is a mystery. He
came directly to the pen as he had come the year before, and his
presence in that bleakest of Marches gave the weather its only touch
of spring.

The same force and promptness are manifest in the domestic affairs of
the bird. One of the first to arrive this spring, he was the first to
build and bring off a brood--or, perhaps, _she_ was. And the size of
the brood--of the broods, for there was a second, and a third!

Phœbe appeared without his mate, and for nearly three weeks he
hunted in the vicinity of the pen, calling the day long, and, toward
the end of the second week, occasionally soaring into the air,
fluttering, and pouring forth a small, ecstatic song that seemed
fairly forced from him.

These aerial bursts meant just one thing: _she_ was coming, was coming
soon! Was she coming or was he getting ready to go for her? Here he
had been for nearly three weeks, his house-lot chosen, his mind at
rest, his heart beating faster with every sunrise. It was as plain as
day that he knew--was certain--just how and just when something lovely
was going to happen. I wished I knew. I was half in love with her
myself; and I, too, watched for her.

On the evening of April 14th, he was alone as usual. The next morning
a pair of phœbes flitted in and out of the windows of the pen. Here
she was. Will some one tell me all about it? Had she just come along
and fallen instantly in love with him and his fine pig-pen? It is
pretty evident that he nested here last year. Was she, then, his old
mate? Did they keep together all through the autumn and winter? If so,
then why not together all the way back from Florida to Massachusetts?

Here is a pretty story. But who will tell it to me?

For several days after she came, the weather continued raw and wet, so
that nest-building was greatly delayed. The scar of an old, last
year’s nest still showed on a stringer, and I wondered if they had
decided on this or some other site for the new nest. They had not made
up their minds, for when they did start it was to make three
beginnings in as many places.

Then I offered a suggestion. Out of a bit of stick, branching at right
angles, I made a little bracket and tacked it up on one of the
stringers. It appealed to them at once, and from that moment the
building went steadily on.

Saddled upon this bracket, and well mortared to the stringer, the
nest, when finished, was as safe as a castle. And how perfect a thing
it was! Few nests, indeed, combine the solidity, the softness, and the
exquisite inside curve of Phœbe’s.

In placing the bracket, I had carelessly nailed it under one of the
cracks in the loose board roof. The nest was receiving its first
linings when there came a long, hard rain that beat through the crack
and soaked the little cradle. This was serious, for a great deal of
mud had been worked into the thick foundation, and here, in the
constant shade, the dampness would be long in drying out.

The builders saw the mistake, too, and with their great good sense
immediately began to remedy it. They built the bottom up thicker,
carried the walls over on a slant that brought the outermost point
within the line of the crack, then raised them until the cup was as
round-rimmed and hollow as the mould of Mrs. Phœbe’s breast could
make it.

The outside of the nest, its base, is broad and rough and shapeless
enough; but nothing could be softer and lovelier than the inside, the
cradle, and nothing drier, for the slanting walls of the nest shed
every drop from the leafy crack above.

Wet weather followed the heavy rain until long after the nest was
finished. The whole structure was as damp and cold as a newly
plastered house. It felt wet to my touch. Yet I noticed that the birds
were already brooding. Every night and often during the day I would
see one of them in the nest--so deep in, that only a head or a tail
showed over the round rim.

After several days I looked to see the eggs, but to my surprise found
the nest empty. It had been robbed, I thought, yet by what creature I
could not imagine. Then down cuddled one of the birds again--and I
understood. Instead of wet and cold, the nest to-day was warm to my
hand, and dry almost to the bottom. It had changed color, too, all the
upper part having turned a soft silver-gray. She (I am sure it was
she) had not been brooding her eggs at all; she had been brooding her
mother’s thought of them; and for them had been nestling here these
days and nights, _drying and warming_ their damp cradle with the fire
of her life and love.

In due time the eggs came,--five of them, white, spotless, and
shapely. While the little phœbe hen was hatching them, I gave my
attention further to the cock.

Our intimate friendship revealed a most pleasing nature in phœbe.
Perhaps such close and continued association would show like qualities
in every bird, even in the kingbird; but I fear only a woman, like
Mrs. Olive Thorne Miller, could find them in him. Not much can be said
of this flycatcher family, except that it is useful--a kind of virtue
that gets its chief reward in heaven. I am acquainted with only four
of the other nine Eastern members,--crested flycatcher, kingbird, wood
pewee, and chebec,--and each of these has some redeeming attribute
besides the habit of catching flies.

They are all good nest-builders, good parents, and brave, independent
birds; but aside from phœbe and pewee--the latter in his small way
the sweetest voice of the oak woods--the whole family is an odd lot,
cross-grained, cross-looking, and about as musical as a family of
ducks. A duck seems to know that he cannot sing. A flycatcher knows
nothing of his shortcomings. He believes he can sing, and in time he
will prove it. If desire and effort count for anything, he certainly
must prove it in time. How long the family has already been training,
no one knows. Everybody knows, however, the success each flycatcher of
them has thus far attained. It would make a good minstrel show,
doubtless, if the family would appear together. In chorus, surely,
they would be far from a tuneful choir. Yet individually, in the wide
universal chorus of the out-of-doors, how much we should miss the
kingbird’s metallic twitter and the chebec’s insistent call!

There was little excitement for phœbe during this period of
incubation. He hunted in the neighborhood and occasionally called to
his mate, contented enough perhaps, but certainly sometimes appearing
tired.

[Illustration: PHŒBE AND HER YOUNG]

One rainy day he sat in the pig-pen window looking out at the gray,
wet world. He was humped and silent and meditative, his whole attitude
speaking the extreme length of his day, the monotony of the drip,
drip, drip from the eaves, and the sitting, the ceaseless sitting, of
his brooding wife. He might have hastened the time by catching a few
flies for her or by taking her place on the nest; but I never saw him
do it.

Things were livelier when the eggs hatched, for it required a good
many flies a day to keep the five young ones growing. And how they
grew! Like bread sponge in a pan, they began to rise, pushing the
mother up so that she was forced to stand over them; then pushing her
out until she could cling only to the side of the nest at night; then
pushing her off altogether. By this time they were hanging to the
outside themselves, covering the nest from sight almost, until finally
they spilled off upon their wings.

Out of the nest upon the air! Out of the pen and into a sweet, wide
world of green and blue and of golden light! I saw one of the broods
take this first flight, and it was thrilling.

The nest was placed back from the window and below it, so that in
leaving the nest the young would have to drop, then turn and fly up to
get out. Below was the pig.

As they grew, I began to fear that they might try their wings before
this feat could be accomplished, and so fall to the pig below. But
Nature, in this case, was careful of her pearls. Day after day they
clung to the nest, even after they might have flown; and when they did
go, it was with a sure and long flight that carried them out and away
to the tops of the neighboring trees.

They left the nest one at a time and were met in the air by their
mother, who, darting to them, calling loudly, and, whirling about
them, helped them as high and as far away as they could go.

I wish the simple record of these family affairs could be closed
without one tragic entry. But that can rarely be of any family. Seven
days after the first brood were awing, I found the new eggs in the
nest. Soon after that the male bird disappeared. The second brood had
now been out a week, and in all that time no sight or sound was had of
the father.

What happened? Was he killed? Caught by a cat or a hawk? It is
possible; and this is an easy and kindly way to think of him. It is
not impossible that he may have remained as leader and protector to
the first brood; or (perish the thought!) might he have grown weary at
sight of the second lot of five eggs, of the long days and the neglect
that they meant for him, and out of jealousy and fickleness wickedly
deserted?

I hope it was death, a stainless, even ignominious death by one of my
neighbor’s many cats.

Death or desertion, it involved a second tragedy. Five such young ones
at this time were too many for the mother. She fought nobly; no mother
could have done more. All five were brought within a few days of
flight; then, one day, I saw a little wing hanging listlessly over the
side of the nest. I went closer. One had died. It had starved to
death. There were none of the parasites in the nest that often kill
whole broods. It was a plain case of sacrifice,--by the mother,
perhaps; by the other young, maybe--one for the other four.

But she did well. Nine such young birds to her credit since April. Who
shall measure her actual use to the world? How does she compare in
value with the pig? Weeks later I saw several of her brood along the
meadow fence hawking for flies. They were not far from my
cabbage-patch.

I hope a pair of them will return to me next spring and that they will
come early. Any bird that deigns to dwell under roof of mine commands
my friendship. But no other bird takes Phœbe’s place in my
affections; there is so much in him to like, and he speaks for so much
of the friendship of nature.

“Humble and inoffensive bird” he has been called by one of our leading
ornithologies--because he comes to my pig-pen! Inoffensive! this bird
with the cabbage butterfly in his beak! The faint and damning praise!
And humble? There is not a humble feather on his body. Humble to
those who see the pen and not the bird. But to me--why, the bird has
made a palace of my pig-pen!

The very pig seems less a pig because of this exquisite association;
and the lowly work of feeding the creature has been turned for me by
Phœbe into a poetic course in bird study.




CHAPTER VIII

IS IT A LIFE OF FEAR?


There was a swish of wings, a flash of gray, a cry of pain; a
squawking, cowering, scattering flock of hens; a weakly fluttering
pullet; and yonder, swinging upward into the sky, a marsh hawk,
buoyant and gleaming silvery in the sun. Over the trees he beat,
circled once, and disappeared.

The hens were still flapping for safety in a dozen directions, but the
gray harrier had gone. A bolt of lightning could hardly have dropped
so unannounced, could hardly have vanished so completely, could
scarcely have killed so quickly. I ran to the pullet, but found her
dead. The harrier’s stroke, delivered with fearful velocity, had laid
head and neck open as with a keen knife. Yet a little slower and he
would have missed, for the pullet warded off the other claw with her
wing. The gripping talons slipped off the long quills, and the hawk
swept on without his quarry. He dared not come back for it at my feet;
so, with a single turn above the woods he was gone.

The scurrying hens stopped to look about them. There was nothing in
the sky to see. They stood still and silent a moment. The rooster
_chucked_. Then one by one they turned back into the open pasture. A
huddled group under the hen-yard fence broke up and came out with the
others. Death had flashed among them, but had missed _them_. Fear had
come, but it had gone. Within two minutes from the fall of the stroke,
every hen in the flock was intent at her scratching, or as intently
chasing the gray grasshoppers over the pasture.

Yet, as the flock scratched, the high-stepping cock would frequently
cast up his eye toward the tree-tops; would sound his alarum at the
flight of a robin; and if a crow came over, he would shout and dodge
and start to run. But instantly the shadow would pass, and instantly
Chanticleer--

    “He looketh as it were a grym leoun,
    And on hise toos he rometh up and doun;
           *       *       *       *       *
    Thus roial as a prince is in an halle.”

He wasn’t afraid. Cautious, alert, watchful he was, but not afraid. No
shadow of dread lay dark and ominous across the sunshine of his
pasture. Shadows came--like a flash; and like a flash they vanished
away.

We cannot go far into the fields without sighting the hawk and the
snake, whose other names are Death. In one form or another Death moves
everywhere, down every wood-path and pasture-lane, through the black
waters of the mill-pond, out under the open of the April sky, night
and day, and every day, the four seasons through.

I have seen the still surface of a pond break suddenly with a swirl,
and flash a hundred flecks of silver into the light, as the minnows
leap from the jaws of the terrible pike. Then a loud rattle, a streak
of blue, a splash at the centre of the swirl, and I see the pike
twisting and bending in the beak of the terrible kingfisher. The
killer is killed. But at the mouth of the nest-hole in the steep
sand-bank, swaying from a root in the edge of the turf above, hangs
the terrible black snake, the third killer; and the belted kingfisher,
dropping the pike, darts off with a startled cry.

I have been afield at times when one tragedy has followed another in
such rapid and continuous succession as to put a whole shining,
singing, blossoming springtime under a pall. Everything has seemed to
cower, skulk, and hide, to run as if pursued. There was no peace, no
stirring of small life, not even in the quiet of the deep pines; for
here a hawk would be nesting, or a snake would be sleeping, or I
would hear the passing of a fox, see perhaps his keen, hungry face an
instant as he halted, winding me.

There is struggle, and pain, and death in the woods, and there is fear
also, but the fear does not last long; it does not haunt and follow
and terrify; it has no being, no shape, no lair. The shadow of the
swiftest scudding cloud is not so fleeting as this Fear-shadow in the
woods. The lowest of the animals seem capable of feeling fear; yet the
very highest of them seem incapable of dreading it. For them Fear is
not of the imagination, but of the sight, and of the passing moment.

    “The present only toucheth thee!”

It does more, it throngs him--our little fellow mortal of the
stubble-field. Into the present is lived the whole of his life--he
remembers none of it; he anticipates none of it. And the whole of this
life is action; and the whole of this action is joy. The moments of
fear in an animal’s life are few and vanishing. Action and joy are
constant, the joint laws of all animal life, of all nature--of the
shining stars that sing together, of the little mice that squeak
together, of the bitter northeast storms that roar across the wintry
fields.

I have had more than one hunter grip me excitedly, and with almost a
command bid me hear the music of the baying pack. There are hollow
halls in the swamps that lie to the east and north and west of me,
that catch up the cry of the foxhounds, that blend it, mellow it,
round it, and roll it, rising and falling over the meadows in great
globes of sound, as pure and sweet as the pearly notes of the veery
rolling round their silver basin in the summer dusk.

What music it is when the pack breaks into the open on the warm trail!
A chorus then of tongues singing the ecstasy of pursuit! My blood
leaps; the natural primitive wild thing of muscle and nerve and
instinct within me slips its leash, and on past with the pack I drive,
the scent of the trail single and sweet in my nostrils, a very fire in
my blood, motion, motion, motion in my bounding muscles, and in my
being a mighty music, spheric and immortal!

                  “The fair music that all creatures made
    To their great Lord, whose love their motions swayed....”

But what about the fox, loping wearily on ahead? What part has he in
the chorus? No part, perhaps, unless we grimly call him its conductor.
But the point is the chorus--that it never ceases, the hounds at this
moment, not the fox, in the leading rôle.

“But the chorus ceases for me,” you say. “My heart is with the poor
fox.” So is mine, and mine is with the dogs too. No, don’t say “Poor
little fox!” For many a night I have bayed with the pack, and as
often--oftener, I think--I have loped and dodged and doubled with the
fox, pitting limb against limb, lung against lung, wit against wit,
and always escaping. More than once, in the warm moonlight, I, the
fox, have led them on and on, spurring their lagging muscles with a
sight of my brush, on and on, through the moonlit night, through the
day, on into the moon again, and on until--only the stir of my own
footsteps has followed me. Then, doubling once more, creeping back a
little upon my track, I have looked at my pursuers, silent and stiff
upon the trail, and, ere the echo of their cry has died away, I have
caught up the chorus and carried it single-throated through the
wheeling, singing spheres.

There is more of fact than of fancy to this. That a fox ever purposely
led a dog to run to death would be hard to prove; but that the dogs
run themselves to death in a single extended chase after a single fox
is a common occurrence here in the woods about the farm. Occasionally
the fox may be overtaken by the hounds; seldom, however, except in the
case of a very young one or of one unacquainted with the lay of the
land, a stranger that may have been driven into the rough country
here.

I have been both fox and hound; I have run the race too often not to
know that both enjoy it at times, fox as much as hound. Some weeks ago
the dogs carried a young fox around and around the farm, hunting him
here, there, everywhere, as if in a game of hide-and-seek. An old fox
would have led the dogs on a long coursing run across the range. But
the young fox, after the dogs were caught and taken off the trail,
soon sauntered up through the mowing-field behind the barn, came out
upon the bare knoll near the house, and sat there in the moonlight
yapping down at Rex and Dewey, the house-dogs in the two farms below.
Rex is a Scotch collie, Dewey a dreadful mix of dog-dregs. He had been
tail-ender in the pack for a while during the afternoon. Both dogs
answered back at the young fox. But he could not egg them on. Rex was
too fat, Dewey had had enough; not so the young fox. It had been fun.
He wanted more. “Come on, Dewey!” he cried. “Come on, Rex, play tag
again! You’re still ‘it.’”

I was at work with my chickens one spring day when the fox broke from
cover in the tall woods, struck the old wagon-road along the ridge,
and came at a gallop down behind the hen-coops, with five hounds not a
minute behind. They passed with a crash and were gone--up over the
ridge and down into the east swamp. Soon I noticed that the pack had
broken, deploying in every direction, beating the ground over and
over. Reynard had given them the slip--on the ridge-side, evidently,
for there were no cries from below in the swamp.

Leaving my work at noon, I went down to restake my cow in the meadow.
I had just drawn her chain-pin when down the road through the orchard
behind me came the fox, hopping high up and down, his neck stretched,
his eye peeled for poultry. Spying a white hen of my neighbor’s, he
made for her, clear to the barnyard wall. Then, hopping higher for a
better view, he sighted another hen in the front yard, skipped in
gayly through the fence, seized her, and loped across the road and
away up the birch-grown hills beyond.

The dogs had been at his very heels ten minutes before. He had fooled
them. And no doubt he had done it again and again. They were even now
yelping at the end of the baffling trail behind the ridge. Let them
yelp. It is a kind and convenient habit of dogs, this yelping, one can
tell so exactly where they are. Meantime one can take a turn for one’s
self at the chase, get a bite of chicken, a drink of water, a wink or
two of rest, and when the yelping gets warm again, one is quite ready
to pick up one’s heels and lead the pack another merry dance. The fox
is quite a jolly fellow.

This is the way the races out of doors are all run off. Now and then
they may end tragically. A fox cannot reckon on the hunter with a gun.
He is racing against the pack of hounds. But, mortal finish or no, the
spirit of the chase is neither rage nor terror, but the excitement of
a matched game, the ecstasy of pursuit for the hound, the passion of
escape for the fox, without fury or fear--except for the instant at
the start and at the finish--when it is a finish.

This is the spirit of the chase--of the race, more truly; for it is
always a race, where the stake is not life and death, but rather the
joy of winning. The hound cares as little for his own life as for the
life of the fox he is hunting. It is the race, instead, that he loves;
it is the moments of crowded, complete, supreme existence for
him--“glory” we call it when men run it off together. Death, and the
fear of death, the animals can neither understand nor feel. Only
enemies exist in the world out of doors, only hounds, foxes,
hawks--they, and their scents, their sounds and shadows; and not fear,
but readiness only. The level of wild life, of the soul of all nature,
is a great serenity. It is seldom lowered, but often raised to a
higher level, intenser, faster, more exultant.

The serrate pines on my horizon are not the pickets of a great pen. My
fields and swamps and ponds are not one wide battle-field, as if the
only work of my wild neighbors were bloody war, and the whole of their
existence a reign of terror. This is a universe of law and order and
marvelous balance; conditions these of life, of normal, peaceful,
joyous life. Life and not death is the law; joy and not fear is the
spirit, is the frame of all that breathes, of very matter itself.

    “And ever at the loom of Birth
      The Mighty Mother weaves and sings;
    She weaves--fresh robes for mangled earth;
      She sings--fresh hopes for desperate things.”

But suppose the fox were a defenseless rabbit, what of fear and terror
then?

Ask any one who has shot in the rabbity fields of southern New Jersey.
The rabbit seldom runs in blind terror. He is soft-eyed, and timid,
and as gentle as a pigeon, but he is not defenseless. A nobler set of
legs was never bestowed by nature than the little cottontail’s. They
are as wings compared with the bent, bow legs that bear up the
ordinary rabbit-hound. With winged legs, protecting color, a clear map
of the country in his head,--its stumps, railpiles, cat-brier tangles,
and narrow rabbit-roads,--with all this as a handicap, Bunny may well
run his usual cool and winning race. The balance is just as even, the
chances quite as good, and the contest every bit as interesting to him
as to Reynard.

I have seen a rabbit squat close in his form and let a hound pass
yelping within a few feet of him, but waiting on his toes as ready as
a hair-trigger should he be discovered.

I have seen him leap for his life as the dog sighted him, and,
bounding like a ball across the stubble, disappear in the woods, the
hound within two jumps of his flashing tail. I have waited at the end
of the wood-road for the runners to come back, down the home-stretch,
for the finish. On they go through the woods, for a quarter, or
perhaps a half a mile, the baying of the hound faint and intermittent
in the distance, then quite lost. No, there it is again, louder now.
They have turned the course.

I wait.

The quiet life of the woods is undisturbed; for the voice of the hound
is only an echo, not unlike the far-off tolling of a slow-swinging
bell. The leaves stir as a wood mouse scurries from his stump; an
acorn rattles down; then in the winding wood-road I hear the _pit-pat,
pit-pat_, of soft furry feet, and there at the bend is the rabbit. He
stops, rises high up on his haunches, and listens. He drops again upon
all fours, scratches himself behind the ear, reaches over the cart-rut
for a nip of sassafras, hops a little nearer, and throws his big ears
forward in quick alarm, for he sees me, and, as if something had
exploded under him, he kicks into the air and is off,--leaving a
pretty tangle for the dog to unravel, later on, by this mighty jump to
the side.

My children and a woodchopper were witnesses recently of an exciting,
and, for this section of Massachusetts, a novel race, which, but for
them, must certainly have ended fatally. The boys were coming through
the wood-lot where the man was chopping, when down the hillside toward
them rushed a little chipmunk, his teeth a-chatter with terror; for
close behind him, with the easy, wavy motion of a shadow, glided a
dark-brown animal, which the man took on the instant for a mink, but
which must have been a large weasel or a pine marten. When almost at
the feet of the boys, and about to be seized by the marten, the
squeaking chipmunk ran up a tree. Up glided the marten, up for twenty
feet, when the chipmunk jumped. It was a fearfully close call.

The marten did not dare to jump, but turned and started down, when the
man intercepted him with a stick. Around and around the tree he
dodged, growling and snarling and avoiding the stick, not a bit
abashed, stubbornly holding his own, until forced to seek refuge among
the branches. Meanwhile, the terrified chipmunk had recovered his
nerve and sat quietly watching the sudden turn of affairs from a
near-by stump.

I frequently climb into the cupola of the barn during the winter, and
bring down a dazed junco that would beat his life out up there against
the window-panes. He will lie on his back in my open hand, either
feigning death or really powerless with fear. His eyes will close, his
whole tiny body throb convulsively with his throbbing heart. Taking
him to the door, I will turn him over and give him a gentle toss.
Instantly his wings flash; they take him zigzag for a yard or two,
then bear him swiftly round the corner of the house and drop him in
the midst of his fellows, where they are feeding upon the lawn. He
will shape himself up a little and fall to picking with the others.

From a state of collapse the laws of his being bring the bird into
normal behavior as quickly and completely as the collapsed rubber ball
is rounded by the laws of its being. The memory of the fright seems to
be an impression exactly like the dent in the rubber ball--as if it
had never been.

Memories, of course, the animals surely have; but little or no power
to use them. The dog will sometimes seem to cherish a grudge; so will
the elephant. Some one injures or wrongs him, and the huge beast
harbors the memory, broods it, and awaits his opportunity for revenge.
Yet the records of these cases usually show that the creature had been
living with the object of his hatred--his keeper, perhaps--and that
the memory goes no farther back than the present moment, than the
sight of the hated one.

At my railroad station I frequently see a yoke of great sleepy,
bald-faced oxen, that look as much alike as two blackbirds. Their
driver knows them apart; but as they stand there, bound to one another
by the heavy bar across their foreheads, it would puzzle anybody else
to tell Buck from Berry. But not if he approach them wearing an
overcoat. At sight of me in an overcoat the off ox will snort and back
and thrash about in terror, twisting the head of his yoke-fellow,
nearly breaking his neck, and trampling him miserably. But the nigh ox
is used to it. He chews and blinks away placidly, keeps his feet the
best he can, and doesn’t try to understand at all why greatcoats
should so frighten his cud-chewing brother. I will drop off my coat
and go up immediately to smooth the muzzles of both oxen, now blinking
sleepily while the lumber is being loaded on.

Years ago, the driver told me, the off ox was badly frightened by a
big woolly coat, the sight or smell of which probably suggested to the
creature some natural enemy, a panther, perhaps, or a bear. The memory
remained, but beyond recall except in the presence of its first cause,
the greatcoat.

To us there are such things as terror and death, but not to the lower
animals except momentarily. We are clutched by terror even as the
junco was clutched in my goblin hand. When the mighty fingers open, we
zigzag, dazed, from the danger; but fall to planning before the
tremors of the fright have ceased. Upon the crumbled, smoking heap of
San Francisco a second splendid city has arisen and shall ever rise.
Terror can kill the living, but it cannot hinder them from forgetting,
or prevent them from hoping, or, for more than an instant, stop them
from doing. Such is the law of life--the law of heaven, of my
pastures, of the little junco, of myself. Life, Law, and Matter are
all of one piece. The horse in my stable, the robin, the toad, the
beetle, the vine in my garden, the garden itself, and I together with
them all, come out of the same divine dust; we all breathe the same
divine breath; we have our beings under the same divine laws; only
they do not know that the law, the breath, and the dust are divine.
If, with all that I know of fear, I can so readily forget it, and can
so constantly feel the hope and the joy of life within me, how soon
for them, my lowly fellow mortals, must vanish all sight of fear, all
memory of pain! And how abiding with them, how compelling, the
necessity to live! And in their unquestioning obedience, what joy!

The face of the fields is as changeful as the face of a child. Every
passing wind, every shifting cloud, every calling bird, every baying
hound, every shape, shadow, fragrance, sound, and tremor, are
reflected there. But if time and experience and pain come, they pass
utterly away; for the face of the fields does not grow old or wise or
seamed with pain. It is always the face of a child,--asleep in
winter, awake in spring and summer,--a face of life and health always,
as much in the falling leaf as in the opening bud, as much under the
covers of the snow as in the greensward of the spring, as much in the
wild, fierce joy of fox and hound as they course the turning, tangling
paths of the woodlands in their fateful race as in the song of brook
and bird on a joyous April morning.




CHAPTER IX

THE BUZZARD OF THE BEAR SWAMP


No, I do not believe that any one of you ever went into a swamp to
find a turkey buzzard’s nest. Still, if you had been born on the edge
of a great swamp, as I was, and if the great-winged buzzards had been
soaring, soaring up in your sky, as all through my boyhood they were
soaring up in mine, then why should you not have gone some time into
the swamp to see where they make their nests--these strange
cloud-winged creatures?

Boys are boys, and girls are girls, the world over; and I am pretty
sure that little Jack Horner and myself were not the only two boys in
all the world to do great and wonderful deeds. Any boy with a love for
birds and a longing for the deep woods, living close to the edge of
the Bear Swamp, would have searched out that buzzard’s nest.

Although I was born within the shadows of the Bear Swamp, close enough
to smell the magnolias along its margin, and lived my first ten years
only a little farther off, yet it was not until after twice ten years
of absence that I stood again within sight of it, ready for the first
time to cross its dark borders and find the buzzard’s nest.

Now here at last I found myself, looking down over the largest, least
trod, deepest-tangled swamp in southern New Jersey--wide, gloomy,
silent, and to me,--for I still thought of it as I used to when a
child,--to me, a mysterious realm of black streams, hollow trees,
animal trails, and haunting shapes, presided over by this great bird,
the turkey buzzard.

For he was never mere bird to me, but some kind of spirit. He stood to
me for what was far off, mysterious, secret, and unapproachable in the
deep, dark swamp; and, in the sky, so wide were his wings, so majestic
the sweep of his flight, he had always stirred me, caused me to hold
my breath and wish myself to fly.

No other bird did I so much miss from my New England skies when I came
here to live. Only the other day, standing in the heart of Boston, I
glanced up and saw, sailing at a far height against the billowy
clouds, an aeroplane; and what should I think of but the flight of the
vulture, so like the steady wings of the great bird seemed the steady
wings of this great monoplane far off against the sky.

And so you begin to understand why I had come back after so many years
to the swamp, and why I wanted to see the nest of this strange bird
that had been flying, flying forever in my imagination and in my sky.
But my good uncle, whom I was visiting, when I mentioned my quest,
merely exclaimed, “What in thunderation!”

You will find a good many uncles and other folk who won’t understand a
good many things that you want to do. Never mind. If you want to see a
buzzard’s nest, let all your relations exclaim while you go quietly
off alone and see it.

I wanted to find a buzzard’s nest--the nest of the Bear Swamp buzzard;
and here at last I stood; and yonder on the clouds, a mere mote in the
distance, floated the bird. It was coming toward me over the wide
reach of the swamp.

Silent, inscrutable, and alien lay the swamp, and untouched by human
hands. Over it spread a quiet and reserve as real as twilight. Like a
mask it was worn, and was slipped on, I know, at my approach. I could
feel the silent spirit of the place drawing back away from me. But I
should have at least a guide to lead me through the shadow land, for
out of the lower living green towered a line of limbless stubs, like a
line of telegraph-poles, their bleached bones gleaming white, or
showing dark and gaunt against the horizon, and marking for me a path
far out across the swamp. Besides, here came the buzzard winding
slowly down the clouds. Soon its spiral changed to a long
pendulum-swing, till just above the skeleton trees the great bird
wheeled and, bracing itself with its flapping wings, dropped heavily
upon one of the headless tree-trunks.

It had come leisurely, yet I could see that it had come with a
directness and purpose that was unmistakable and also meaningful. It
had discovered me in the distance, and, while still invisible to my
eyes, had started down to perch upon that giant stub in order to watch
me. It was suspicious, and had come to watch me, because somewhere
beneath its perch, I felt sure, lay a hollow log, the creature’s den,
holding its two eggs or its young. A buzzard has something like a
soul.

Marking the direction of the stub, and its probable distance, I waded
into the deep underbrush, the buzzard perched against the sky for my
guide, and, for my quest, the stump or hollow log that held the
creature’s nest.

The rank ferns and ropy vines swallowed me up, and shut out at times
even the sight of the sky and the buzzard. It was not until half an
hour’s struggle that, climbing a pine-crested swell in the low bottom,
I sighted the bird again. It had not moved.

I was now in the real swamp, the old uncut forest. It was a land of
tree giants: huge tulip poplar and swamp white oak, so old that they
had become solitary, their comrades having fallen one by one; while
some of them, unable to loose their grip upon the soil, which had
widened and tightened through centuries, were still standing, though
long since dead. It was upon one of these that the buzzard sat humped.

Directly in my path stood an ancient swamp white oak, the greatest
tree, I think, that I have ever seen. It was not the highest, nor the
largest round, perhaps, but in years and looks the greatest. Hoary,
hollow, and broken-limbed, his huge bole seemed encircled with the
centuries.

    “For it had bene an auncient tree,
    Sacred with many a mysteree.”

Above him to twice his height loomed a tulip poplar, clean-boled for
thirty feet and in the top all green and gold with blossoms. It was a
resplendent thing beside the oak, yet how unmistakably the gnarled old
monarch wore the crown! His girth more than balanced the poplar’s
greater height; and, as for blossoms, he had his tiny-flowered
catkins; but nature knows the beauty of strength and inward majesty,
and has pinned no boutonnière upon the oak.

My buzzard now was hardly more than half a mile away, and plainly seen
through the rifts in the lofty timbered roof above me. As I was
nearing the top of a large fallen pine that lay in my course, I was
startled by the _burrh! burrh! burrh!_ of three partridges taking wing
just beyond, near the foot of the tree. Their exploding flight seemed
all the more like a real explosion when three little clouds of
dust-smoke rose out of the low, _wet_ bottom of the swamp and drifted
up against the green.

Then I saw an interesting sight. The pine, in its fall, had snatched
with its wide-reaching, multitudinous roots at the shallow bottom and
torn out a giant fistful of earth, leaving a hole about two feet deep
and more than a dozen feet wide. The sand thus lifted into the air had
gradually washed down into a mound on each side of the butt, where it
lay high and dry above the level of the wet swamp. This the swamp
birds had turned into a great dust-bath. It was in constant use,
evidently. Not a spear of grass had sprouted in it, and all over it
were pits and craters of various sizes, showing that not only the
partridges but also the quail and such small things as the warblers
bathed here,--though I can’t recall ever having seen a warbler bathe
in the dust. A dry bath in the swamp was something of a luxury,
evidently. I wonder if the buzzards used it?

I went forward cautiously now, and expectantly, for I was close enough
to see the white beak and red wattled neck of my buzzard guide. The
buzzard saw me, too, and began to twist its head and to twitch its
wing-tips nervously. Then the long, black wings began to open, as you
would open a two-foot rule, and, with a heavy lurch that left the dead
stub rocking, the bird dropped and was soon soaring high up in the
blue.

This was the locality of the nest; now where should I find it?
Evidently I was to have no further help from the old bird. The
underbrush was so thick that I could hardly see farther than my nose.
A half-rotten tree-trunk lay near, the top end resting across the
backs of several saplings that it had borne down in its fall. I crept
up on this for a look around, and almost tumbled off at finding myself
staring directly into the dark, cavernous hollow of an immense log
lying on a slight rise of ground a few feet ahead of me.

It was a yawning hole, which at a glance I knew belonged to the
buzzard. The log, a mere shell of a mighty white oak, had been girdled
and felled with an axe, by coon-hunters probably, and still lay with
one side resting upon the rim of the stump. As I stood looking,
something white stirred vaguely in the hole and disappeared.

Leaping from my perch, I scrambled forward to the mouth of the hollow
log and was greeted with hisses from far back in the dark. Then came a
thumping of bare feet, more hisses, and a sound of snapping beaks. I
had found my buzzard’s nest!

[Illustration: YOUNG TURKEY BUZZARD]

Hardly that, either, for there was not a feather, stick, or chip as
evidence of a nest. The eggs had been laid upon the sloping cavern
floor, and in the course of their incubation must have rolled clear
down to the opposite end, where the opening was so narrow that the
buzzard could not have brooded them until she had rolled them back.
The wonder is that they had ever hatched.

But they had, and what they hatched was another wonder. Nature never
intended a young buzzard for any eye but his mother’s, and _she_ hates
the sight of him. Elsewhere I have told of a buzzard that devoured her
eggs at the approach of an enemy, so delicately balanced are her
unnamable appetites and her maternal affections!

The two strange nestlings in the log must have been three weeks old, I
should say, the larger weighing about four pounds. They were covered,
as young owls are, with deep snow-white down, out of which protruded
their black scaly, snaky legs. They stood braced on these long black
legs, their receding heads drawn back, shoulders thrust forward, and
bodies humped between the featherless wings like challenging tom-cats.

In order to examine them, I crawled into the den--not a difficult act,
for the opening measured four feet and a half across at the mouth. The
air was musty inside, yet surprisingly free from odor. The floor was
absolutely clean, but on the top and sides of the cavity was a thick
coating of live mosquitoes, most of them gorged, hanging like a
red-beaded tapestry over the walls.

I had taken pains that the flying buzzard should not see me enter, for
I hoped she would descend to look after her young. But she would take
no chances with herself. I sat near the mouth of the hollow, where I
could catch the fresh breeze that pulled across the end, and where I
had a view of a far-away bit of sky. Suddenly, across this field of
blue, there swept a meteor of black--the buzzard! and evidently in
that instant of passage, at a distance certainly of half a mile, she
spied me in the log.

I waited more than an hour longer, and when I tumbled out with a dozen
kinds of cramps, the unworried mother was soaring serenely far up in
the clear, cool sky.




CHAPTER X

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO HEAR THIS SPRING


I

The frogs! You can have no spring until you hear the frogs. The first
shrill notes, heard before the ice is fairly out of the marshes, will
be the waking call of the hylas, the tiny tree-frogs that later on in
the summer you will find in the woods. Then, as the spring advances
and this silvery sleigh-bell jingle tinkles faster, other voices will
join in--the soft croak of the spotted leopard frogs, the still softer
melancholy quaver of the common toad, and away down at the end of the
scale the deep, solemn bass of the great bullfrog saying, “Go round!
Better go round!”


II

You must hear, besides the first spring notes of the bluebird and the
robin, four bird songs this spring. First (1) the song of the wood
thrush or the hermit thrush, whichever one lives in your neighborhood.
No words can describe the purity, the peacefulness, the spiritual
quality of the wood thrush’s simple “Come to me.” It is the voice of
the tender twilight, the voice of the tranquil forest, speaking to
you. After the thrush (2) the brown thrasher, our finest, most gifted
songster, as great a singer, I think (and I have often heard them
both), as the Southern mockingbird. Then (3) the operatic catbird. She
sits lower down among the bushes than the brown thrasher, as if she
knew that, compared with him, she must take a back seat; but for
variety of notes and length of song, she has few rivals. I say _she_,
when really I ought to say _he_, for it is the males of most birds
that sing, but the catbird seems so long and slender, so dainty and
feminine, that I think of this singer as of some exquisite operatic
singer in a woman’s rôle. Then (4) the bobolink; for his song is just
like Bryant’s bubbling poem, only better! Go to the meadows in June
and listen as he comes lilting and singing over your head.


III

There are some birds that cannot sing: the belted kingfisher, for
instance; he can only rattle. You must hear him rattle. You can do as
well yourself if you will shake a “pair of bones” or heave an anchor
and let the chain run fast through the hawse-hole. You then must hear
the downy woodpecker doing his rattling _rat-ta-tat-tat-tat-tat_
(across the page and back again), as fast as _rat-ta-tat_ can _tat_.
How he makes the old dead limb or fence-post rattle as he drums upon
it with his chisel bill. He can be heard half a mile around.

Then high-hole, the flicker (or golden-winged woodpecker), you must
hear him yell, _Up-up-up-up-up up-up-up-up-up-up_,--a ringing,
rolling, rapid kind of yodel that echoes over the spring fields.


IV

You must hear the nighthawk and the whip-poor-will. Both birds are to
be heard at twilight, and the whip-poor-will far into the night. At
the very break of dawn is also a good time to listen to them.

At dusk you will see (I have seen him from the city roofs in Boston) a
bird about the size of a pigeon mounting up into the sky by short
flights, crying _peent_, until far over your head the creature will
suddenly turn and on half-closed wings dive headlong toward the
earth, when, just before hitting the ground, upward he swoops, at the
same instant making a weird booming sound, a kind of hollow groan with
his wings, as the wind rushes through their large feathers. This diver
through the dim ocean of air is the nighthawk. Let one of the birds
dive close to your head on a lonely dusky road, and your hair will try
to jump out from under your hat.

The whip-poor-will’s cry you all know. When you hear one this spring,
go out into the twilight and watch for him. See him spring into the
air, like a strange shadow, for flies; count his _whip-poor-wills_ (he
may call it more than a hundred times in as many seconds!). But hear a
circle of the birds, if possible, calling through the darkness of a
wood all around you!


V

There is one strange bird song that is half song and half dance that
perhaps most of you may never be able to hear and see; but as it is
worth going miles to hear, and nights of watching to witness, I am
going to set it here as one of your outdoor tasks or feats: you must
hear the mating song of the woodcock. I have described the song and
the dance in “Roof and Meadow,” in the chapter called “One Flew East
and One Flew West.” Mr. Bradford Torrey has an account of it in his
“Clerk of the Woods,” in the chapter named “Woodcock Vespers.” To hear
the song is a rare experience for the habitual watcher in the woods,
but one that you might have the first April evening that you are
abroad.

Go down to your nearest meadow--a meadow near a swampy piece of woods
is best--and here, along the bank of the meadow stream, wait in the
chilly twilight for the _speank_, _speank_, or the _peent_, _peent_,
from the grass--the signal that the song is about to begin.


VI

One of the dreadful--positively dreadful--sounds of the late spring
that I hear day in and day out is the gobbling, strangling, ghastly
cries of young crows feeding. You will surely think something is being
murdered. The crying of a hungry baby is musical in comparison. But it
is a good sound to hear, for it reminds one of the babes in the
woods--that a new generation of birds is being brought through from
babyhood to gladden the world. It is a tender sound! The year is still
young.


VII

You should hear the hum of the honey-bees on a fresh May day in an
apple tree that is just coming into perfect bloom. The enchanting
loveless of the pink and white world of blossoms is enough to make one
forget to listen to the _hum-hum-hum-humming-ing-ing-ing-ing_ of the
excited bees. But hear their myriad wings, fanning the perfume into
the air and filling the sunshine with the music of work. The whir, the
hum of labor--of a busy factory, of a great steamship dock--is always
music to those who know the blessedness of work; but it takes that
knowledge, and a good deal of imagination besides, to hear the music
in it. Not so with the bees. The season, the day, the colors, and
perfumes--they are the song; the wings are only the million-stringed
æolian upon which the song is played.


VIII

You should hear the grass grow. What! I repeat, you should hear the
grass grow. I have a friend, a sound and sensible man, but a lover of
the out-of-doors, who says he can hear it grow. But perhaps it is the
soft stir of the working earthworms that he hears. Try it. Go out
alone one of these April nights; select a green pasture with a slope
to the south, at least a mile from any house, or railroad; lay your
ear flat upon the grass, listen without a move for ten minutes. You
hear something--or do you feel it? Is it the reaching up of the grass?
is it the stir of the earthworms? is it the pulse of the throbbing
universe? or is it your own throbbing pulse? It is all of these, I
think; call it the heart of the grass beating in every tiny living
blade, if you wish to. You should listen to hear the grass grow.


IX

The fires have gone out on the open hearth. Listen early in the
morning and toward evening for the rumbling, the small, muffled
thunder, of the chimney swallows, as they come down from the open sky
on their wonderful wings. Don’t be frightened. It isn’t Santa Claus
this time of year; nor is it the Old Nick! The smothered thunder is
caused by the rapid beating of the swallows’ wings on the air in the
narrow chimney-flue, as the birds settle down from the top of the
chimney and hover over their nests. Stick your head into the fireplace
and look up! Don’t smoke the precious lodgers out, no matter how much
racket they make.


X

Hurry out while the last drops of your first May thunder-shower are
still falling and listen to the robins singing from the tops of the
trees. Their liquid songs are as fresh as the shower, as if the
raindrops in falling were running down from the trees in song--as
indeed they are in the overflowing trout-brook. Go out and listen, and
write a better poem than this one that I wrote the other afternoon
when listening to the birds in our first spring shower:--

        The warm rain drops aslant the sun
          And in the rain the robins sing;
        Across the creek in twos and troops,
          The hawking swifts and swallows wing.

        The air is sweet with apple bloom,
          And sweet the laid dust down the lane,
        The meadow’s marge of calamus,
          And sweet the robins in the rain.

        O greening time of bloom and song!
          O fragrant days of tender pain!
        The wet, the warm, the sweet young days
          With robins singing in the rain.




CHAPTER XI

TURTLE EGGS FOR AGASSIZ


I took down, recently, from the shelves of a great public library, the
four volumes of Agassiz’s “Contributions to the Natural History of the
United States.” I doubt if anybody but the charwoman, with her duster,
had touched those volumes for twenty-five years. They are a monumental
work, the fruit of vast and heroic labors, with colored plates on
stone, showing the turtles of the United States, and their
life-history. The work was published more than half a century ago, but
it looked old beyond its years--massive, heavy, weathered, as if dug
from the rocks; and I soon turned with a sigh from the weary learning
of its plates and diagrams to look at the preface.

Then, reading down through the catalogue of human names and of thanks
for help received, I came to a sentence beginning:--

“In New England I have myself collected largely; but I have also
received valuable contributions from the late Rev. Zadoc Thompson of
Burlington; ... from Mr. D. Henry Thoreau of Concord; ... and from Mr.
J. W. P. Jenks of Middleboro.” And then it hastens on with the thanks
in order to get to the turtles, as if turtles were the one and only
thing of real importance in all the world.

Turtles are important--interesting; so is the late Rev. Zadoc Thompson
of Burlington. Indeed any reverend gentleman who would catch turtles
for Agassiz must have been interesting. If Agassiz had only put a
chapter into his turtle book about him! and as for the Mr. Jenks of
Middleboro (at the end of the quotation) I know that he was
interesting; for years later, he was an old college professor of mine.
He told me some of the particulars of his turtle contributions,
particulars which Agassiz should have found a place for in his big
book. The preface says merely that this gentleman sent turtles to
Cambridge by the thousands--brief and scanty recognition. For that is
not the only thing this gentleman did. On one occasion he sent, not
turtles, but turtle _eggs_ to Cambridge--_brought_ them, I should say;
and all there is to show for it, so far as I could discover, is a
small drawing of a bit of one of the eggs!

Of course, Agassiz wanted to make that drawing, and had to have a
_fresh_ turtle egg to draw it from. He had to have it, and he got it.
A great man, when he wants a certain turtle egg, at a certain time,
always gets it, for he gets some one else to get it for him. I am glad
he got it. But what makes me sad and impatient is that he did not
think it worth while to tell us about the getting of it.

It would seem, naturally, that there could be nothing unusual or
interesting about the getting of turtle eggs when you want them.
Nothing at all, if you should chance to want the eggs as you chance to
find them. So with anything else. But if you want turtle eggs _when_
you want them, and are bound to have them, then you must--get Mr.
Jenks, or somebody else to get them for you.

Agassiz wanted those turtle eggs when he wanted them--not a minute
over three hours from the minute they were laid. Yet even that does
not seem exacting, hardly more difficult than the getting of hens’
eggs only three hours old. Just so, provided the professor could have
had his private turtle-coop in Harvard College Yard; and provided he
could have made his turtles lay. But turtles will not respond, like
hens, to meat-scraps and the warm mash. The professor’s problem was
not to get from a mud turtle’s nest in the back yard to his work-table
in the laboratory; but to get from the laboratory in Cambridge to some
pond when the turtles were laying, and back to the laboratory within
the limited time. And this might have called for nice and
discriminating work--as it did.

Agassiz had been engaged for a long time upon his “Contributions.” He
had brought the great work nearly to a finish. It was, indeed,
finished but for one small yet very important bit of observation: he
had carried the turtle egg through every stage of its development with
the single exception of one--the very earliest. That beginning stage
had brought the “Contributions” to a halt. To get eggs that were fresh
enough to show the incubation at this period had been impossible.

There were several ways that Agassiz might have proceeded: he might
have got a leave of absence for the spring term, taken his laboratory
to some pond inhabited by turtles, and there camped until he should
catch the reptile digging out her nest. But there were difficulties in
all of that--as those who are college professors and naturalists know.
As this was quite out of the question, he did the easiest thing--asked
Mr. Jenks of Middleboro to get him the eggs. Mr. Jenks got them.
Agassiz knew all about his getting of them; and I say the strange and
irritating thing is, that Agassiz did not think it worth while to tell
us about it, at least in the preface to his monumental work.

It was many years later that Mr. Jenks, then a gray-haired college
professor, told me how he got those eggs to Agassiz.

“I was principal of an academy, during my younger years,” he began,
“and was busy one day with my classes, when a large man suddenly
filled the doorway of the room, smiled to the four corners of the
room, and called out with a big, quick voice that he was Professor
Agassiz.

“Of course he was. I knew it, even before he had had time to shout it
to me across the room.

“Would I get him some turtle eggs? he called. Yes, I would. And would
I get them to Cambridge within three hours from the time they were
laid? Yes, I would. And I did. And it was worth the doing. But I did
it only once.

“When I promised Agassiz those eggs, I knew where I was going to get
them. I had got turtle eggs there before--at a particular patch of
sandy shore along a pond, a few miles distant from the academy.

“Three hours was the limit. From the railroad station to Boston was
thirty-five miles; from the pond to the station was perhaps three or
four miles; from Boston to Cambridge we called about three miles.
Forty miles in round numbers! We figured it all out before he
returned, and got the trip down to two hours,--record time:--driving
from the pond to the station; from the station by express train to
Boston; from Boston by cab to Cambridge. This left an easy hour for
accidents and delays.

“Cab and car and carriage we reckoned into our time-table; but what we
didn’t figure on was the turtle.” And he paused abruptly.

“Young man,” he went on, his shaggy brows and spectacles hardly hiding
the twinkle in the eyes that were bent severely upon me, “young man,
when _you_ go after turtle eggs, take into account the turtle. No! No!
that’s bad advice. Youth never reckons on the turtle--and youth seldom
ought to. Only old age does that; and old age would never have got
those turtle eggs to Agassiz.

“It was in the early spring that Agassiz came to the academy, long
before there was any likelihood of the turtles’ laying. But I was
eager for the quest, and so fearful of failure that I started out to
watch at the pond, fully two weeks ahead of the time that the turtles
might be expected to lay. I remember the date clearly: it was May
14th.

“A little before dawn--along near three o’clock--I would drive over to
the pond, hitch my horse near by, settle myself quietly among some
thick cedars close to the sandy shore, and there I would wait, my
kettle of sand ready, my eye covering the whole sleeping pond. Here
among the cedars I would eat my breakfast, and then get back in good
season to open the academy for the morning session.

“And so the watch began.

“I soon came to know individually the dozen or more turtles that kept
to my side of the pond. Shortly after the cold mist would lift and
melt away, they would stick up their heads through the quiet water;
and as the sun slanted down over the ragged rim of tree-tops, the slow
things would float into the warm lighted spots, or crawl out and doze
comfortably on the hummocks and snags.

“What fragrant mornings those were! How fresh and new and unbreathed!
The pond odors, the woods odors, the odors of the ploughed fields--of
water-lily, and wild grape, and the dew-laid soil! I can taste them
yet, and hear them yet--the still, large sounds of the waking day--the
pickerel breaking the quiet with his swirl; the kingfisher dropping
anchor; the stir of feet and wings among the trees. And then the
thought of the great book being held up for me! Those were rare
mornings!

“But there began to be a good many of them, for the turtles showed no
desire to lay. They sprawled in the sun, and never one came out upon
the sand as if she intended to help on the great professor’s book. The
story of her eggs was of small concern to her; her contribution to the
Natural History of the United States could wait.

“And it did wait. I began my watch on the 14th of May; June 1st found
me still among the cedars, still waiting, as I had waited every
morning, Sundays and rainy days alike. June 1st was a perfect morning,
but every turtle slid out upon her log, as if egg-laying might be a
matter strictly of next year.

“I began to grow uneasy,--not impatient yet, for a naturalist learns
his lesson of patience early, and for all his years; but I began to
fear lest, by some subtile sense, my presence might somehow be known
to the creatures; that they might have gone to some other place to
lay, while I was away at the schoolroom.

“I watched on to the end of the first week, on to the end of the
second week in June, seeing the mists rise and vanish every morning,
and along with them vanish, more and more, the poetry of my early
morning vigil. Poetry and rheumatism cannot long dwell together in the
same clump of cedars, and I had begun to feel the rheumatism. A month
of morning mists wrapping me around had at last soaked through to my
bones. But Agassiz was waiting, and the world was waiting, for those
turtle eggs and I would wait. It was all I could do, for there is no
use bringing a china nest-egg to a turtle; she is not open to any such
delicate suggestion.

“Then came a mid-June Sunday morning, with dawn breaking a little
after three: a warm, wide-awake dawn, with the level mist lifted from
the level surface of the pond a full hour higher than I had seen it
any morning before.

“This was the day. I knew it. I have heard persons say that they can
hear the grass grow; that they know by some extra sense when danger is
nigh. For a month I had been watching, had been brooding over this
pond, and now I knew. I felt a stirring of the pulse of things that
the cold-hearted turtles could no more escape than could the clods and
I.

“Leaving my horse unhitched, as if he, too, understood, I slipped
eagerly into my covert for a look at the pond. As I did so, a large
pickerel ploughed a furrow out through the spatter-docks, and in his
wake rose the head of a large painted turtle. Swinging slowly round,
the creature headed straight for the shore, and, without a pause,
scrambled out on the sand.

“She was nothing unusual for a turtle, but her manner was unusual and
the gait at which she moved; for there was method in it and fixed
purpose. On she came, shuffling over the sand toward the higher open
fields, with a hurried, determined see-saw that was taking her
somewhere in particular, and that was bound to get her there on time.

“I held my breath. Had she been a dinosaurian making Mesozoic
footprints, I could not have been more fearful. For footprints in the
Mesozoic mud, or in the sands of time, were as nothing to me when
compared with fresh turtle eggs in the sands of this pond.

“But over the strip of sand, without a stop, she paddled, and up a
narrow cow-path into the high grass along a fence. Then up the narrow
cow-path, on all fours, just like another turtle, I paddled, and into
the high wet grass along the fence.

“I kept well within sound of her, for she moved recklessly, leaving a
wide trail of flattened grass behind. I wanted to stand up,--and I
don’t believe I could have turned her back with a rail,--but I was
afraid if she saw me that she might return indefinitely to the pond;
so on I went, flat to the ground, squeezing through the lower rails of
the fence, as if the field beyond were a melon-patch. It was nothing
of the kind, only a wild, uncomfortable pasture, full of dewberry
vines, and very discouraging. They were excessively wet vines and
briery. I pulled my coat-sleeves as far over my fists as I could get
them, and with the tin pail of sand swinging from between my teeth to
avoid noise, I stumped fiercely, but silently, on after the turtle.

[Illustration: “TAIL FIRST, BEGAN TO BURY HERSELF”]

“She was laying her course, I thought, straight down the length of
this dreadful pasture, when, not far from the fence, she suddenly hove
to, warped herself short about, and came back, barely clearing me. I
warped about, too, and in her wake bore down across the corner of the
pasture, across the powdery public road, and on to a fence along a
field of young corn.

“I was somewhat wet by this time, but not so wet as I had been before
wallowing through the deep, dry dust of the road. Hurrying up behind a
large tree by the fence, I peered down the corn-rows and saw the
turtle stop, and begin to paw about in the loose, soft soil. She was
going to lay!

“I held on to the tree and watched, as she tried this place, and that
place, and the other place. But _the_ place, evidently, was hard to
find. What could a female turtle do with a whole field of possible
nests to choose from? Then at last she found it, and, whirling about,
she backed quickly at it and, tail first, began to bury herself before
my staring eyes.

“Those were not the supreme moments of my life; perhaps those moments
came later that day; but those certainly were among the slowest, most
dreadfully mixed of moments that I ever experienced. They were hours
long. There she was, her shell just showing, like some old hulk in the
sand alongshore. And how long would she stay there? and how should I
know if she had laid an egg?

“I could still wait. And so I waited, when, over the freshly awakened
fields, floated four mellow strokes from the distant town clock.

“Four o’clock! Why there was no train until seven! No train for three
hours! The eggs would spoil! Then with a rush it came over me that
this was Sunday morning, and there was no regular seven o’clock
train,--none till after nine.

“I think I should have fainted had not the turtle just then begun
crawling off. I was weak and dizzy; but there, there in the sand, were
the eggs! and Agassiz! and the great book! Why, I cleared the
fence--and the forty miles that lay between me and Cambridge--at a
single jump! He should have them, trains or no. Those eggs should go
to Agassiz by seven o’clock, if I had to gallop every mile of the way.
Forty miles! Any horse could cover it in three hours, if he had to;
and, upsetting the astonished turtle, I scooped out her long white
eggs.

“On a bed of sand in the bottom of the pail I laid them, with what
care my trembling fingers allowed; filled in between them with more
sand; so with layer after layer to the rim; and covering all smoothly
with more sand, I ran back for my horse.

“That horse knew, as well as I, that the turtles had laid, and that he
was to get those eggs to Agassiz. He turned out of that field into the
road on two wheels, a thing he had not done for twenty years, doubling
me up before the dashboard, the pail of eggs miraculously lodged
between my knees.

“I let him out. If only he could keep this pace all the way to
Cambridge!--or even halfway there, I would have time to finish the
trip on foot. I shouted him on, holding to the dasher with one hand,
holding the pail of eggs with the other, not daring to get off my
knees, though the bang on them, as we pounded down the wood-road, was
terrific. But nothing must happen to the eggs; they must not be
jarred, or even turned over in the sand before they came to Agassiz.

“In order to get out on the pike it was necessary to drive back away
from Boston toward the town. We had nearly covered the distance, and
were rounding a turn from the woods into the open fields, when, ahead
of me, at the station it seemed, I heard the quick, sharp whistle of a
locomotive.

“What did it mean? Then followed the _puff, puff, puff_, of a starting
train. But what train? Which way going? And jumping to my feet for a
longer view, I pulled into a side road that paralleled the track, and
headed hard for the station.

“We reeled along. The station was still out of sight, but from behind
the bushes that shut it from view, rose the smoke of a moving engine.
It was perhaps a mile away, but we were approaching, head on, and,
topping a little hill, I swept down upon a freight train, the black
smoke pouring from the stack, as the mighty creature pulled itself
together for its swift run down the rails.

“My horse was on the gallop, following the track, and going straight
toward the coming train. The sight of it almost maddened me--the bare
thought of it, on the road to Boston! On I went; on it came, a half--a
quarter of a mile between us, when suddenly my road shot out along an
unfenced field with only a level stretch of sod between me and the
engine.

“With a pull that lifted the horse from his feet, I swung him into the
field and sent him straight as an arrow for the track. That train
should carry me and my eggs to Boston!

“The engineer pulled the whistle. He saw me stand up in the rig, saw
my hat blow off, saw me wave my arms, saw the tin pail swing in my
teeth, and he jerked out a succession of sharp Halts! But it was he
who should halt, not I; and on we went, the horse with a flounder
landing the carriage on top of the track.

“The train was already grinding to a stop; but before it was near a
standstill, I had backed off the track, jumped out, and, running down
the rails with the astonished engineers gaping at me, had swung aboard
the cab.

“They offered no resistance; they hadn’t had time. Nor did they have
the disposition, for I looked strange, not to say dangerous. Hatless,
dew-soaked, smeared with yellow mud, and holding, as if it were a baby
or a bomb, a little tin pail of sand!

“‘Crazy,’ the fireman muttered, looking to the engineer for his cue.

“I had been crazy, perhaps, but I was not crazy now.

“‘Throw her wide open,’ I commanded. ‘Wide open! These are fresh
turtle eggs for Professor Agassiz of Cambridge. He must have them
before breakfast.’

“Then they knew I was crazy, and, evidently thinking it best to humor
me, threw the throttle wide open, and away we went.

“I kissed my hand to the horse, grazing unconcernedly in the open
field, and gave a smile to my crew. That was all I could give them,
and hold myself and the eggs together. But the smile was enough. And
they smiled through their smut at me, though one of them held fast to
his shovel, while the other kept his hand upon a big ugly wrench.
Neither of them spoke to me, but above the roar of the swaying engine
I caught enough of their broken talk to understand that they were
driving under a full head of steam, with the intention of handing me
over to the Boston police, as perhaps the safest way of disposing of
me.

“I was only afraid that they would try it at the next station. But
that station whizzed past without a bit of slack, and the next, and
the next; when it came over me that this was the through freight,
which should have passed in the night, and was making up lost time.

“Only the fear of the shovel and the wrench kept me from shaking hands
with both men at this discovery. But I beamed at them; and they at me.
I was enjoying it. The unwonted jar beneath my feet was wrinkling my
diaphragm with spasms of delight. And the fireman beamed at the
engineer, with a look that said, ‘See the lunatic grin; he likes it!’

“He did like it. How the iron wheels sang to me as they took the
rails! How the rushing wind in my ears sang to me! From my stand on
the fireman’s side of the cab I could catch a glimpse of the track
just ahead of the engine, where the ties seemed to leap into the
throat of the mile-devouring monster. The joy of it! of seeing space
swallowed by the mile!

“I shifted the eggs from hand to hand and thought of my horse, of
Agassiz, of the great book, of my great luck,--luck,--luck,--until the
multitudinous tongues of the thundering train were all chiming ‘luck!
luck! luck!’ They knew! they understood! This beast of fire and
tireless wheels was doing its best to get the eggs to Agassiz!

“We swung out past the Blue Hills, and yonder flashed the morning sun
from the towering dome of the State House. I might have leaped from
the cab and run the rest of the way on foot, had I not caught the eye
of the engineer watching me narrowly. I was not in Boston yet, nor in
Cambridge either. I was an escaped lunatic, who had held up a train,
and forced it to carry me from Middleboro to Boston.

“Perhaps I had overdone the lunacy business. Suppose these two men
should take it into their heads to turn me over to the police, whether
I would or no? I could never explain the case in time to get the eggs
to Agassiz. I looked at my watch. There were still a few minutes left
in which I might explain to these men, who, all at once, had become my
captors. But how explain? Nothing could avail against my actions, my
appearance, and my little pail of sand.

“I had not thought of my appearance before. Here I was, face and
clothes caked with yellow mud, my hair wild and matted, my hat gone,
and in my full-grown hands a tiny tin pail of sand, as if I had been
digging all night with a tiny tin shovel on the shore! And thus to
appear in the decent streets of Boston of a Sunday morning!

“I began to _feel_ like a lunatic. The situation was serious, or
might be, and rather desperately funny at its best. I must in some way
have shown my new fears, for both men watched me more sharply.

“Suddenly, as we were nearing the outer freight-yard, the train slowed
down and came to a stop. I was ready to jump, but still I had no
chance. They had nothing to do, apparently, but to guard me. I looked
at my watch again. What time we had made! It was only six o’clock,--a
whole hour left in which to get to Cambridge!

“But I didn’t like this delay. Five minutes--ten--went by.

“‘Gentlemen,’ I began, but was cut short by an express train coming
past. We were moving again, on--into a siding--on to the main
track--on with a bump and a crash and a succession of crashes, running
the length of the train--on, on at a turtle’s pace, but on,--when the
fireman, quickly jumping for the bell-rope, left the way to the step
free, and--

“I never touched the step, but landed in the soft sand at the side of
the track, and made a line for the freight-yard fence.

“There was no hue or cry. I glanced over my shoulder to see if they
were after me. Evidently their hands were full, or they didn’t know I
had gone.

“But I had gone; and was ready to drop over the high board-fence, when
it occurred to me that I might drop into a policeman’s arms. Hanging
my pail in a splint on top of a post, I peered cautiously over--a
very wise thing to do before you jump a high board-fence. There,
crossing the open square toward the station, was a big, burly fellow
with a club--looking for me!

“I flattened for a moment, when some one in the freight-yard yelled at
me. I preferred the policeman, and, grabbing my pail, I slid softly
over to the street. The policeman moved on past the corner of the
station out of sight. The square was free, and yonder stood a cab.

“Time was flying now. Here was the last lap. The cabman saw me coming,
and squared away. I waved a dollar-bill at him, but he only stared the
more. A dollar can cover a good deal, but I was too much for one
dollar. I pulled out another, thrust them both at him, and dodged into
the cab, calling, ‘Cambridge!’

“He would have taken me straight to the police-station, had I not
said, ‘Harvard College. Professor Agassiz’s house! I’ve got eggs for
Agassiz,’ pushing another dollar up at him through the hole.

“It was nearly half past six.

“‘Let him go!’ I ordered. ‘Here’s another dollar if you make Agassiz’s
house in twenty minutes. Let him out; never mind the police!’

“He evidently knew the police, or there were none around at that time
on a Sunday morning. We went down the sleeping streets, as I had gone
down the wood-roads from the pond two hours before, but with the
rattle and crash now of a fire brigade. Whirling a corner into
Cambridge Street, we took the bridge at a gallop, the driver shouting
out something in Hibernian to a pair of waving arms and a belt and
brass buttons.

“Across the bridge with a rattle and jolt that put the eggs in
jeopardy, and on over the cobble-stones, we went. Half standing, to
lessen the jar, I held the pail in one hand and held myself in the
other, not daring to let go even to look at my watch.

“But I was afraid to look at the watch. I was afraid to see how near
to seven o’clock it might be. The sweat was dropping down my nose, so
close was I running to the limit of my time.

“Suddenly there was a lurch, and I dived forward, ramming my head into
the front of the cab, coming up with a rebound that landed me across
the small of my back on the seat, and sent half of my pail of eggs
helter-skelter over the floor.

“We had stopped. Here was Agassiz’s house; and without taking time to
pick up the eggs that were scattered, I jumped out with my pail and
pounded at the door.

“No one was astir in the house. But I would stir some one. And I did.
Right in the midst of the racket the door opened. It was the maid.

“‘Agassiz,’ I gasped, ‘I want Professor Agassiz, quick!’ And I pushed
by her into the hall.

“‘Go ’way, sir. I’ll call the police. Professor Agassiz is in bed. Go
’way, sir!’

“‘Call him--Agassiz--instantly, or I’ll call him myself.’

“But I didn’t; for just then a door overhead was flung open, a great
white-robed figure appeared on the dim landing above, and a quick loud
voice called excitedly,--

“‘Let him in! Let him in. I know him. He has my turtle eggs!’

“And the apparition, slipperless, and clad in anything but an academic
gown, came sailing down the stairs.

“The maid fled. The great man, his arms extended, laid hold of me with
both hands, and dragging me and my precious pail into his study, with
a swift, clean stroke laid open one of the eggs, as the watch in my
trembling hands ticked its way to seven--as if nothing unusual were
happening to the history of the world.”




CHAPTER XII

AN ACCOUNT WITH NATURE


There were chipmunks everywhere. The stone walls squeaked with them.
At every turn, from early spring to early autumn, a chipmunk was
scurrying away from me. Chipmunks were common. They did no particular
harm, no particular good; they did nothing in particular, being only
chipmunks and common, or so I thought, until one morning (it was
June-bug time) when I stopped and watched a chipmunk that sat atop the
stone wall down in the orchard. He was eating, and the shells of his
meal lay in a little pile upon the big flat stone which served as his
table.

They were acorn-shells, I thought; yet June seemed rather late in the
season for acorns, and, looking closer, I discovered that the pile was
entirely composed of June-bug shells--wings and hollow bodies of the
pestiferous beetles!

Well, well! I had never seen this before, never even heard of it.
Chipmunk, a _useful_ member of society! actually eating bugs in this
bug-ridden world of mine! This was interesting and important. Why, I
had really never known Chipmunk, after all!

So I hadn’t. He had always been too common. Flying squirrels were
more worth while, because there were none on the farm. Now, however, I
determined to cultivate the acquaintance of Chipmunk, for there might
be other discoveries awaiting me. And there were.

A narrow strip of grass separated the orchard and my garden-patch. It
was on my way to the garden that I most often stopped to watch this
chipmunk, or rather the pair of them, in the orchard wall. June
advanced, the beetles disappeared, and the two chipmunks in the wall
were now seven, the young ones almost as large as their parents, and
both young and old on the best of terms with me.

For the first time in four years there were prospects of good
strawberries. Most of my small patch was given over to a new variety,
one that I had originated; and I was waiting with an eagerness which
was almost anxiety for the earliest berries.

I had put a little stick beside each of the three big berries that
were reddening first (though I could have walked from the house
blindfolded and picked them). I might have had the biggest of the
three on June 7th, but for the sake of the flavor I thought it best to
wait another day. On the 8th I went down to get it. The big berry was
gone, and so was one of the others, while only half of the third was
left on the vine!

Gardening has its disappointments, its seasons of despair--and wrath,
too. Had a toad showed himself at that moment, he might have fared
badly, for more than likely, I thought, it was he who had stolen my
berries. On the garden wall sat a friendly chipmunk eying me
sympathetically.

[Illustration: CHIPMUNK EATING JUNE-BUGS]

A few days later several fine berries were ripe, and I was again on my
way to the garden when I passed the chipmunks in the orchard. A
shining red spot among the vine-covered stones of their wall brought
me to a stop. For an instant I thought that it was my rose-breasted
grosbeak, and that I was about to get a clew to its nest. Then up to
the slab where he ate the June-bugs scrambled the chipmunk, and the
rose-red spot on the breast of the supposed grosbeak dissolved into a
big scarlet-red strawberry. And by its long wedge shape I knew it was
one of my new variety.

I hurried across to the patch and found every berry gone, while a line
of bloody fragments led me back to the orchard wall, where a
half-dozen fresh calyx crowns completed my second discovery.

No, it did not complete it. It took a little watching to find out that
the whole family--all seven!--were after those berries. They were
picking them half ripe, even, and actually storing them away, canning
them, down in the cavernous depths of the stone-pile!

Alarmed? Yes, and I was wrathful, too. The taste for strawberries is
innate, original; you can’t be human without it. But joy in chipmunks
is a cultivated liking. What chance in such a circumstance has the
nature-lover with the human man? What shadow of doubt as to his choice
between the chipmunks and the strawberries?

I had no gun and no time to go over to my neighbor’s to borrow his. So
I stationed myself near by with a fistful of stones, and waited for
the thieves to show themselves. I came so near to hitting one of them
with a stone that the sweat started all over me. After that there was
no danger. I had lost my nerve. The little scamps knew that war had
been declared, and they hid and dodged and sighted me so far off that
even with a gun I should have been all summer killing the seven of
them.

Meantime, a good rain and the warm June days were turning the berries
red by the quart. They had more than caught up to the chipmunks. I
dropped my stones and picked. The chipmunks picked, too; so did the
toads and the robins. Everybody picked. It was free for all. We picked
them and ate them, jammed them, and canned them. I almost carried some
over to my neighbor, but took peas instead.

The strawberry season closed on the Fourth of July; and our taste was
not dimmed, nor our natural love for strawberries abated; but all four
of the small boys had hives from over-indulgence, so bountifully did
Nature provide, so many did the seven chipmunks leave us!

Peace between me and the chipmunks had been signed before the
strawberry season closed, and the pact still holds. Other things have
occurred since to threaten it, however. Among them, an article in a
recent number of an out-of-door magazine, of wide circulation. Herein
the chipmunk family was most roundly rated, in fact condemned to
annihilation because of its wicked taste for birds’ eggs and for the
young birds. Numerous photographs accompanied the article, showing the
red squirrel with eggs in his mouth, but no such proof (even the red
squirrel photographs, I strongly believe, were done from a _stuffed_
squirrel) of Chipmunk’s guilt, though he was counted equally bad and,
doubtless, will suffer with Chickaree at the hands of those who have
taken the article seriously.

I believe that would be a great mistake. Indeed, I believe the article
a deliberate falsehood, concocted in order to sell the made-up
photographs. Chipmunk is not an egg-sucker, else I should have found
it out. But of course that does not mean that no one else has found it
out. It does mean, however, that if Chipmunk robs at all he does it so
seldom as to call for no alarm or retribution.

There is scarcely a day in the nesting-season when I fail to see half
a dozen chipmunks about the walls, yet I have never noticed one even
suspiciously near a bird’s nest. In an apple tree, scarcely six jumps
from the home of the family in the orchard wall, a brood of tree
swallows came to wing this spring; while robins, chippies, and
red-eyed vireos--not to mention a cowbird, which I wish they had
devoured--have also hatched and flown away from nests that these
squirrels might easily have rifled.

It is not often that one comes upon even the red squirrel in the very
act of robbing a nest. But the black snake, the glittering fiend! and
the dear house cats! If I run across a dozen black snakes in the early
summer, it is safe to say that six of them are discovered to me by the
cries of the birds that they are robbing. So is it with the cats. No
creature larger than a June-bug, however, is often distressed by a
chipmunk. In a recent letter to me Mr. Burroughs says:--

“No, I never knew the chipmunk to suck or destroy eggs of any kind,
and I have never heard of any well-authenticated instance of his doing
so. The red squirrel is the sinner in this respect, and probably the
gray squirrel also.”

It will be difficult to find a true bill against him. Were the
evidence all in, I believe that instead of a culprit we should find
Chipmunk a useful citizen. Does not that pile of June-bug bodies on
the flat stone leave me still in debt to him? He may err occasionally,
and may, on occasion, make a nuisance of himself--but so do my four
small boys, bless them! And, well,--who doesn’t? When a family of
chipmunks, which you have fed all summer on the veranda, take up their
winter quarters inside the closed cabin, and chew up your quilts,
hammocks, table-cloths, and whatever else there is of chewable
properties, then they are anathema.

The havoc certain chipmunks in the mountains once made among our
possessions was dreadful. But instead of exterminating them root and
branch, a big box was prepared the next summer and lined with tin, in
which the linen was successfully wintered.

But how real was the loss, after all? Here was a rough log cabin on
the side of Thorn Mountain. What sort of table-cloth ought to be found
in such a cabin, if not one that has been artistically chewed by
chipmunks? Is it for fine linen that we take to the woods in summer?
The chipmunks are well worth a table-cloth now and then--well worth,
besides these, all the strawberries and all the oats they can steal
from my small patch.

Only it isn’t stealing. Since I ceased throwing stones and began to
watch the chipmunks carefully, I do not find that their manner is in
the least the manner of thieves. They do not act as if they were
taking what they have no right to. For who has told Chipmunk to earn
his oats in the sweat of his brow? No one. Instead, he seems to
understand that he is one of the innumerable factors ordained to make
me sweat--a good and wholesome experience for me so long as I get the
necessary oats.

And I get them, in spite of the chipmunks, though I don’t like to
guess at the quantity of oats they have carried off--anywhere, I
should say, from a peck to a bushel, which they have stored as they
tried to store the berries, somewhere in the big recesses of the stone
wall.

All this, however, is beside the point. It isn’t a case of oats and
berries against June-bugs. You don’t haggle with Nature after that
fashion. The farm is not a market-place where you get exactly what you
pay for. You must spend on the farm all you have of time and strength
and brains; but you must not expect in return merely your money’s
worth. Infinitely more than that, and oftentimes less. Farming is like
virtue,--its own reward. It pays the man who loves it, no matter how
short the crop of oats and corn.

So it is with Chipmunk. Perhaps his books don’t balance--a few
June-bugs short on the credit side. What then? It isn’t mere bugs and
berries, as I have just suggested, but stone-piles. What is the
difference in value to me between a stone-pile with a chipmunk in it
and one without. Just the difference, relatively speaking, between the
house with my four boys in it, and the house without.

Chipmunk, with his sleek, round form, his rich color and his stripes,
is the daintiest, most beautiful of all our squirrels. He is one of
the friendliest of my tenants, too, friendlier even than the
friendliest of my birds--Chickadee. The two are very much alike in
spirit; but however tame and confiding Chickadee may become, he is
still a bird and belongs to a different and, despite his wings, lower
order of beings. Chickadee is often curious about me; he can be coaxed
to eat from my hand. Chipmunk is more than curious; he is interested;
and it is not crumbs that he wants, but friendship. He can be coaxed
to eat from my lips, sleep in my pocket, and even come to be stroked.

I have sometimes seen Chickadee in winter when he seemed to come to me
out of very need for living companionship. But in the flood-tide of
summer life Chipmunk will watch me from his stone-pile and tag me
along with every show of friendship.

The family in the orchard wall have grown very familiar. They flatter
me. One or another of them, sitting upon the high flat slab, sees me
coming. He sits on the very edge of the crack, to be truthful; and if
I take a single step aside toward him, he flips, and all there is left
of him is a little angry squeak from the depths of the stones. If,
however, I pass properly along, do not stop or make any sudden motion,
he sees me past, then usually follows me, especially if I get well off
and pause.

During a shower one day I halted under a large hickory just beyond his
den. He came running after me, so interested that he forgot to look to
his footing, and just opposite me slipped and bumped his nose hard
against a stone--so hard that he sat up immediately and vigorously
rubbed it. Another time he followed me across to the garden and on
until he came to the barbed-wire fence along the meadow. Here he
climbed a post and continued after me by way of the middle strand of
the wire, wriggling, twisting, even grabbing the barbs, in his efforts
to maintain his balance. He got midway between the posts, when the
sagging strand tripped him and he fell with a splash into a shallow
pool below. No, he did not drown, but his curiosity did get a ducking.

Did the family in the orchard wall stay together as a family for the
first summer? I should like to know. As late as August they all seemed
to be in the wall; for in August I cut my oats, and during this
harvest we all worked together.

I mowed the oats as soon as they began to yellow, cocking them to cure
for hay. It was necessary to let them “make” for six or seven days,
and all this time the chipmunks raced back and forth between the cocks
and the stone wall. They might have hidden their gleanings in a dozen
crannies nearer at hand; but evidently they had a particular
storehouse, near the home nest, where the family could get at their
provisions in bad weather without coming forth.

Had I removed the stones and dug out the nest, I should have found a
tunnel leading into the ground for a few feet and opening into a
chamber filled with a bulky grass nest--a bed capable of holding half
a dozen chipmunks--and, adjoining this, by a short passageway, the
storehouse of the oats.

How many trips they made between this crib and the oat-patch, how
many kernels they carried in their pouches at a trip, and how big a
pile they had when all the grains were in,--these are more of the
things I should like to know.

When the first frosts come, the family--if they are still a
family--seek the nest in the ground beneath the stone wall. But they
do not go to sleep immediately. Their outer entrances have not yet
been closed. There is still plenty of fresh air and, of course, plenty
of food--acorns, chestnuts, hickory-nuts, and oats. They doze quietly
for a time and then they eat, pushing the empty shells and hulls into
some side passage prepared beforehand to receive the débris.

But soon the frost is creeping down through the stones and earth
overhead, the rains are filling the outer doorways and shutting off
the supply of fresh air; and one day, though not sound sleepers, the
family cuddle down and forget to wake entirely until the frost has
begun to creep back toward the surface, and in through the softened
soil is felt the thrill of the waking spring.




CHAPTER XIII

WOODS MEDICINE


The real watcher in the woods usually goes off by himself. He hates to
have anybody along; for Anybody wants to be moving all the time, and
Anybody wants to be talking all the time, and Anybody wants to be
finding a circus, or a zoo, or a natural history museum in the middle
of the woods, else Anybody wishes he had stayed at home or gone to the
ball-game.

Now I always say to Mr. Anybody when he asks me to take him into the
woods, “Yes, come along, if you can stand stock-still for an hour,
without budging; if you can keep stock-still for an hour, without
talking; if you can get as excited watching two tumble-bugs trying to
roll their ball up hill, as you do watching nine baseball men trying
to bat their ball about a field.”

The doctor pulled a small blankbook out of his vest pocket, scribbled
something in Latin and Chinese (at least it looked like Chinese), and
then at the bottom wrote in English, “Take one teaspoonful every
hour”; and, tearing off the leaf, handed it to the patient. It was a
prescription for some sort of medicine.

Now I am going to give you a prescription,--for some woods
medicine,--a magic dose that will cure you of blindness and deafness
and clumsy-footedness, that will cause you to see things and hear
things and think things in the woods that you have never thought or
heard or seen in the woods before. Here is the prescription:--

    WOOD CHUCK, M. D.,

     MULLEIN HILL.


     Office Hours: 5.30 A.M. until Breakfast.


     Rx: No moving for one hour.... No talking for one hour.... No
     dreaming or thumb-twiddling the while....

     _Sig_: The dose to be taken from the top of a stump with a bit
     of sassafras bark or a nip of Indian turnip every time you go
     into the woods.


     WOOD CHUCK.

I know that this compound will cure if you begin taking it early
enough--along, I should say, from the Fifth to the Eighth Grades. It
is a very difficult dose to take at any age, but it is almost
impossible for grown-ups to swallow it; for they have so many things
to do, or think they have, that they can’t sit still a whole hour
anywhere--a terrible waste of time! And then they have been talking
for so many years that to stop for a whole hour might--kill them, who
knows! And they have been working nervously with their hands so long
that their thumbs will twiddle, and to sleep they will go the minute
they sit down, in spite of themselves. It is no use to give this
medicine to grown-ups. They are what Dr. Wood Chuck calls
“chronics”--hopeless hurriers who will never sit down upon a stump,
who, when the Golden Chariot comes for them, will stand up and drive
all the way to heaven.

However, I am not giving this medicine to grown-ups, but to you. Of
course you will make a bad face over it, too; for, young or old, it is
hard to sit still and even harder to keep still--I mean not to talk. I
have closely watched four small boys these several years now, and I
never knew one of them to sit still for a whole hour _at home_--not
once in his whole life! And as for his tongue! he might tuck that into
his cheek, hold it down between his teeth, crowd it back behind his
fist--no matter. The tongue is an unruly member. But let these four
boys get into the woods, and every small pale-face of them turns
Indian instinctively, tip-toeing up and down the ridges with lips as
close-sealed as if some finger of the forest were laid upon them. So
it must be with you when you enter the fields and woods.

The wood-born people are all light-footed and cautious in their
stirring. Only the box turtles scuff carelessly along; and that is
because they can shut themselves up--head, paws, tail--inside their
lidded shells, and defy their enemies.

The skunk, however, is sometimes careless in his going; for he knows
that he will neither be crowded nor jostled along the street, so he
naturally behaves as if all the woods were his. Yet, how often do you
come upon a skunk? Seldom--because, he is quite as unwilling to meet
you as you are to meet him; but as one of your little feet makes as
much noise in the leaves as all four of his, he hears you coming and
turns quietly down some alley or in at some burrow and allows you to
pass on.

Louder than your step in the woods is the sound of your voice. Perhaps
there is no other noise so far-reaching, so alarming, so silencing in
the woods as the human voice. When your tongue begins, all the other
tongues cease. Songs stop as by the snap of a violin string;
chatterings cease; whisperings end--mute are the woods and empty as a
tomb, except the wind be moving aloft in the trees.

Three things all the animals can do supremely well: they can hear
well; they can see motion well; they can wait well.

If you would know how well an animal can wait, scare Dr. Wood Chuck
into his office, then sit down outside and wait for him to come out.
It would be a rare and interesting thing for you to do. No one has
ever done it yet, I believe! Establish a world’s record for keeping
still! But you should scare him in at the beginning of your summer
vacation so as to be sure you have all the waiting-time the state
allows: for you may have to leave the hole in September and go back to
school.

When the doctor wrote the prescription for this medicine, “No moving
for an hour,” he was giving you a very small, a homeopathic dose of
patience, as you can see; for _an hour_ at a time, every wood-watcher
knows, will often be only a waste of time, unless followed
immediately by another hour of the same.

On the road to the village one day, I passed a fox-hunter sitting atop
an old stump. It was about seven o’clock in the morning.

“Hello, Will!” I called, “been out all night?”

“No, got here ’bout an hour ago,” he replied.

I drove on and, returning near noon, found Will still atop the stump.

“Had a shot yet?” I called.

“No, the dogs brought him down ’tother side the brook, and carried him
over to the Shanty field.”

About four o’clock that afternoon I was hurrying down to the station,
and there was Will atop that same stump.

“Got him yet?” I called.

“No, dogs are fetching him over the Quarries now”--and I was out of
hearing.

It was growing dark when I returned; but there was Will Hall atop the
stump. I drew up in the road.

“Grown fast to that stump, Will?” I called. “Want me to try to pull
you off?”

“No, not yet,” he replied, jacking himself painfully to his feet.
“Chillin’ up some, ain’t it?” he added shaking himself. “Might’s well
go home, I guess”--when from the direction of Young’s Meadows came the
eager voice of his dogs; and, waving me on, he got quickly back atop
the stump, his gun ready across his knees.

I was nearly home when, through the muffle of the darkening woods, I
heard the quick _bang! bang!_ of Will’s gun.

Yes, he got him, a fine red fox. And speaking to me about it one day,
he said,--

“There’s a lot more to sittin’ still than most folks thinks. The
trouble is, most folks in the woods can’t stand the monopoly of it.”

Will’s English needs touching up in spots; but he can show the
professors a great many things about the ways of the woods.

And now what does the doctor mean by “No dreaming or thumb-twiddling”
in the woods? Just this: that not only must you be silent and
motionless for hours at a time, but you must also be alert--watchful,
keen, ready to take a hint, to question, guess, and interpret. The
fields and woods are not full of life, but full only of the sounds,
shadows, and signs of life.

You are atop of your stump, when over the ridge you hear a slow, quiet
rustle in the dead leaves--a skunk; then a slow, _loud_ rustle--a
turtle; then a _quick_, loud--_one-two-three_--rustle--a chewink; then
a tiny, rapid rustle--a mouse; then a long, rasping rustle--a snake;
then a measured, galloping rustle--a squirrel; then a light-heavy,
hop-thump rustle--a rabbit; then--and not once have you seen the
rustlers in the leaves beyond the ridge; and not once have you stirred
from your stump.

Perhaps this understanding of the leaf-sounds might be called
“interpretation”; but before you can interpret them, you must hear
them; and no dozing, dreaming, fuddling sitter upon a stump has ears
to hear.

As you sit there, you notice a blue jay perched silent and unafraid
directly over you--not an ordinary, common way for a blue jay to act.
“Why?” you ask. Why, a nest, of course, somewhere near! Or, suddenly
round and round the trunk of a large oak tree whirls a hummingbird.
“Queer,” you say. Then up she goes--and throwing your eye ahead of her
through the tree-tops you chance to intercept her bee-line flight--a
hint! She is probably gathering lichens for a nest which she is
building somewhere near, in the direction of her flight. A whirl! a
flash!--as quick as light! You have a wonderful story!

Now do not get the impression that all one needs to do in order to
become acquainted with the life of the woods is to sit on a
stump a long time, say nothing, and listen hard. All that is
necessary--rather, the ability to do it is necessary; but in the woods
or out it is also necessary to exercise common sense. Guess, for
instance, when guessing is all that you can do. You will learn more,
however, and learn it faster, generally, by following it up, than by
sitting on a stump and guessing about it.

At twilight, in the late spring and early summer, we frequently hear
a gentle, tremulous call from the woods or from below in the orchard.
“What is it?” I had been asked a hundred times, and as many times had
guessed that it might be the hen partridge clucking to her brood; or
else I had replied that it made me think of the mate-call of a coon,
or that I half inclined to believe it the cry of the woodchucks, or
that possibly it might be made by the owls. In fact, I didn’t know the
peculiar call, and year after year I kept guessing at it.

We were seated one evening on the porch listening to the
whip-poor-wills, when some one said, “There’s your woodchuck
singing again.” Sure enough, there sounded the tremulous
woodchuck-partridge-owl-coon cry. I slipped down through the birches
determined at last to know that cry and stop guessing about it, if I
had to follow it all night.

The moon was high and full, the footing almost noiseless, and
everything so quiet that I quickly located the clucking sounds as
coming from the orchard. I came out of the birches into the wood-road,
and was crossing the open field to the orchard, when something dropped
with a swish and a vicious clacking close upon my head. I jumped from
under my hat, almost,--and saw the screech owl swoop softly up into
the nearest apple tree. Instantly she turned toward me and uttered the
gentle purring cluck that I had been guessing at so hard for at least
three years. And even while I looked at her, I saw in the tree
beyond, silhouetted against the moonlit sky, two round bunches,--young
owls evidently,--which were the explanation of the calls. These two,
and another young one, were found in the orchard the following day.

I rejoined the guessers on the porch and gave them the satisfying
fact, but only after two or three years of guessing about it. I had
laughed once at some of my friends over on the other road who had
bolted their front door and had gone out of the door at the side of
the house for precisely twenty-one years because the key in the
front-door lock wouldn’t work. They were intending to have it fixed,
but the children being little kept them busy; then the children grew
up, and of course kept them busier; got married at last and left
home--all but one daughter. Still the locksmith was not called to fix
that front door. One day this unmarried daughter, in a fit of
impatience, got at that door herself, and found that the key had been
inserted just twenty-one years before--_upside down_!

There I had sat on the porch--on a stump, let us say, and guessed
about it. Truly, my key to this mystery had been left long in the
lock, upside down, while I had been going in and out by the side door.

No, you must _go_ into the fields and woods, go deep and far and
frequently, with eyes and ears and all your souls alert!

INTRODUCTION                                      ix
       I. THE SUMMER AFIELD                            1
      II. THE WILD ANIMALS AT PLAY                     9
     III. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO SEE THIS SUMMER      18
      IV. THE COYOTE OF PELICAN POINT                 27
       V. FROM T WHARF TO FRANKLIN FIELD              39
      VI. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO HEAR THIS SUMMER     46
     VII. THE SEA-BIRDS’ HOME                         57
    VIII. THE MOTHER MURRE                            65
      IX. MOTHER CAREY’S CHICKENS                     79
       X. RIDING THE RIM ROCK                         88
      XI. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO DO THIS SUMMER      100
     XII. THE “CONY”                                 112
          NOTES AND SUGGESTIONS                      123



    ILLUSTRATIONS


    A SUMMER EVENING--BLACK-CROWNED NIGHT HERONS        _Frontispiece_
    RED CLOVER AND BUMBLEBEE                                         4
    RED SALAMANDER, OLD AND YOUNG                                    7
    NEWTS                                                            7
    HIPPOPOTAMUS--“IT WAS HIS GAME OF SOLITAIRE”                     9
    THE OTTER AND HIS SLIDE                                         12
    “FOLLOW MY LEADER”                                              14
    BUTTERFLIES AT PLAY--“WHIRLING OVER MT. HOOD’S POINTED PEAK”    16
    RUBY-THROATED HUMMINGBIRD AND NEST                              20
    ORCHIDS                                                         22
    YOUNG COWBIRD IN VIREO’S NEST                                   25
    COYOTE--“WHAT A SHOT!”                                          28
    ARGIOPE, THE MEADOW SPIDER                                      44
    CICADA--“DOG-DAYS-Z-Z-Z-Z-Z-Z-Z”                                48
    “THE BATS FLITTING AND WAVERING ABOUT”                          49
    RED-EYED VIREO--“DO YOU BELIEVE IT?”                            52
    TUFTED PUFFINS                                                  59
    BRANDT’S CORMORANT                                              63
    A MOTHER SPIDER WITH HER SACK OF EGGS                           67
    THE FATHER STICKLEBACK ON GUARD                                 68
    CALIFORNIA MURRE--“WITH THREATENING BEAK WATCHED THE TWO MEN
        COME ON”                                                    75
    PETRELS--“SKIMMING THE HEAVING SEA LIKE SWALLOWS”               80
    RIDING THE RIM ROCK--“NECK AND NECK WITH A BIG WHITE STEER”     97
    SASSAFRAS                                                      105
    DEADLY NIGHTSHADE                                              106
    POISON SUMACH                                                  107
    POISON IVY                                                     108
    VIRGINIA CREEPER                                               109
    THE DEADLY MUSHROOMS                                           110
    POKE BERRIES                                                   111
    THE CONY, OR PIKA                                              116




INTRODUCTION


In this fourth and last volume of these outdoor books I have taken you
into the summer fields and, shall I hope? left you there. After all,
what better thing could I do? And as I leave you there, let me say one
last serious word concerning the purpose of such books as these and
the large subject of nature-study in general.

I believe that a child’s interest in outdoor life is a kind of hunger,
as natural as his interest in bread and butter. He cannot live on
bread and butter alone, but he ought not to try to live without them.
He cannot be educated on nature-study alone, but he ought not to be
educated without it. To learn to obey and reason and feel--these are
the triple ends of education, and the greatest of these is to learn to
feel. The teacher’s word for obedience; the arithmetic for reasoning;
and for feeling, for the cultivation of the imagination, for the power
to respond quickly and deeply, give the child the out-of-doors.

“If I could teach my Rugby boys but one thing,” said Dr. Arnold, “that
one thing should be poetry.” Why? Because poetry draws out the
imagination, quickens and refines and deepens the emotions. The first
great source of poetry is Nature. Give the child poetry; and give him
the inspiration of the poem, the teacher of the poet--give him
Nature. Make a poet of the child, who is already a poet born.

How can so essential, so fundamental a need become a mere fad of
education? A child wants first to eat, then to play, then he wants to
know--particularly he wants to know the animals. And he does know an
elephant from a kangaroo long before he knows a Lincoln from a
Napoleon; just so he wants to go to the woods long before he asks to
visit a library.

The study of the ant in the school-yard walk, the leaves on the
school-yard trees, the clouds over the school-house roof, the sights,
sounds, odors coming in at the school-room windows, these are
essential studies for art and letters, to say nothing of life.

And this is the way serious men and women think about it. Captain
Scott, dying in the Antarctic snows, wrote in his last letter to his
wife: “Make our boy interested in natural history if you can. It is
better than games. Keep him in the open air.”

I hope that these four volumes may help to interest you in natural
history, that they may be the means of taking you into the open air of
the fields many times the seasons through.

    DALLAS LORE SHARP.
    MULLEIN HILL, February, 1914.




SUMMER




CHAPTER I

THE SUMMER AFIELD


The word summer, being interpreted, means vacation; and vacation,
being interpreted, means--so many things that I have not space in this
book to name them. Yet how can there be a vacation without mountains,
or seashore, or the fields, or the forests--days out of doors? My
ideal vacation would have to be spent in the open; and this book, the
larger part of it, is the record of one of my summer vacations--the
vacation of the summer of 1912. That was an ideal vacation, and along
with my account of it I wish to give you some hints on how to make the
most of your summer chance to tramp the fields and woods.

For the real lover of nature is a tramp; not the kind of tramp that
walks the railroad-ties and carries his possessions in a tomato-can,
but one who follows the cow-paths to the fields, who treads the
rabbit-roads in the woods, watching the ways of the wild things that
dwell in the tree-tops, and in the deepest burrows under ground.

Do not tell anybody, least of all yourself, that you love the
out-of-doors, unless you have your own path to the woods, your own
cross-cut to the pond, your own particular huckleberry-patch and
fishing-holes and friendships in the fields. The winds, the rain, the
stars, the green grass, even the birds and a multitude of other wild
folk try to meet you more than halfway, try to seek you out even in
the heart of the great city; but the great out-of-doors you must seek,
for it is not in books, nor in houses, nor in cities. It is out at the
end of the car-line or just beyond the back-yard fence, maybe--far
enough away, anyhow, to make it necessary for you to put on your
tramping shoes and with your good stout stick go forth.

You must learn to be a good tramper. You thought you learned how to
walk soon after you got out of the cradle, and perhaps you did, but
most persons only know how to hobble when they get into the unpaved
paths of the woods.

With stout, well-fitting shoes, broad in the toe and heel; light,
stout clothes that will not catch the briers, good bird-glasses, and a
bite of lunch against the noon, swing out on your _legs_; breathe to
the bottom of your lungs; balance your body on your hips, not on your
collar-bones, and, going leisurely, but not slowly (for crawling is
deadly dull), do ten miles up a mountain-side or through the brush;
and if at the end you feel like _eating up_ ten miles more, then you
may know that you can walk, can _tramp_, and are in good shape for the
summer.

In your tramping-kit you need: a pocket-knife; some string; a pair of
field-glasses; a botany-can or fish-basket on your back; and perhaps a
notebook. This is all and more than you need for every tramp. To these
things might be added a light camera. It depends upon what you go for.
I have been afield all my life and have never owned or used a camera.
But there are a good many things that I have never done. A camera may
add a world of interest to your summer, so if you find use for a
camera, don’t fail to make one a part of your tramping outfit.

After all, what you carry on your back or on your feet or in your
hands does not matter half so much as what you carry in your head and
heart--your eye, and spirit, and purpose. For instance, when you go
into the fields have some purpose in your going besides the indefinite
desire to get out of doors.

If you long for the wide sky and the wide winds and the wide slopes of
green, then that is a real and a definite desire. You want to get out,
OUT, OUT, because you have been shut _in_. Very good; for you will get
what you wish, what you go out to get. The point is this: always go
out for something. Never yawn and slouch out to the woods as you might
to the corner grocery store, because you don’t know how else to kill
time.

Go with some purpose; because you wish to visit some particular spot,
see some bird, find some flower, catch some--fish! Anything that takes
you into the open is good--ploughing, hoeing, chopping, fishing,
berrying, botanizing, tramping. The aimless person anywhere is a
failure, and he is sure to get lost in the woods!

It is a good plan to go frequently over the same fields, taking the
beaten path, watching for the familiar things, until you come to know
your haunt as thoroughly as the fox or the rabbit knows his. Don’t be
afraid of using up a particular spot. The more often you visit a place
the richer you will find it to be in interest for you.

Now, do not limit your interest and curiosity to any one kind of life
or to any set of things out of doors. Do not let your likes or your
prejudices interfere with your seeing the whole out-of-doors with all
its manifold life, for it is all interrelated, all related to you, all
of interest and meaning. The clover blossom and the bumblebee that
carries the fertilizing pollen are related; the bumblebee and the
mouse that eats up its grubs are related; and every one knows that
mice and cats are related; thus the clover, the bumblebee, the mouse,
the cat, and, finally, the farmer, are all so interrelated that if the
farmer keeps a cat, the cat will catch the mice, the mice cannot eat
the young bumblebees, the bumblebees can fertilize the clover, and the
clover can make seed. So if the farmer wants clover seed to sow down a
new field with, he must keep a cat.

I think it is well for you to have some one thing in which you are
particularly interested. It may be flowers or birds or shells or
minerals. But as the whole is greater than any of its parts, so a love
and knowledge of nature, of the earth and the sky over your head and
under your feet, with all that lives with you there, is more than a
knowledge of its birds or trees or reptiles.

But be on your guard against the purpose to spread yourselves over too
much. Don’t be thin and superficial. Don’t be satisfied with learning
the long Latin names of things while never watching the ways of the
things that have the names. As they sat on the porch, so the story
goes, the school trustee called attention to a familiar little
orange-colored bug, with black spots on his back, that was crawling on
the floor.

“I s’pose you know what that is?” he said.

“Yes,” replied the applicant, with conviction; “that is a _Coccinella
septempunctata_.”

“Young man,” was the rejoinder, “a feller as don’t know a ladybug when
he sees it can’t get my vote for teacher in this deestrict.”

The “trustee” was right; for what is the use of knowing that the
little ladybug is _Coc-ci-nel’-la sep-tem-punc-ta’-ta_ when you do not
know that she is a ladybug, and that you ought to say to her:--

    “Ladybug, ladybug, fly away home;
    Your house is on fire, your children alone”?

Let us say, now, that you are spending your vacation in the edge of
the country within twenty miles of a great city such as Boston. That
might bring you out at Hingham, where I am spending mine. In such an
ordinary place (if any place _is_ ordinary,) what might you expect to
see and watch during the summer?

Sixty species of birds, to begin with! They will keep you busy all
summer. The wild animals, beasts, that you will find depend so very
much upon your locality--woods, waters, rocks, etc.--that it is hard
to say how many they will be. Here in my woods you might come upon
three or four species of mice, three species of squirrels, the mink,
the muskrat, the weasel, the mole, the shrew, the fox, the skunk, the
rabbit, and even a wild deer. Of reptiles and amphibians you would see
several more species than of fur-bearing animals,--six snakes, four
common turtles, two salamanders, frogs, toads, newts,--a wonderfully
interesting group, with a real live rattler among them if you should
go over to the Blue Hills, fifteen miles away.

[Illustration: RED SALAMANDERS, OLD AND YOUNG]

You will go many times into the fields before you can make of the
reptiles your friends and neighbors. But by and by you will watch them
and note their ways with as much interest as you watch the other wild
folk about you. It is a pretty shallow lover of nature who jumps upon
a little snake with both feet, or who shivers when a little salamander
drops out of the leaf-mould at his feet.

[Illustration: NEWTS]

And what shall I say of the fishes? There are a dozen of them in the
stream and ponds within the compass of my haunt. They are a
fascinating family, and one very little watched by the ordinary
tramper. But _you_ are not ordinary. Quiet and patience and much
putting together of scraps of observations will be necessary if you
are to get at the whole story of any fish’s life. The story will be
worth it, however.

No, I shall not even try to _number_ the insects--the butterflies,
beetles, moths, wasps, bees, bugs, ticks, mites, and such small “deer”
as you will find in the round of your summer’s tramp. Nor shall I try
to name the flowers and trees, the ferns and mosses. It is with the
common things that you ought now to become familiar, and one summer is
all too short for the things you ought to see and hear and do in your
vacation out of doors.




CHAPTER II

THE WILD ANIMALS AT PLAY


The watcher of wild animals never gets used to the sight of their
mirthless sport. In all other respects animal play is entirely human.

A great deal of human play is serious--desperately serious on the
football-field, and at the card-table, as when a lonely player is
trying to kill time with solitaire.

I have watched a great ungainly hippopotamus for hours trying to do
the same solemn thing by cuffing a croquet-ball back and forth from
one end of his cage to the other. His keepers told me that without the
plaything the poor caged giant would fret and worry himself to death.
It was his game of solitaire.

In all their games of rivalry the animals are serious as humans, and,
forgetting the fun, often fall to fighting--a sad case, indeed. But
brutes are brutes. We cannot expect anything better of the animals.
Only this morning the whole flock of chickens in the hen-yard started
suddenly on the wild flap to see which would beat to the back fence
and wound up on the “line” in a free fight, two of the cockerels
tearing the feathers from each other in a desperate set-to.

You have seen puppies fall out in the same human fashion, and kittens
also, and older folk as well. I have seen a game of wood-tag among
friendly gray squirrels come to a finish in a fight. As the crows pass
over during the winter afternoon, you will notice their play--racing
each other through the air, diving, swooping, cawing in their fun,
when suddenly some one’s temper snaps, and there is a mix-up in the
air.

They can get angry, but they cannot laugh. I once saw what I thought
was a twinkle of merriment, however, in an elephant’s eye. It was at
the circus several years ago. The keeper had just set down for one of
the elephants a bucket of water which a perspiring youth had brought
in. The big beast sucked it quietly up,--the whole of it,--swung
gently around as if to thank the perspiring boy, then soused him, the
whole bucketful! Everybody roared, and one of the other elephants
joined in with trumpetings, so huge and jolly was the joke.

The elephant who played the trick looked solemn enough, except for a
twitch at the lips and a glint in the eye. There is something of a
smile about every elephant’s lips, to be sure, and fun is so
contagious that one should hesitate to say that he saw an elephant
laugh. But if that elephant didn’t laugh, it was not his fault.

From the elephant to the infusorian, the microscopic animal of a
single cell known as the paramœcium, is a far cry--to the extreme
opposite end of the animal kingdom, worlds apart. Yet I have seen
_Paramœcium caudatum_ at play in a drop of water under a compound
microscope, as I have seen elephants at play in their big bath-tub at
the zoölogical gardens.

Place a drop of stagnant water under your microscope and watch these
atoms of life for yourself. Invisible to the naked eye, they are
easily followed on the slide as they skate and whirl and chase one
another to the boundaries of their playground and back again, first
one of them “it,” then another. They stop to eat, they slow up to
divide their single-celled bodies into two cells, the two cells now
two living creatures where a moment before they were but one, both of
them swimming off immediately to feed and multiply and play.

Play seems to be as natural and as necessary to the wild animals as it
is to human beings. Like us the animals play hardest while young, but
as some human children never outgrow their youth and love of play, so
there are old animals that never grow too fat nor too stiff nor too
stupid to play.

The condition of the body has a great deal to do with the state of the
spirit. The sleek, lithe otter could not possibly grow fat. He keeps
in trim because he cannot help it, perhaps, but however that may be,
he is a very boy for play, and even goes so far as to build himself a
slide or chute for the fun of diving down it into the water. A writer
in one of the magazines tells of an otter in the New York Zoölogical
Park that swam and dived with a round stone balanced on his head.

Building a slide is more than we children used to do, for we had
ready-made for us grandfather’s two big slanting cellar-doors, down
which we slid and slid and slid till the wood was scoured white and
slippery with the sliding. The otter loves to slide. Up he climbs on
the bank, then down he goes--splash--into the stream. Up he climbs
and down he goes--time after time, day after day. There is nothing
like a slide, unless it is a cellar-door.

How much of a necessity to the otter is his play, one would like to
know--what he would give up for it, and how he would do deprived of
it. In the case of Pups, my neighbor’s beautiful young collie, play
seems more needful than food. There are no children, no one, to play
with him there, so that the sight of my small boys sets him almost
frantic.

His efforts to induce a hen or a rooster to play with him are
pathetic. The hen cannot understand. She hasn’t a particle of play in
her anyhow, but Pups cannot get that through his head. He runs rapidly
around her, drops on all fours flat, swings his tail, cocks his ears,
looks appealingly and barks a few little cackle-barks, as nearly
hen-like as he can bark them, then dashes off and whirls back--while
the hen picks up another bug. She never sees Pups. The old white coon
cat is better; but she is usually up the miff-tree. Pups steps on her,
knocks her over, or otherwise offends, especially when he tags her out
into the fields and spoils her hunting. The Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals ought to send some child or puppy out to play
with Pups of a Saturday.

I doubt if among the lower forms of animals play holds any such
prominent place as with the dog and the keen-witted, intelligent
otter. To catch these lower animals at play is a rare experience. One
of our naturalists describes the game of “follow my leader,” as he
watched it played by a school of minnows--a most unusual record, but
not at all hard to believe, for I saw recently, from the bridge in the
Boston Public Garden, a school of goldfish playing at something very
much like it.

This naturalist was lying stretched out upon an old bridge, watching
the minnows through a large crack between the planks, when he saw one
leap out of the water over a small twig floating at the surface.
Instantly another minnow broke the water and flipped over the twig,
followed by another and another, the whole school, as so many sheep,
or so many children, following the leader over the twig.

The love of play seems to be one of the elemental needs of all life
above the plants, and the games of us human children seem to have
been played before the dry land was, when there were only water babies
in the world, for certainly the fish never learned “follow my leader”
from us. Nor did my young bees learn from us their game of “prisoners’
base” which they play almost every summer noontime in front of the
hives. And what is the game the flies play about the cord of the
drop-light in the centre of the kitchen ceiling?

One of the most interesting animal games that I ever saw was played by
a flock of butterflies on the very top of Mount Hood, whose pointed
snow-piled peak looks down from the clouds over the whole vast State
of Oregon.

Mount Hood is an ancient volcano, eleven thousand two hundred
twenty-five feet high. Some seven thousand feet or more up, we came to
“Tie-up Rock”--the place on the climb where the glacier snows lay
before us and we were tied up to one another and all of us fastened by
rope to the guide.

From this point to the peak, it was sheer deep snow. For the last
eighteen hundred feet we clung to a rope that was anchored on the edge
of the crater at the summit, and cut our steps as we climbed.

Once we had gained the peak, we lay down behind a pile of sulphurous
rock, out of the way of the cutting wind, and watched the steam float
up from the crater, with the widest world in view that I ever turned
my eyes upon.

The draft pulled hard about the openings among the rock-piles, but
hardest up a flue, or chimney, that was left in the edge of the
crater-rim where parts of the rock had fallen away.

As we lay at the side of this flue, we soon discovered that
butterflies were hovering about us; no, not hovering, but flying
swiftly up between the rocks from somewhere down the flue. I could
scarcely believe my eyes. What could any living thing be doing
here?--and of all things, butterflies? This was three or four thousand
feet above the last vestige of vegetation, a mere point of volcanic
rock (the jagged edge-piece of an old crater) wrapped in eternal ice
and snow, with sulphurous gases pouring over it, and across it
blowing a wind that would freeze as soon as the sun was out of the
sky.

But here were real butterflies. I caught two or three of them and
found them to be vanessas (_Vanessa californica_), a close relative of
our mourning-cloak butterfly. They were all of one species,
apparently, but what were they doing here?

Scrambling to the top of the piece of rock behind which I had been
resting, I saw that the peak was alive with butterflies, and that they
were flying--over my head, out down over the crater, and out of sight
behind the peak, whence they reappeared, whirling up the flue past me
on the wings of the draft that pulled hard through it, to sail down
over the crater again, and again to be caught by the draft and pulled
up the flue, to their evident delight, up and out over the peak, where
they could again take wings, as boys take their sleds, and so down
again for the fierce upward draft that bore them whirling over Mount
Hood’s pointed peak.

Here they were, thousands of feet above the snow-line, where there was
no sign of vegetation, where the heavy vapors made the air to smell,
where the very next day a wild snowstorm wrapped its frozen folds
about the peak--here they were, butterflies, playing, a host of them,
like so many schoolboys on the first coasting snow!




CHAPTER III

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO SEE THIS SUMMER


I

The dawn, the breaking dawn! I know nothing lovelier, nothing fresher,
nothing newer, purer, sweeter than a summer dawn. I am just back from
one--from the woods and cornfields wet with dew, the meadows and
streams white with mist, and all the world of paths and fences running
off into luring spaces of wavering, lifting, beckoning horizons where
shrouded forms were moving and hidden voices calling. By noontime the
buzz-saw of the cicada will be ripping the dried old stick of this
August day into splinters and sawdust. No one could imagine that this
midsummer noon at 90° in the shade could have had so Maylike a
beginning.


II

I said in “The Spring of the Year” that you should see a farmer
ploughing, then a few weeks later the field of sprouting corn. Now in
July or August you must see that field in silk and tassel, blade and
stalk standing high over your head.

You might catch the same sight of wealth in a cotton-field, if cotton
is “king” in your section; or in a vast wheat-field, if wheat is your
king; or in a potato-field if you live in Maine--but no, not in a
potato-field. It is all underground in a potato-field. Nor can cotton
in the South, or wheat in the Northwest, give you quite the _depth_
and the ranked and ordered wealth of long, straight lines of tall
corn.

Then to hear a summer rain sweep down upon it and the summer wind run
swiftly through it! You must see a great field of standing corn.


III

Keep out from under all trees, stand away from all tall poles, but get
somewhere in the open and watch a blue-black thunderstorm come up. It
is one of the wonders of summer, one of the shows of the sky, a thing
of terrible beauty that I must confess I cannot look at without dread
and a feeling of awe that rests like a load upon me.

    “All heaven and earth are still--though not in sleep,
    But breathless, as we grow when feeling most;
    And silent, as we stand in thoughts too deep:--
           *       *       *       *       *
    The sky is changed!--and such a change! Oh night,
    And storm, and darkness, ye are wondrous strong,
    Yet lovely in your strength. .. .. ..
    .. .. .. .. . Far along,
    From peak to peak the rattling crags among,
    Leaps the live thunder! Not from one lone cloud,
    But every mountain now hath found a tongue,
    And Jura answers, through her misty shroud,
    Back to the joyous Alps who call to her aloud.”


IV

But there are many smaller, individual things to be seen this summer,
and among them, notable for many reasons, is a hummingbird’s nest.
“When completed it is scarcely larger than an English walnut and is
usually saddled on a small horizontal limb of a tree or shrub
frequently many feet from the ground. It is composed almost entirely
of soft plant fibers, fragments of spiders’ webs sometimes being used
to hold them in shape. The sides are thickly studded with bits of
lichen, and practiced, indeed, is the eye of the man who can
distinguish it from a knot on the limb.”

This is the smallest of birds’ nests and quite as rare and difficult
to find as any single thing that you can go out to look for. You will
stumble upon one now and then; but not many in a whole lifetime. Let
it be a test of your keen eye--this finding of a little hummer’s nest
with its two white eggs the size of small pea-beans or its two tiny
young that are up and off on their marvelous wings within three weeks
from the time the eggs are laid!


V

Have you read Mr. William L. Finley’s story of the California condor’s
nest? The hummingbird young is out and gone within three weeks; but
the condor young is still in the care of its watchful parents three
months after it is hatched. You ought to watch the slow, guarded youth
of one of the larger hawks or owls during the summer. Such birds build
very early,--before the snow is gone sometimes,--but they are to be
seen feeding their young far into the summer. The wide variety in
bird-life, both in size and habits, will be made very plain to you if
you will watch the nests of two such birds as the hummer and the
vulture or the eagle.


VI

This is the season of flowers. But what among them should you
especially see? Some time ago one of the school-teachers near me
brought in a list of a _dozen_ species of wild orchids, gathered out
of the meadows, bogs, and woods about the neighborhood. Can you do as
well?

Suppose, then, that you try to find as many. They were the pink
lady’s-slipper; the yellow lady’s-slipper; the yellow fringed-orchis
(_Habenaria ciliaris_); the ladies’-tresses, two species; the
rattlesnake-plantain; arethusa, or Indian pink; calopogon, or grass
pink; pogonia, or snake-mouth (_ophioglossoides_ and _verticillata_);
the ragged fringed-orchis; and the showy or spring orchis. Arethusa
and the showy orchis really belong to the spring but the others will
be task enough for you, and one that will give point and purpose to
your wanderings afield this summer.

[Illustration: ORCHIDS

    1. _Arethusa bulbosa_
    2. _Pogonia ophioglossoides_
    3. Pink Lady’s-Slipper
    4. Yellow Lady’s-Slipper
    5. Showy Orchis
]


VII

There are a certain number of moths and butterflies that you should
see and know also. If one could come to know, say, one hundred and
fifty flowers and the moths and butterflies that visit them (for the
flower and its insect pollen-carrier are to be thought of and studied
together), one would have an excellent speaking acquaintance with the
blossoming out-of-doors.

Now, among the butterflies you ought to know the mourning-cloak, or
vanessa; the big red-brown milkweed butterfly; the big yellow tiger
swallowtail; the small yellow cabbage butterfly; the painted beauty;
the red admiral; the common fritillary; the common wood-nymph--but I
have named enough for this summer, in spite of the fact that I have
not named the green-clouded or Troilus butterfly, and Asterias, the
black swallowtail, and the red-spotted purple, and the viceroy.

Among the moths to see are the splendid Promethea, Cecropia,
bullseye, Polyphemus, and Luna, to say nothing of the hummingbird
moth, and the sphinx, or hawk, moths, especially the large
one that feeds as a caterpillar upon the tomato-vines,
_Ma-cros’-i-la-quin-que-mac-u-la’-ta_.


VIII

There is a like list of interesting beetles and other insects, that
play a large part in even _your_ affairs, which you ought to watch
during the summer: the honeybee, the big droning golden bumblebee, the
large white-faced hornet that builds the paper nests in the bushes and
trees, the gall-flies, the ichneumon-flies, the burying beetle, the
tumble-bug beetle, the dragon-fly, the caddis-fly--these are only a
few of a whole world of insect folk about you, whose habits and
life-histories are of utmost importance and of tremendous interest.
You will certainly believe it if you will read the Peckhams’ book
called “Wasps, Social and Solitary,” or the beautiful and fascinating
insect stories by the great French entomologist Fabre. Get also
“Every-day Butterflies,” by Scudder; and “Moths and Butterflies,” by
Miss Dickerson, and “Insect Life,” by Kellogg.


IX

You see I cannot stop with this list of the things. That is the
trouble with summer--there is too much of it while it lasts, too much
variety and abundance of life. One is simply compelled to limit one’s
self to some particular study, and to pick up mere scraps from other
fields.

But, to come back to the larger things of the out-of-doors, you should
see the mist some summer morning very early or some summer evening,
sheeted and still over a winding stream or pond, especially in the
evening when the sun has gone down behind the hill, the flame has
faded from the sky, and over the rim of the circling slopes pours the
soft, cool twilight, with a breeze as soft and cool, and a spirit that
is prayer. For then from out the deep shadows of the wooded shore, out
over the pond, a thin white veil will come creeping--the mist, the
breath of the sleeping water, the soul of the pond!


X

You should see it rain down little toads this summer--_if you can!_
There are persons who claim to have seen it. But I never have. I have
stood on Maurice River Bridge, however, and apparently had them
pelting down upon my feet as the big drops of the July shower struck
the planks--myriads of tiny toads covering the bridge across the
river! Did they rain down? No, they had been hiding in the dirt
between the planks and hopped out to meet the sweet rain and to soak
their little thirsty skins full.


XI

You should see a cowbird’s young in a vireo’s nest and the efforts of
the poor deceived parents to satisfy its insatiable appetite at the
expense of their own young ones’ lives! Such a sight will set you to
thinking.


XII

I shall not tell you what else you should see, for the whole book
could be filled with this one chapter, and then you might lose your
forest in your trees. The individual tree is good to look at--the
mighty wide-limbed hemlock or pine; but so is a whole dark, solemn
forest of hemlocks and pines good to look at. Let us come to the
out-of-doors with our study of the separate, individual plant or
thing; but let us _go on to Nature_, and not stop with the individual
thing.




CHAPTER IV

THE COYOTE OF PELICAN POINT


“We have stopped the plumers,” said the game-warden, “and we are
holding the market-hunters to something like decency; but there’s a
pot-hunter yonder on Pelican Point that I’ve got to do up or lose my
job.”

Pelican Point was the end of a long, narrow peninsula that ran out
into the lake, from the opposite shore, twelve miles across from us.
We were in the Klamath Lake Reservation in southern Oregon, one of the
greatest wild-bird preserves in the world.

Over the point, as we drew near, the big white pelicans were winging,
and among them, as our boat came up to the rocks, rose a colony of
black cormorants. The peninsula is chiefly of volcanic origin,
composed of crumbling rock and lava, and ends in well-stratified
cliffs at the point. Patches of scraggly sagebrush grew here and
there, and out near the cliffs on the sloping lava sides was a field
of golden California poppies.

The gray, dusty ridge in the hot sun, with cliff swallows and
cormorants and the great pouched pelicans as inhabitants, seemed the
last place that a pot-hunter would frequent. What could a pot-hunter
find here? I wondered.

We were pulling the boat up on the sand at a narrow neck in the
peninsula, when the warden touched my arm. “Up there near the sky-line
among the sage! What a shot!”

I was some seconds in making out the head and shoulders of a coyote
that was watching us from the top of the ridge.

“The rascal knows,” went on the warden, “I have no gun; he can smell a
gun clear across the lake. I have tried for three years to get that
fellow. He’s the terror of the whole region, and especially of the
Point; if I don’t get him soon, he’ll clean out the pelican colony.

“Why don’t I shoot him? Poison him? Trap him? I have offered fifty
dollars for his hide. Why don’t I? I’ll show you. Now you watch the
critter as I lead you up the slope toward him.”

We had not taken a dozen steps when I found myself staring hard at the
place where the coyote had been, but not at the coyote, for he was
gone. He had vanished before my eyes. I had not seen him move,
although I had been watching him steadily.

“Queer, isn’t it?” said the warden. “It’s not his particular dodge,
for every old coyote that has been hunted learns to work it; but I
never knew one that had it down so fine as this sinner. There’s next
to nothing here for him to skulk behind. Why, he has given my dog the
slip right here on the bare rock! But I’ll fix him yet.”

I did not have to be persuaded to stay overnight with the warden for
the coyote-hunt the next day. The warden, I found, had fallen in with
a Mr. Harris, a homesteader, who had been something of a professional
coyote-hunter. Harris had just arrived in southern Oregon, and had
brought with him his dogs, a long, graceful greyhound, and his
fighting mate, a powerful Russian wolfhound; both were crack coyote
dogs from down Saskatchewan. He had accepted the warden’s offer of
fifty dollars for the hide of the coyote of Pelican Point, and was now
on his way round the lake.

The outfit appeared late the next day, and consisted of the two dogs,
a horse and buckboard, and a big, empty dry-goods box.

I had hunted possums in the gum swamps of the South with a stick and a
gunny-sack, but this rig, on the rocky, roadless shores of the lake--a
dry-goods box for coyotes!--beat any hunting combination I had ever
seen.

We had pitched the tent on the south shore of the point where the
peninsula joined the mainland, and were finishing our supper, when not
far from us, back on shore, we heard the doleful yowl of the coyote.

We were on our feet in an instant.

“There he is,” said the warden, “lonesome for a little play with your
dogs, Mr. Harris.”

There was still an hour and a half of good light, and Harris untied
his dogs. I had never seen the coyote hunted, and was greatly
interested. Harris, with his dogs close in hand, led us directly away
from where we had heard the coyote bark. Then we stopped and sat down.
At my look of inquiry, Harris smiled.

“Oh, no, we’re not after coyotes to-night, not _that_ coyote, anyhow,”
he said. “You know a coyote is made up of equal parts of curiosity,
cowardice, and craft; and it’s a long hunt unless you can get a lead
on his curiosity. We are not out for _him_. He sees that. In fact,
we’ll amble back now--but we’ll manage to get up along the crest of
that little ridge where he is sitting, so that the dogs can follow him
whichever way he runs. You hunt coyotes wholly by sight, you know.”

The little trick worked perfectly. The coyote, curious to see what we
were doing, had risen to his feet, and stood, plainly outlined against
the sky. He was entirely unsuspecting, and as we approached, only
edged and backed, more apparently to get a sight of the dogs behind us
than through any fear.

Suddenly Harris stepped from before the dogs, pointed them toward the
coyote, and slipped their leashes. The hounds were trained to the
work. There was just an instant’s pause, a quick yelp, then two
doubling, reaching forms ahead of us, with a little line of dust
between.

The coyote saw them coming, and started to run, not hurriedly,
however, for he had had many a run before. He was not afraid, and kept
looking behind to see what manner of dog was after him this time.

But he was not long in making up his mind that this was an entirely
new kind, for in less than three minutes the hounds had halved the
distance that separated him from them. At first, the big wolfhound was
in the lead. Then, as if it had taken him till this time to find all
four of his long legs, the greyhound pulled himself together, and in a
burst of speed that was astonishing, passed his heavier companion.

We raced along the ridge to see the finish. But the coyote ahead of
the dogs was no novice. He knew the game perfectly. He saw the gap
closing behind him. Had he been young, he would have been seized by
fear; would have darted right and left, mouthing and snapping in
abject terror. Instead of that, he dug his nails into the shore, and
with all his wits about him, sped for the desert. The greyhound was
close behind him.

I held my breath. Harris, I think, would have taken his fifty dollars
then and there! And the warden would have handed it to him, despite
his past experience with the beast; but suddenly the coyote headed
straight off for a low manzanita bush that stood up amid the scraggly
sagebrush back from the shore.

The hunt was now going directly from us, with the dust and the
wolfhound behind, following the line in front. The gap between the
greyhound and the coyote seemed to have closed, and when the hound
took the low manzanita with a bound that was half-somersault, Harris
exclaimed, “He’s nailed him!” and we ran ahead to see the wolfhound
complete the job.

The wolfhound, however, kept right on across the desert; the greyhound
lagged uncertainly far behind; in the lead, ahead of the big grizzled
wolfhound, bobbed the form of a fleeing jack-rabbit!

The look of astonishment and then of disgust on Harris’s face was
amusing to see. The warden may have been disappointed, but he did not
take any pains to repress a chuckle.

Harris said nothing. He was searching the stunted sagebrush off to the
left of us. We followed his eyes, and he and the warden, both
experienced plainsmen, picked out the skulking, shadowy shape of the
coyote, as the creature, with belly to the ground, slunk off out of
sight.

It was too late for any further attempt that night.

“An old stager, sure,” Harris commented, as we returned to camp.
“Knows a trick or two for every one of mine. But I’ll fix him.”

Nothing was seen of the coyote all the early part of the next day, and
no effort was made to find him; but toward the middle of the
afternoon, Harris hitched up the bronco, and, unpacking a flat package
in the bottom of the buckboard, showed us a large glass window, which
he fitted as a door into one end of the big dry-goods box. Then into
the glass-ended box he put the two hounds.

“Now, gentlemen,” he said, “I’m going to invite you to take a
sight-seeing trip on this auto out into the sagebrush. Incidentally,
if you chance to see a coyote, don’t mention it.”

If all the coyotes, jack-rabbits, gophers, and pelicans of the
territory had come out to see us thump and bump over the dry, uneven
desert, I should not have been surprised; and so, on coming back to
camp, it was with no wonder at all that I discovered the coyote, out
on the point, staring at us from across the neck of the peninsula.
Nothing like this had happened on his side of the lake before.

Harris saw him instantly, and was quick to recognize our advantage. We
had the coyote cornered--out on the long, narrow peninsula, where the
dogs must run him down. The wily creature had so far forgotten himself
as to get caught between us and the ridge along shore, and, partly in
curiosity, had kept running ahead and stopping to look at us, until
now he was past the place where he could skulk back without our seeing
him, into the open plain.

Even yet all depended upon our getting so close to him that the dogs
could keep him constantly in sight. The crumbling ledges at the end of
the point were full of holes and crevices into which the beast could
dodge.

We were not close enough, however. With one of us watching the coyote,
should he happen to run, Harris turned the bronco slowly round until
the glass end of the box in the back of the buckboard was pointing
directly at the creature. There was a scramble of feet inside the box.
The dogs had sighted the beast. Then Harris started as if to drive
away, the coyote watching us all the time.

Instead of driving off, he made a circle, and coming back slowly
toward the coyote, gained the top of a little knoll. Had the coyote
seen the dogs in the box, he would have vanished instantly; but the
box interested and puzzled him.

He stood looking with all his eyes as the procession turned, and once
more the glass end of the box was pointed directly toward him. The
dogs evidently knew what was expected of them. They were silent, but
ready. Suddenly, without stopping the pony, Harris pulled open the
glass door, and yelled, “Go!”

And go they did. I never saw hundred-yard runners leap from the mark
as those two hounds leaped from that box. The coyote, in his
astonishment, actually turned a back handspring and started for the
point.

The dogs were hardly two hundred yards behind him, and were making
short work of the space between. It seemed hardly fair, and I must say
that I felt something like sympathy for the under dog, wild dog though
he was; the odds against him were so great.

But the coyote knew his track thoroughly, and was taking advantage of
the rough, loose, shelving ground. For the farther out toward the end
of the point they ran, the narrower, rockier, and steeper grew the
peninsula, the more difficult and dangerous the footing.

The coyote slanted along the side of the ridge, and took a sloping
slab of rock ahead of him with a slow side-step and a climb that
brought the dogs close up behind him. They took the rock at a leap,
slid halfway across, and scrambling, rolled several yards down the
slope--and lost all the gain they had made.

Things began to even up. The chase began to be interesting. Here
judgment was called for, as well as speed. The cliff swallows swarmed
out of their nests under the overhanging rocks; the black cormorants
and great-winged pelicans saw their old enemy coming, and rose,
flapping, over the water; the circling gulls dropped low between the
runners; their strange clangor and the stranger tropical shapes thick
in the air gave the scene a wildness altogether new to me.

On fled the coyote; on bounded the dogs. He would never escape!
Nothing without wings could ever do it! Mere feet could never stand
such a test! The chances that pursued and pursuers took--the
leaps--the landings! The whole slope seemed rolling with stones,
started by the feet of the runners.

They were nearing the high, rough rocks of the tip of the point.
Between them and the ledges of the point, and reaching from the edge
of the water nearly to the top of the ridge, lay the steep golden
garden of California poppies, blooming in the dry lava soil that had
crumbled and drifted down on the rocky side.

The coyote veered, and dashed down toward the middle of the poppies;
the hounds hit the bed two jumps behind. There was a cloud of dust,
and in it we saw an avalanche of dogs ploughing a wide furrow through
the flowers nearly down to the water. Climbing slowly out near the
upper edge of the bed was the coyote, again with a good margin of
lead.

But the beast was at the end of the point, and nearing the end of his
race. Had we been out of the way, he might have turned and yet given
the dogs the slip--for behind us lay the open desert.

Straight toward the rocks he headed, with the hounds laboring up the
slope after him. He was running to the very edge of the point, as if
he were intending to leap off the cliff to death in the lake below,
and I saw Harris’s face tighten as his hounds topped the ridge, and
senselessly tore on toward the same fearful edge. But the race was not
done yet. The coyote hesitated, turned down the ledges on the south
slope, and leaping in among the cormorant nests, started back toward
us.

He was surer on his feet than were the hounds, but this hesitation on
the point had cost him several yards. The hounds would pick him up in
the little cove of smooth, hard sand that lay, encircled by rough
rocks, just ahead, unless--no, he must cross the cove, he must take
the stretch. He was taking it--knowingly, too, and with a burst of
power that he had not shown upon the slopes. He was flinging away his
last reserve.

The hounds were nearly across; the coyote was within fifty feet of the
boulders, when the greyhound, lowering his long, flat head, lunged for
the spine of his quarry.

The coyote heard him coming, spun on his fore feet, offering his fangs
to those of his foe, and threw himself backward just as the jaws of
the wolfhound clashed at him and flecked his throat with foam.

The two great dogs collided and bounded wide apart, startling a jack
rabbit that dived between them into a hole among the rocks. The
coyote, on his feet in an instant, caught the motion of the rabbit,
and like his shadow, leaped into the air after him for the hole.

He was as quick as thought, quicker than either of the hounds. He
sprang high over them,--safely over them, we thought,--when, in
mid-air, at the turn of the dive, he twisted, heeled half-over, and
landed hard against the side of the hole; and the wolfhound pulled him
down.

It was over; but there was something strange, almost unfair, it
seemed, about the finish.

Before we got down to the cove both of the dogs had slunk back,
cowering from the dead coyote. Then there came to us the buzz of a
rattlesnake--a huge, angry reptile that lay coiled in the mouth of the
hole. The rabbit had struck and roused the snake. The coyote in his
leap had caught the warning whir, but caught it too late to clear both
snake and hounds. His twist in the air to clear the snake had cost him
his life. So close is the race in the desert world.




CHAPTER V

FROM T WHARF TO FRANKLIN FIELD


Over and over I read the list of saints and martyrs on the wall across
the street, thinking dully how men used to suffer for their religion,
and how, nowadays, they suffer for their teeth. For I was reclining in
a dentist’s chair, blinking through the window at the Boston Public
Library, seeing nothing, however, nothing but the tiles on the roof,
and the names of Luther, Wesley, Wycliffe, graven on the granite wall,
while the dentist burred inside of my cranium and bored down to my
toes for nerves. So, at least, it seemed.

By and by my gaze wandered blankly off to the square patch of sky in
sight above the roof. A black cloud was driving past in the wind away
up there. Suddenly a white fleck swept into the cloud, careened,
spread two wide wings against it, and rounded a circle. Then another
and another, until eight herring gulls were soaring white against the
sullen cloud in that little square of sky high over the roofs of
Boston.

Was this the heart of a vast city? Could I be in a dentist’s chair?
There was no doubt about the chair; but how quickly the red-green roof
of the Library became the top of some great cliff; the droning noise
of traffic in the streets, the wash of waves against the rocks; and
yonder on the storm-stained sky those wheeling wings, how like the
winds of the ocean, and the raucous voices, how they seemed to fill
all the city with the sweep and the sound of the sea!

Boston, Baltimore, New York, Philadelphia, Chicago, San Francisco--do
you live in any one of them or in any other city? If you do, then you
have a surprisingly good chance to watch the ways of wild things and
even to come near to the heart of Nature. Not so good a chance, to be
sure, as in the country; but the city is by no means so lacking in
wild life or so shunned by the face of Nature as we commonly believe.

All great cities are alike, all of them very different, too, in
details; Boston’s streets, for instance, being crookeder than most,
but like them all, reaching out for many a mile before they turn into
country roads and lanes with borders of quiet and wide green fields.

But Boston has the wide waters of the Harbor and the Charles River
Basin. And it also has T Wharf! They did not throw the tea overboard
there, back in Revolutionary days, as you may be told, but T Wharf is
famous, nevertheless, famous for fish!

Fish? Swordfish and red snappers, scup, shad, squid, squeteague,
sharks, skates, smelts, sculpins, sturgeon, scallops, halibut,
haddock, hake--to say nothing of mackerel, cod, and countless freak
things caught by trawl and seine all the way from Boston Harbor to the
Grand Banks! I have many a time sat on T Wharf and caught short, flat
flounders with my line. It is almost as good as a trip to the Georges
in the “We’re Here” to visit T Wharf; and then to walk slowly up
through Quincy Market. Surely no single walk in the woods will yield a
tithe of the life to be found here, and found only here for us,
brought as the fish and game and fruits have been from the ends of the
earth and the depths of the sea.

There is no reason why city children should not know a great deal
about animal life, nor why the teachers in city schools should feel
that nature study is impossible for them. For, leaving the wharf with
its fish and gulls and fleet of schooners, you come up four or five
blocks to old King’s Chapel Burying-Ground where the Boston sparrows
roost. Boston is full of interesting sights, but none more interesting
to the bird-lover than this sparrow-roost. The great bird rocks in the
Pacific, described in another chapter of this book, are larger, to be
sure, yet hardly more clamorous when, in the dusk, the sparrow clans
begin to gather; nor hardly wilder than this city roost when the night
lengthens, and the quiet creeps down the alleys and along the empty
streets, and the sea winds stop on the corners, and the lamps, like
low-hung stars, light up the sleeping birds till their shadows waver
large upon the stark walls about the old graveyard that break far
overhead as rim rock breaks on the desert sky.

Now shift the scene to an early summer morning on Boston Common, two
blocks farther up, and on to the Public Garden across Charles Street.
There are more wild birds to be seen in the Garden on a May morning
than there are here in the woods of Hingham, and the summer still
finds some of them about the shrubs and pond. And it is an easy place
in which to watch them. One of our bird-students has found over a
hundred species in the Garden. Can any one say that the city offers a
poor chance for nature-study?

This is the story of every great city park. My friend Professor
Herbert E. Walter found nearly one hundred and fifty species of birds
in Lincoln Park, Chicago. And have you ever read Mr. Bradford Torrey’s
delightful essay called “Birds on Boston Common”?

Then there are the squirrels and the trees on the Common; the flowers,
bees, butterflies, and even the schools of goldfish, in the pond of
the Garden--enough of life, insect-life, plant-life, bird-life,
fish-life, for more than a summer of lessons.

Nor is this all. One block beyond the Garden stands the Natural
History Museum, crowded with mounted specimens of birds and beasts,
reptiles, fishes, and shells beyond number--more than you can study,
perhaps. You city folk, instead of having too little, have altogether
too much of too many things. But such a museum is always a suggestive
place for one who loves the out-of-doors. And the more one knows of
nature, the more one gets out of the museum. You can carry there, and
often answer, the questions that come to you in your tramps afield, in
your visits to the Garden, and in your reading of books. Then add to
this the great Agassiz Museum at Harvard University, and the Aquarium
at South Boston, and the Zoölogical Gardens at Franklin Park, and the
Arnold Arboretum--all of these with their multitude of mounted
specimens and their living forms for _you_! For me also; and in from
the country I come, very often, to study natural history in the city.

What is true of Boston is true of every city in some degree. The sun
and the moon and stars shine upon the city as upon the country, and
during my years of city life (I lived in the very heart of Boston) it
was my habit to climb to my roof, above the din and glare of the
crowded street, and here among the chimney-pots to lie down upon my
back, the city far below me, and overhead the blue sky, the Milky Way,
the constellations, or the moon, swinging--

    “Through the heaven’s wide pathless way,
    And oft, as if her head she bowed
    Stooping through a fleecy cloud.”

Here, too, I have watched the gulls that sail over the Harbor,
especially in the winter. From this outlook I have seen the winging
geese pass over, and heard the faint calls of other migrating flocks,
voices that were all the more mysterious for their falling through the
muffling hum that rises from the streets and spreads over the wide
roof of the city as a soft night wind over the peaked roofs of a
forest of firs.

[Illustration: ARGIOPE, THE MEADOW SPIDER]

Strangely enough here on the roof I have watched the only nighthawks
that I have ever found in Massachusetts. This is surely the last place
you would expect to find such wild, spooky, dusk-loving creatures as
nighthawks. Yet here, on the tarred and pebbled roofs, here among the
whirling, squeaking, smoking chimney-pots, here above the crowded,
noisy streets, these birds built their nests,--laid their eggs,
rather, for they build no nests,--reared their young, and in the long
summer twilight rose and fell through the smoky air, uttering their
peevish cries and making their ghostly booming sounds with their
high-diving, just as if they were out over the darkening swales along
some gloomy swamp-edge.

For many weeks I had a big tame spider in the corner of my study there
in that city flat, and I have yet to read an account of all the
species of spiders to be found dwelling within the walls of any great
city. Even Argiope of the meadows is doubtless found in the Fens. Not
far away from my flat, down near the North Station, one of my friends
on the roof of his flat kept several hives of bees. They fed on the
flowers of the Garden, on those in dooryards, and on the
honey-yielding lindens which stand here and there throughout the city.
Pigeons and sparrows built their nests within sight of my windows; and
by going early to the roof I could see the sun rise, and in the
evening I could watch it go down behind the hills of Belmont as now I
watch it from my lookout here on Mullein Hill.

One is never far from the sky, nor from the earth, nor from the free,
wild winds, nor from the wilder night that covers city and sea and
forest with its quiet, and fills them all with lurking shadows that
never shall be tamed.




CHAPTER VI

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO HEAR THIS SUMMER


I

The fullness, the flood, of life has come, and, contrary to one’s
expectations, a marked silence has settled down over the waving fields
and the cool deep woods. I am writing these lines in the lamplight,
with all the windows and doors open to the dark July night. The summer
winds are moving in the trees. A cricket and a few small green
grasshoppers are chirping in the grass; but nothing louder is near at
hand. And nothing louder is far off, except the cry of the
whip-poor-will in the wood road. But him you hear in the spring and
autumn as well as in the summer. Ah, listen! My tree-toad in the
grapevine over the bulkhead door!

This is a voice you must hear--on cloudy summer days, toward twilight,
and well into the evening. Do you know what it is to feel lonely? If
you do, I think, then, that you know how the soft, far-off, eerie cry
of the tree-toad sounds. He is prophesying rain, the almanac people
think, but I think it is only the sound of rain in his voice, summer
rain after a long drouth, cooling, reviving, soothing rain, with just
a patter of something in it that I cannot describe, something that I
used to hear on the shingles of the garret over the rafters where the
bunches of horehound and catnip and pennyroyal hung.


II

You ought to hear the lively clatter of a mowing-machine. It is hot
out of doors; the roads are beginning to look dusty; the insects are
tuning up in the grass, and, like their chorus all together, and
marching round and round the meadow, moves the mower’s whirring blade.
I love the sound. Haying is hard, sweet work. The farmer who does not
love his haying ought to be made to keep a country store and sell
kerosene oil and lumps of dead salt pork out of a barrel. He could not
appreciate a live, friendly pig.

Down the long swath sing the knives, the cogs click above the square
corners, and the big, loud thing sings on again,--the song of
“first-fruits,” the first great ingathering of the season,--a song to
touch the heart with joy and sweet solemnity.


III

You ought to hear the Katydids--two of them on the trees outside your
window. They are not saying “Katy did,” nor singing “Katy did”; they
are fiddling “Katy did,” “Katy didn’t”--by rasping the fore wings.

Is the sound “Katy” or “Katy did”? or what is said? Count the notes.
Are they at the rate of two hundred per minute? Watch the
instrumentalist--till you make sure it is the male who is wooing Katy
with his persistent guitar. The male has no long ovipositors.


IV

Another instrumentalist to hear is the big cicada or “harvest-fly.”
There is no more characteristic sound of all the summer than his big,
quick, startling whirr--a minute mowing-machine up on the limb
overhead! Not so minute either, for the creature is fully two inches
long, with bulging eyes and a click to his wings when he flies that
can be heard a hundred feet away! “Dog-days-z-z-z-z-z-z-z” is the song
he sings to me.

[Illustration: “FLITTING AND WAVERING ABOUT”]


V

This is the season of small sounds. As a test of the keenness of your
ears go out at night into some open glade in the woods or by the side
of some pond and listen for the squeaking of the bats flitting and
wavering above in the uncertain light over your head. You will need a
stirless midsummer dusk; and if you can hear the thin, fine squeak as
the creature dives near your head, you may be sure your ears are
almost as keen as those of the fox. The sound is not audible to most
human ears.


VI

Another set of small sounds characteristic of midsummer is the
twittering of the flocking swallows in the cornfields and upon the
telegraph-wires. This summer I have had long lines of the young birds
and their parents from the old barn below the hill strung on the wires
from the house across the lawn. Here they preen while some of the old
birds hawk for flies, the whole line of them breaking into a soft
little twitter each time a newcomer alights among them. One swallow
does not make a summer, but your electric light wires sagging with
them is the very soul of the summer.


VII

In the deep, still woods you will hear the soft call of the robin--a
low, pensive, plaintive note unlike its spring cry or the
after-shower song. It is as if the voice of the slumberous woods were
speaking--without alarm, reproach, or welcome either. It is an
invitation to stretch yourself on the deep moss and let the warm
shadows of the summer woods steal over you with sleep.

[Illustration: THE RED-EYED VIREO]

And this, too, is a thing to learn. Doing something, hearing
something, seeing something by no means exhausts our whole business
with the out-of-doors. To lie down and do nothing, to be able to keep
silence and to rest on the great whirling globe is as needful as to
know everything going on about us.


VIII

There is one bird-song so characteristic of midsummer that I think
every lover of the woods must know it: the oft-repeated, the constant
notes of the red-eyed vireo or “preacher.” Wilson Flagg says of him:
“He takes the part of a deliberative orator who explains his subject
in a few words and then makes a pause for his hearers to reflect upon
it. We might suppose him to be repeating moderately with a pause
between each sentence, ‘You see it--you know it--do you hear me?--do
you believe it?’ All these strains are delivered with a rising
inflection at the close, and with a pause, as if waiting for an
answer.”


IX

A few other bird-notes that are associated with hot days and stirless
woods, and that will be worth your hearing are the tree-top song of
the scarlet tanager. He is one of the summer sights, a dash of the
burning tropics is his brilliant scarlet and jet black, and his song
is a loud, hoarse, rhythmical carol that has the flame of his feathers
in it and the blaze of the sun. You will know it from the cool, liquid
song of the robin both by its peculiar quality and because it is a
short song, and soon ended, not of indefinite length like the robin’s.

Then the peculiar, coppery, reverberating, or _confined_ song of the
indigo bunting--as if the bird were singing inside some great kettle.

One more--among a few others--the softly falling, round, small,
upward-swinging call of the wood pewee. Is it sad? Yes, sad. But
sweeter than sad,--restful, cooling, and inexpressibly gentle. All day
long from high above your head and usually quite out of view, the
voice--it seems hardly a voice--breaks the long silence of the summer
woods.


X

When night comes down with the long twilight there sounds a strange,
almost awesome _quawk_ in the dusk over the fields. It sends a thrill
through me, notwithstanding its nightly occurrence all through July
and August. It is the passing of a pair of night herons--the
black-crowned, I am sure, although this single pair only fly over.
Where the birds are numerous they nest in great colonies.

It is the wild, eerie _quawk_ that you should hear, a far-off,
mysterious, almost uncanny sound that fills the twilight with a vague,
untamed something, no matter how bright and civilized the day may have
been.


XI

From the harvest fields comes the sweet whistle of Bob White, the
clear, round notes rolling far through the hushed summer noon; in the
wood-lot the crows and jays have already begun their cawings and
screamings that later on become the dominant notes of the golden
autumn. They are not so loud and characteristic now because of the
insect orchestra throbbing with a rhythmic beat through the air. So
wide, constant, and long-continued is this throbbing note of the
insects that by midsummer you almost cease to notice it. But stop and
listen--field crickets, katydids, long-horned grasshoppers, snowy
tree-crickets: _chwĭ-chwĭ-chwĭ-chwĭ--thrr-r-r-r-r-r-r
--crrri-crrri-crrri-crrri--gru-gru-gru-gru--
retreat-retreat-retreat-treat-treat_--like the throbbing of the
pulse.


XII

One can do no more than suggest in a short chapter like this; and all
that I am doing here is catching for you some of the still, small
voices of _my_ summer. How unlike those of your summer they may be I
can easily imagine, for you are in the Pacific Coast, or off on the
vast prairies of Canada, or down in the sunny fields and hill-country
of the South.

I have done enough if I have suggested that you stop and listen; for
after all it is having ears which hear _not_ that causes the trouble.
Hear the voices that make your summer vocal--the loud and still voices
which alike pass unheeded unless we pause to hear.

As a lesson in listening, go out some quiet evening, and as the
shadows slip softly over the surface of the wood-walled pond, listen
to the breathing of the fish as they come to the top, and the splash
of the muskrats, or the swirl of the pickerel as he ploughs a furrow
through the silence.




CHAPTER VII

THE SEA-BIRDS’ HOME


After my wandering for years among the quiet lanes and along the
winding cow-paths of the home fields, my trip to the wild-bird rocks
in the Pacific Ocean, as you can imagine, was a thrilling experience.
We chartered a little launch at Tillamook, and, after a fight of hours
and hours to cross Tillamook Bar at the mouth of the bay, we got out
upon the wide Pacific, and steamed down the coast for Three-Arch
Rocks, which soon began to show far ahead of us just off the rocky
shore.

I had never been on the Pacific before, nor had I ever before seen the
birds that were even now beginning to dot the sea and to sail over and
about us as we steamed along. It was all new, so new that the very
water of the Pacific looked unlike the familiar water of the Atlantic.
And surely the waves were different,--longer, grayer, smoother, with
an immensely mightier heave. At least they seemed so, for every time
we rose on the swell, it was as if our boat were in the hand of Old
Ocean, and his mighty arm were “putting” us, as the athlete “puts” the
shot. It was all new and strange and very wild to me, with the wild
cries of the sea-birds already beginning to reach us as flocks of the
birds passed around and over our heads.

The fog was lifting. The thick, wet drift that had threatened our
little launch on Tillamook Bar stood clear of the shouldering sea to
the westward, and in over the shore, like an upper sea, hung at the
fir-girt middles of the mountains, as level and as gray as the sea
below. There was no breeze. The long, smooth swell of the Pacific
swung under us and in, until it whitened at the base of the three
rocks that rose out of the sea in our course, and that now began to
take on form in the foggy distance. Gulls were flying over us, lines
of black cormorants and crowds of murres were winging past, but we
were still too far away from the looming rocks to see that the gray of
their walls was the gray of uncounted colonies of nesting birds,
colonies that covered their craggy steeps as, on shore, the green firs
clothed the slopes of the Coast Range Mountains up to the hanging fog.

As we ran on nearer, the sound of the surf about the rocks became
audible, the birds in the air grew more numerous, their cries now
faintly mingling with the sound of the sea. A hole in the side of the
middle Rock, a mere fleck of foam it seemed at first, widened rapidly
into an arching tunnel through which our boat might run; the swell of
the sea began to break over half-sunken ledges; and soon upon us fell
the damp shadows of the three great rocks, for now we were looking far
up at their sides, where we could see the birds in their guano-gray
rookeries, rookery over rookery,--gulls, cormorants, guillemots,
puffins, murres,--encrusting the sides from tide-line to pinnacles, as
the crowding barnacles encrusted the bases from the tide-line down.

[Illustration: TUFTED PUFFINS]

We had not approached without protest, for the birds were coming off
to meet us, wheeling and clacking overhead, the nearer we drew, in a
constantly thickening cloud of lowering wings and tongues. The clamor
was indescribable, the tossing flight enough to make one mad with the
motion of wings. The air was filled, thick, with the whirling and the
screaming, the clacking, the honking, close to our ears, and high up
in the peaks, and far out over the waves. Never had I been in this
world before. Was I on my earth? or had I suddenly wakened up in some
old sea world where there was no dry land, no life but this?

We rounded the outer or Shag Rock and headed slowly in opposite the
yawning hole of the middle Rock as into some mighty cave, so sheer and
shadowy rose the walls above us,--so like to cavern thunder was the
throbbing of the surf through the hollow arches, was the flapping and
screaming of the birds against the high circling walls, was the deep,
menacing grumble of the bellowing sea-lions, as, through the muffle of
surf and sea-fowl, herd after herd lumbered headlong into the foam.

It was a strange, wild scene. Hardly a mile from the Oregon coast, but
cut off by breaker and bar from the abrupt, uninhabited shore, the
three rocks of the Reservation, each pierced with its resounding arch,
heaved their huge shoulders from the waves straight up, high,
towering, till our little steamer coasted their dripping sides like
some puffing pygmy.

Each rock was perhaps as large as a solid city square and as high as
the tallest of sky-scrapers; immense, monstrous piles, each of them,
and run through by these great caverns or arches, dim, dripping,
filled with the noise of the waves and the beat of thousands of wings.

They were of no part or lot with the dry land. Their wave-scooped
basins were set with purple starfish and filled with green and pink
anemones, and beaded many deep with mussels of amethyst and jet that
glittered in the clear beryl waters; and, above the jeweled basins,
like fabled beasts of old, lay the sea-lions, uncouth forms,
flippered, reversed in shape, with throats like the caves of Æolus,
hollow, hoarse, discordant; and higher up, on every jutting bench and
shelf, in every weathered rift, over every jog of the ragged cliffs,
to their bladed backs and pointed peaks, swarmed the sea-birds,
webfooted, amphibious, shaped of the waves, with stormy voices given
them by the winds that sweep in from the sea.

As I looked up at the amazing scene, at the mighty rocks and the
multitude of winging forms, I seemed to see three swirling piles of
life, three cones that rose like volcanoes from the ocean, their sides
covered with living lava, their craters clouded with the smoke of
wings, while their bases seemed belted by the rumble of a
multi-throated thunder. The very air was dank with the smell of
strange, strong volcanic gases,--no breath of the land, no odor of
herb, no scent of fresh soil; but the raw, rank smells of rookery and
den, saline, kelpy, fetid; the stench of fish and bedded guano, and of
the reeking pools where the sea-lion herds lay sleeping on the lower
rocks in the sun.

A boat’s keel was beneath me, but as I stood out on the pointed prow,
barely above the water, and found myself thrust forward without will
or effort among the crags and caverns, among the shadowy walls, the
damps, the smells, the sounds, among the bellowing beasts in the
churning waters about me, and into the storm of wings and tongues in
the whirling air above me, I passed from the things I had known, and
the time and the earth of man, into a monstrous period of the past.

This was the home of the sea-birds. Amid all the din we landed from a
yawl and began our climb toward the top of Shag Rock, the outermost of
the three. And here we had another and a different sight of the wild
life. It covered every crag. I clutched it in my hands; I crushed it
under my feet; it was thick in the air about me. My narrow path up the
face of the rock was a succession of sea-bird rookeries, of crowded
eggs, and huddled young, hairy or naked or wet from the shell. Every
time my fingers felt for a crack overhead they touched something warm
that rolled or squirmed; every time my feet moved under me, for a
hold, they pushed in among top-shaped eggs that turned on the shelf or
went over far below; and whenever I hugged the pushing wall I must
bear off from a mass of squealing, struggling, shapeless things, just
hatched. And down upon me, as rookery after rookery of old birds
whirred in fright from their ledges, fell crashing eggs and unfledged
young, that the greedy gulls devoured ere they touched the sea.

I was midway in the climb, at a bad turn round a point, edging inch by
inch along, my face pressed against the hard face of the rock, my feet
and fingers gripping any crack or seam they could feel, when out of
the deep space behind me I caught the swash of waves. Instantly a cold
hand seemed to clasp me from behind.

I flattened against the rock, my whole body, my very mind clinging
desperately for a hold,--a falling fragment of shale, a gust of wind,
the wing-stroke of a frightened bird, enough to break the hold and
swing me out over the water, washing faint and far below. A long
breath, and I was climbing again.

[Illustration: BRANDT’S CORMORANT]

We were on the outer Rock, our only possible ascent taking us up the
sheer south face. With the exception of an occasional Western gull’s
and pigeon guillemot’s nest, these steep sides were occupied entirely
by the California murres,--penguin-shaped birds about the size of a
small wild duck, chocolate-brown above, with white breasts,--which
literally covered the sides of the three great rocks wherever they
could find a hold. If a million meant anything, I should say there
were a million murres nesting on this outer Rock; not nesting either,
for the egg is laid upon the bare ledge, as you might place it upon a
mantel,--a single sharp-pointed egg, as large as a turkey’s, and just
as many of them on the ledge as there is standing-room for the birds.
The murre broods her very large egg by standing straight up over it,
her short legs, by dint of stretching, allowing her to straddle it,
her short tail propping her securely from behind.

On, up along the narrow back, or blade, of the rock, and over the
peak, were the well-spaced nests of the Brandt’s cormorants, nests the
size of an ordinary straw hat, made of sea-grass and the
yellow-flowered sulphur-weed that grew in a dense mat over the north
slope of the top, each nest holding four long, dirty blue eggs or as
many black, shivering young; and in the low sulphur-weed, all along
the roof-like slope of the top, built the gulls and the tufted
puffins; and, with the burrowing puffins, often in the same holes,
were found the Kaeding’s petrels; while down below them, as up above
them,--all around the rock-rim that dropped sheer to the sea,--stood
the cormorants, black, silent, statuesque; and everywhere were nests
and eggs and young, and everywhere were flying, crying birds--above,
about, and far below me, a whirling, whirring vortex of wings that had
caught me in its funnel.




CHAPTER VIII

THE MOTHER MURRE


I hear the bawling of my neighbor’s cow. Her calf was carried off
yesterday, and since then, during the long night, and all day long,
her insistent woe has made our hillside melancholy. But I shall not
hear her to-night, not from this distance. She will lie down to-night
with the others of the herd, and munch her cud. Yet, when the rattling
stanchions grow quiet and sleep steals along the stalls, she will turn
her ears at every small stirring; she will raise her head to listen
and utter a low, tender _moo_. Her full udder hurts; but her cud is
sweet. She is only a cow.

Had she been a wild cow, or had she been out with her calf in a wild
pasture, the mother-love in her would have lived for six months. Here
in the barn she will be forced to forget her calf in a few hours, and
by morning her mother-love shall utterly have died.

There is a mother-principle alive in all nature that never dies. This
is different from mother-love. The oak tree responds to the
mother-principle, and bears acorns. It is a law of life. The
mother-love or passion, on the other hand, occurs only among the
higher animals. It is very common; and yet, while it is one of the
strongest, most interesting, most beautiful of animal traits, it is at
the same time the most individual and variable of all animal traits.

This particular cow of my neighbor’s that I hear lowing, is an
entirely gentle creature ordinarily, but with a calf at her side she
will pitch at any one who approaches her. And there is no other cow in
the herd that mourns so long after her calf. The mother in her is
stronger, more enduring, than in any of the other nineteen cows in the
barn. My own cow hardly mourns at all when her calf is taken away. She
might be an oak tree losing its acorns, or a crab losing her hatching
eggs, so far as any show of love is concerned.

The female crab attaches her eggs to her swimmerets and carries them
about with her for their protection as the most devoted of mothers;
yet she is no more conscious of them, and feels no more for them, than
the frond of a cinnamon fern feels for its spores. She is a mother,
without the love of the mother.

In the spider, however, just one step up the animal scale from the
crab, you find the mother-love or passion. Crossing a field the other
day, I came upon a large female spider of the hunter family, carrying
a round white sack of eggs, half the size of a cherry, attached to her
spinnerets. Plucking a long stem of grass, I detached the sack of eggs
without bursting it. Instantly the mother turned and sprang at the
grass-stem, fighting and biting until she got to the sack, which she
seized in her strong jaws and made off with as fast as her long, rapid
legs would carry her.

I laid the stem across her back and again took the sack away. She came
on for it, fighting more fiercely than before. Once more she seized
it; once more I forced it from her jaws, while she sprang at the
grass-stem and tried to tear it to pieces. She must have been fighting
for two minutes when, by a regrettable move on my part, one of her
legs was injured. She did not falter in her fight. On she rushed for
the sack as fast as I pulled it away. She would have fought for that
sack, I believe, until she had not one of her eight legs to stand on,
had I been cruel enough to compel her. It did not come to this, for
suddenly the sack burst, and out poured, to my amazement, a myriad of
tiny brown spiderlings. Before I could think what to do that mother
spider had rushed among them and caused them to swarm upon her,
covering her, many deep, even to the outer joints of her long legs. I
did not disturb her again, but stood by and watched her slowly move
off with her encrusting family to a place of safety.

I had seen these spiders try hard to escape with their egg-sacks
before, but had never tested the strength of their purpose. For a time
after this experience I made a point of taking the sacks away from
every spider I found. Most of them scurried off to seek their own
safety; one of them dropped her sack of her own accord; some of them
showed reluctance to leave it; some of them a disposition to fight;
but none of them the fierce, consuming mother-fire of the one with the
hurt leg.

Among the fishes, much higher animal forms than the spiders, we find
the mother-love only in the _males_. It is the male stickleback that
builds the nest, then goes out and _drives_ the female in to lay her
eggs, then straightway drives her out to prevent her eating them, then
puts himself on guard outside the nest to protect them from other
sticklebacks and other enemies, until the young shall hatch and be
able to swim away by themselves. Here he stays for a month, without
eating or sleeping, so far as we know.

It is the male toadfish that crawls into the nest-hole and takes
charge of the numerous family. He may dig the hole, too, as the male
stickleback builds the nest. I do not know as to that. But I have
raised many a stone in the edge of the tide along the shore of Naushon
Island in Buzzard’s Bay, to find the under surface covered with round,
drop-like, amber eggs, and in the shallow cavity beneath, an old male
toadfish, slimy and croaking, and with a countenance ugly enough to
turn a prowling eel to stone. The female deposits the eggs, glues them
fast with much nicety to the under surface of the rock, as a female
might, and finishes her work. Departing at once, she leaves the coming
brood to the care of the male, who from this time, without relief or
even food in all probability, assumes the rôle and all the
responsibilities of mother, and must consequently feel all the
mother-love.

Something like this is true of the common hornpout, or catfish, I
believe, though I have never seen it recorded, and lack the chance at
present of proving my earlier observations. I think it is father
catfish that takes charge of the brood, of the swarm of kitten
catfish, from the time the spawn is laid.

A curious sharing of mother qualities by male and female is shown in
the Surinam toads of South America, where the male, taking the newly
deposited eggs, places them upon the back of the female. Here, glued
fast by their own adhesive jelly, they are soon surrounded by cells
grown of the skin of the back, each cell capped by a lid. In these
cells the eggs hatch, and the young go through their metamorphoses,
apparently absorbing some nourishment through the skin of their
mother. Finally they break through the lids of their cells and hop
away. They might as well be toadstools upon a dead stump, so far as
motherly care or concern goes, for, aside from allowing the male to
spread the eggs upon her back, she is no more a mother to them than
the dead stump is to the toadstools. She is host only to the little
parasites.

I do not know of any mother-love among the reptiles. The
mother-passion, so far as my observation goes, plays no part whatever
in the life of reptiles. Whereas, passing on to the birds, the
mother-passion becomes by all odds the most interesting thing in
bird-life.

And is not the mother-passion among the mammals even more interesting?
It is as if the watcher in the woods went out to see the mother animal
only. It is her going and coming that we follow; her faring, foraging,
and watch-care that let us deepest into the secrets of wild animal
life.

On one of the large estates here in Hingham, a few weeks ago, a fox
was found to be destroying poultry. The time of the raids, and their
boldness, were proof enough that the fox must be a female with young.
Poisoned meat was prepared for her, and at once the raids ceased. A
few days later one of the workmen of the estate came upon the den of a
fox, at the mouth of which lay dead a whole litter of young ones. They
had been poisoned. The mother had not eaten the prepared food herself,
but had carried it home to her family. They must have died in the
burrow, for it was evident from the signs that she had dragged them
into the fresh air to revive them, and deposited them gently on the
sand by the hole. Then in her perplexity she had brought various
tidbits of mouse and bird and rabbit, which she placed at their noses
to tempt them to wake up out of their strange sleep and eat. No one
knows how long she watched beside the lifeless forms, nor what her
emotions were. She must have left the neighborhood soon after,
however, for no one has seen her since about the estate.

The bird mother is the bravest, tenderest, most appealing thing one
ever comes upon in the fields. It is the rare exception, but we
sometimes find the real mother wholly lacking among the birds, as in
the case of our notorious cowbird, who sneaks about, watching her
chance, when some smaller bird is gone, to drop her egg into its nest.
The egg must be laid, the burden of the race has been put upon the
bird, but not the precious burden of the child. She lays eggs; but is
not a mother.

The same is true of the European cuckoos, but not quite true, in spite
of popular belief, of our American cuckoos. For our birds (both
species) build rude, elementary nests as a rule, and brood their eggs.
Occasionally they may use a robin’s or a catbird’s nest, in order to
save labor. So undeveloped is the mother in the cuckoo that if you
touch her eggs she will leave them--abandon her rude nest and eggs as
if any excuse were excuse enough for an escape from the cares of
motherhood. How should a bird with so little mother-love ever learn to
build a firm-walled, safe, and love-lined nest?

The great California condor is a most faithful and anxious mother; the
dumb affection of both parent birds, indeed, for their single
offspring is pathetically human. On the other hand, the mother in the
turkey buzzard is so evenly balanced against the vulture in her that I
have known a brooding bird to be so upset by the sudden approach of a
man as to rise from off her eggs and devour them instantly, greedily,
and make off on her serenely soaring wings into the clouds.

Such mothers, however, are not the rule. The buzzard, the cuckoo, and
the cowbird are the striking exceptions. The flicker will keep on
laying eggs as fast as one takes them from the nest-hole, until she
has no more eggs to lay. The quail will sometimes desert her nest if
even a single egg is so much as touched, but only because she knows
that she has been discovered and must start a new nest, hidden in some
new place, for safety. She is a wise and devoted mother, keeping her
brood with her as a “covey” all winter long.

One of the most striking cases of mother-love which has ever come
under my observation, I saw in the summer of 1912 on the bird
rookeries of the Three-Arch Rocks Reservation off the coast of Oregon.

We were making our slow way toward the top of the outer rock. Through
rookery after rookery of birds we climbed until we reached the edge of
the summit. Scrambling over this edge, we found ourselves in the midst
of a great colony of nesting murres--hundreds of them--covering this
steep rocky part of the top.

As our heads appeared above the rim, many of the colony took wing and
whirred over us out to sea, but most of them sat close, each bird upon
its egg or over its chick, loath to leave, and so expose to us the
hidden treasure.

The top of the rock was somewhat cone-shaped, and in order to reach
the peak and the colonies on the west side we had to make our way
through this rookery of the murres. The first step among them, and
the whole colony was gone, with a rush of wings and feet that sent
several of the top-shaped eggs rolling, and several of the young birds
toppling over the cliff to the pounding waves and ledges far below.

We stopped, but the colony, almost to a bird, had bolted, leaving
scores of eggs and scores of downy young squealing and running
together for shelter, like so many beetles under a lifted board.

But the birds had not every one bolted, for here sat two of the colony
among the broken rocks. These two had not been frightened off. That
both of them were greatly alarmed, any one could see from their open
beaks, their rolling eyes, their tense bodies on tiptoe for flight.
Yet here they sat, their wings out like props, or more like gripping
hands, as if they were trying to hold themselves down to the rocks
against their wild desire to fly.

And so they were, in truth, for under their extended wings I saw
little black feet moving. Those two mother murres were not going to
forsake their babies! No, not even for these approaching monsters,
such as they had never before seen, clambering over their rocks.

What was different about these two? They had their young ones to
protect. Yes, but so had every bird in the great colony its young one,
or its egg, to protect, yet all the others had gone. Did these two
have more mother-love than the others? And hence, more courage, more
intelligence?

We took another step toward them, and one of the two birds sprang into
the air, knocking her baby over and over with the stroke of her wing,
and coming within an inch of hurling it across the rim to be battered
on the ledges below. The other bird raised her wings to follow, then
clapped them back over her baby. Fear is the most contagious thing in
the world; and that flap of fear by the other bird thrilled her, too,
but as she had withstood the stampede of the colony, so she caught
herself again and held on.

She was now alone on the bare top of the rock, with ten thousand
circling birds screaming to her in the air above, and with two men
creeping up to her with a big black camera that clicked ominously. She
let the multitude scream, and with threatening beak watched the two
men come on. A motherless baby, spying her, ran down the rock
squealing for his life. She spread a wing, put her bill behind him
and shoved him quickly in out of sight with her own baby. The man with
the camera saw the act, for I heard his machine click, and I heard him
say something under his breath that you would hardly expect a mere man
and a game-warden to say. But most men have a good deal of the mother
in them; and the old bird had acted with such decision, such courage,
such swift, compelling instinct, that any man, short of the wildest
savage, would have felt his heart quicken at the sight.

“Just how compelling might that mother-instinct be?” I wondered. “Just
how much would that mother-love stand?” I had dropped to my knees, and
on all fours had crept up within about three feet of the bird. She
still had chance for flight. Would she allow me to crawl any nearer?
Slowly, very slowly, I stretched forward on my hands, like a
measuring-worm, until my body lay flat on the rocks, and my fingers
were within three _inches_ of her. But her wings were twitching, a
wild light danced in her eyes, and her head turned toward the sea.

For a whole minute I did not stir. I was watching--and the wings again
began to tighten about the babies, the wild light in the eyes died
down, the long, sharp beak turned once more toward me.

Then slowly, very slowly, I raised my hand, touched her feathers with
the tip of one finger--with two fingers--with my whole hand, while
the loud camera click-clacked, click-clacked hardly four feet away!

It was a thrilling moment. I was not killing anything. I had no
long-range rifle in my hands, coming up against the wind toward an
unsuspecting creature hundreds of yards away. This was no wounded
leopard charging me; no mother-bear defending with her giant might a
captured cub. It was only a mother-bird, the size of a wild duck, with
swift wings at her command, hiding under those wings her own and
another’s young, and her own boundless fear!

For the second time in my life I had taken captive with my bare hands
a free wild bird. No, I had not taken her captive. She had made
herself a captive; she had taken herself in the strong net of her
mother-love.

And now her terror seemed quite gone. At the first touch of my hand I
think she felt the love restraining it, and without fear or fret she
let me reach under her and pull out the babies. But she reached after
them with her bill to tuck them back out of sight, and when I did not
let them go, she sidled toward me, quacking softly, a language that I
perfectly understood, and was quick to respond to. I gave them back,
fuzzy and black and white. She got them under her, stood up over them,
pushed her wings down hard around them, her stout tail down hard
behind them, and together with them pushed in an abandoned egg that
was close at hand. Her own baby, some one else’s baby, and some one
else’s forsaken egg! She could cover no more; she had not feathers
enough. But she had heart enough; and into her mother’s heart she had
already tucked every motherless egg and nestling of the thousands of
frightened birds, screaming and wheeling in the air high over her
head.




CHAPTER IX

MOTHER CAREY’S CHICKENS


“Who has not wondered,” I asked, many years ago, “as he has seen the
red rim of the sun sink down in the sea, where the little brood of
Mother Carey’s chickens skimming round the vessel would sleep that
night?” Here on the waves, no doubt, but what a bed! You have seen
them, or you will see them the first time you cross the ocean, far out
of sight of land--a little band of small dark birds, veering,
glancing, skimming the heaving sea like swallows, or riding the great
waves up and down, from crest to trough, as easily as Bobolink rides
the swaying clover billows in the meadow behind the barn.

I have stood at the prow and watched them as the huge steamer ploughed
her way into the darkening ocean. Down in the depths beneath me the
porpoises were playing,--as if the speeding ship, with its mighty
engines, were only another porpoise playing tag with them,--and off on
the gray sea ahead, where the circle of night seemed to be closing in,
this little flock of stormy petrels, Mother Carey’s chickens, rising,
falling with the heave and sag of the sea, so far, for such little
wings, from the shore!

You will see them, and you will ask yourself, as I asked myself,
“Where is their home? Where do they nest?” I hope you will also have a
chance to answer the question some time for yourself, as I had a
chance to answer it for myself recently, out on the Three-Arch Rocks,
in the Pacific, just off the coast of Oregon.

I visited the rocks to see all their multitudinous wild life,--their
gulls, cormorants, murres, guillemots, puffins, oyster-catchers, and
herds of sea-lions,--but more than any other one thing I wanted to see
the petrels, Kaeding’s petrels, that nest on the top of Shag Rock, the
outermost of the three rocks of the Reservation.

No, not merely to _see_ the petrels: what I really wished to do was to
stay all night on the storm-swept peak in order to hear the petrels
come back to their nests on the rock in the dusk and dark. My friend
Finley had done it, years before, on this very rock. On the steep
north slope of the top he had found a safe spot between two jutting
crags, and, wrapping himself in his blanket as the sun went down
behind the hill of the sea, had waited for the winnowing of the small
mysterious wings.

Just to sleep in such a bed would be enough. To lie down far up on the
ragged peak of this wild sea rock, with the break and swash of the
waves coming up from far beneath you, with the wide sea-wind coming
in, and the dusk spreading down, and the wild sea-birds murmuring in
their strange tongues all about you--it would be enough just to turn
one’s face to the lonely sky in such a spot and listen. But how much
more to hear suddenly, among all these strange sounds, the swift
fanning of wings--to feel them close above your face--and to see in
the dim dusk wavering shadowy forms, like a troop of longwinged bats,
hovering over the slope and chittering in a rapid, unbirdlike talk, as
if afraid the very dark might hear them!

That was what I wanted so much to hear and to see. For down in a
little burrow, in the accumulated earth and guano of the top, under
each of these hovering shadows, would be another shadow, waiting to
hear the beating of the wings and the chitter above; and I wanted to
see the mate in the burrow come out and greet the mate that had been
all day upon the sea.

This petrel digs itself a little burrow and lays one egg. The burrow
might hold both birds at once, but one seldom finds two birds in the
burrow together. While one is brooding, the other is off on its
wonderful wings--away off in the wake of your ocean steamer, perhaps,
miles and miles from shore. But when darkness falls it remembers its
nest and speeds home to the rock, taking its place down in the little
black burrow, while the mate comes forth and spreads its wings out
over the heaving water, not to return, it may be, until the night and
the day have passed and twilight falls again.

We landed on a ledge of Shag Rock, driving off a big bull sea-lion who
claimed this particular slab of rock as his own. We backed up close to
the shelf in a yawl boat, and as the waves rose and fell, watched our
chance to leap from the stern of the little boat to the rock. Thus we
landed our cameras, food and water, and other things, then we dragged
the boat up, so that, a storm arising or anything happening to the
small steamer that had brought us, we might still get away to the
shore.

It was about the middle of the forenoon. All the morning, as we had
steamed along, a thick fog had threatened us; but now the sun broke
out, making it possible to use our cameras, and after a hasty lunch we
started for the top of the rock--a climb that looked impossible, and
that was pretty nearly as impossible as it looked.

It had been a slow, perilous climb; but, once on the summit, where we
could move somewhat freely and use the cameras, we hurried from colony
to colony to take advantage of the uncertain sunlight, which, indeed,
utterly failed us after only an hour’s work. But, as I had no camera,
I made the best of it, giving all my time to studying the ways of the
birds. Besides, I had come to stay on the peak all night; I could do
my work well enough in the dark. But I could not do it in the wind and
rain.

The sun went into the clouds about four o’clock, but so absorbed was I
in watching, and so thick was the air with wings, so clangorous with
harsh tongues, that I had not seen the fog moving in, or noticed that
the gray wind of the morning had begun to growl about the crags.
Looking off to seaward, I now saw that a heavy bank of mist had
blurred the sky-line and settled down upon the sea. The wind had
freshened; a fine, cold drizzle was beginning to fall, and soon came
slanting across the peak. The prospect was grim and forbidding. Then
the rain began. The night was going to be dark and stormy, too wet and
wild for watching, here where I must hang on with my hands or else
slip and go over--down--down to the waves below.

We started to descend at once, while there was still light enough to
see by, and before the rocks were made any slipperier by the rain. We
did not fear the wind much, for that was from the north, and we must
descend by the south face, up which we had come.

I was deeply disappointed. My night with the petrels on the top was
out of the question. Yet as I backed over the rim of that peak, and
began to pick my way down, it was not disappointment, but fear that I
felt. It had been bad enough coming up; but this going down!--with the
cold, wet shadow of night encircling you and lying dark on the cold,
sullen sea below--this was altogether worse.

The rocks were already wet, and the footing was treacherous. As we
worked slowly along, the birds in the gathering gloom seemed to fear
us less, flying close about our heads, their harsh cries and winging
tumult adding not a little to the peril of the descent. And then the
looking down! and then the impossibility at places of even looking
down--when one could only hang on with one’s hands and feel around in
the empty air with one’s feet for something to stand on!

I got a third of the way down, perhaps, and then stopped. The men did
not laugh at me. They simply looped a rope about me, under my arms,
and lowered me over the narrow shelves into the midst of a large murre
colony, from which point I got on alone. Then they tied the rope about
Dallas, my eleven-year-old son, who was with me on the expedition, and
lowered him.

He came bumping serenely down, smoothing all the little murres and
feeling of all the warm eggs on the way, as if they might have been so
many little kittens, and as if he might have been at home on the
kitchen floor, instead of dangling down the face of a cliff two
hundred or more feet above the sea.

Some forty feet from the waves was a weathered niche, or shelf, eight
or ten feet wide. Here we stopped for the night. The wind was from the
other side of the rock; the overhanging ledge protected us somewhat
from above, though the mist swept about the steep walls to us, and the
drizzle dripped from overhead. But as I pulled my blanket about me and
lay down beside the other men the thought of what the night must be on
the summit made the hard, damp rock under me seem the softest and
warmest of beds.

But what a place was this to sleep in!--this narrow ledge with a
rookery of wild sea-birds just above it, with the den of a wild
sea-beast just below it, with the storm-swept sky shut down upon it,
and the sea, the crawling, sinister sea, coiling and uncoiling its
laving folds about it, as with endless undulations it slipped over the
sunken ledges and swam round and round the rock.

What a place was this to sleep! I could not sleep. I was as wakeful as
the wild beasts that come forth at night to seek their prey. I must
catch a glimpse of Night through her veil of mist, the gray, ghostly
Night, as she came down the long, rolling slope of the sea, and I must
listen, for my very fingers seemed to have ears, so many were the
sounds, and so strange--the talk of the wind on the rock, the sweep
of the storm, the lap of the waves, the rumbling mutter of the wakeful
caverns, the cry of birds, the hoarse grumbling growl of the sea-lions
swimming close below.

The clamor of the birds was at first disturbing. But soon the
confusion caused by our descent among them subsided; the large colony
of murres close by our heads returned to their rookery; and with the
rain and thickening dark there spread everywhere the quiet of a low
murmurous quacking. Sleep was settling over the rookeries.

Down in the sea below us rose the head of an old sea-lion, the old
lone bull whose den we had invaded. He was coming back to sleep. He
rose and sank, blinking dully at the cask we had left on his ledge;
then clambered out and hitched slowly up toward his sleeping-place. I
counted the scars on his head, and noted the fresh deep gash on his
right side. I could hear him blow and breathe.

I drew back from the edge, and, pulling the piece of sail-cloth over
me and the small boy at my side, turned my face up to the slanting
rain. Two young gulls came out of their hiding in a cranny and nestled
against my head, their parents calling gently to them from time to
time all night long. In the murre colony overhead there was a constant
stir and a soft, low talk, and over all the rock, through all the
darkened air there was a silent coming and going of wings--wings--of
the stormy petrels, some of them, I felt sure, the swift shadow wings
of Mother Carey’s chickens that I had so longed to hear come winnowing
in from afar on the sea.

The drizzle thickened. And now I heard the breathing of the sleeping
men beside me; and under me I felt the narrow shelf of rock dividing
the waters from the waters, and then--I, too, must have slept; for
utter darkness was upon the face of the deep.




CHAPTER X

RIDING THE RIM ROCK


From P Ranch to Winnemucca is a seventeen-day drive through a desert
of rim rock and greasewood and sage, which, under the most favorable
of conditions, is beset with difficulty; but which, in the dry season,
and with a herd of anything like four thousand, becomes an unbroken
hazard. More than anything else on such a drive is feared the wild
herd-spirit, the quick black temper of the cattle, that by one sign or
another ever threatens to break the spell of the rider’s power and
sweep the maddened or terrorized herd to destruction. The handling of
the herd to keep this spirit sleeping is ofttimes a thrilling
experience.

Some time before my visit to P Ranch, in Harney County, southeastern
Oregon, in the summer of 1912, the riders had taken out a herd of four
thousand steers on what proved to be one of the most difficult drives
ever made to Winnemucca, the shipping station in northern Nevada.

For the first two days on the trail the cattle were strange to each
other, having been gathered from widely distant grazing-grounds,--from
the Double O and the Home ranches,--and were somewhat clannish and
restive under the driving. At the beginning of the third day signs of
real ugliness appeared. The hot weather and a shortage of water began
to tell on the temper of the herd.

The third day was long and exceedingly hot. The line started forward
at dawn and all day long kept moving, with the sun cooking the bitter
smell of sage into the air, and with the sixteen thousand hoofs
kicking up a still bitterer smother of alkali dust that inflamed eyes
and nostrils and coated the very lungs of the cattle. The fierce
desert thirst was upon the herd long before it reached the creek where
it was to bed for the night. The heat and the dust had made slow work
of the driving, and it was already late when they reached the
creek--only to find it dry.

This was bad. The men were tired. But, worse, the cattle were thirsty,
and Wade, the “boss of the buckaroos,” pushed the herd on toward the
next rim rock, hoping to get down to the plain below to water before
the end of the slow desert twilight. Anything for the night but a dry
camp.

They had hardly started on when a whole flank of the herd, as if by
prearrangement, suddenly breaking away and dividing about two of the
riders, tore off through the brush. The horses were as tired as the
men, and before the chase was over the twilight was gray in the sage
and it became necessary to halt at once and make camp where they were.
They would have to go without water.

The runaways were brought up and the herd closed in till it formed a
circle nearly a mile around. This was as close as it could be drawn,
for the cattle would not bed--lie down. They wanted water more than
they wanted rest. Their eyes were red, their tongues raspy with
thirst. The situation was a serious one.

But camp was made. Two of the riders were sent back along the trail to
bring up the “drags,” while Wade with his other men circled the uneasy
cattle, closing them in, quieting them, and doing everything possible
to make them bed.

But they were thirsty, and, instead of bedding, the herd began to
“growl”--a distant mutter of throats, low, rumbling, ominous, as when
faint thunder rolls behind the hills. Every plainsman fears the growl,
for it usually is a prelude to the “milling,” as it proved to be now,
when the whole vast herd began to stir, slowly, singly, and without
direction, till at length it moved together, round and round, a great
compact circle, the multitude of clicking hoofs, of clashing horns,
and chafing sides like the sound of rushing rain across a field of
corn.

Nothing could be worse for the cattle. The cooler twilight was
falling, but, mingling with it, rose and thickened and spread the
choking dust from their feet that soon covered them and shut out all
but the dark wall of the herd from sight.

Slowly, evenly swung the wall, round and round without a break. Only
one who has watched a milling herd can know its suppressed
excitement. To keep that excitement in check was the problem of Wade
and his men. And the night had not yet begun.

When the riders had brought in the drags and the chuck-wagon had
lumbered up with supper, Wade set the first watch.

Along with the wagon had come the fresh horses--and Peroxide Jim, a
supple, powerful, clean-limbed buckskin, that had, I think, as fine
and intelligent an animal-face as any I ever saw. And why should he
not have been saved fresh for just such a need as this? Are there not
superior horses to match superior men--a Peroxide Jim to complement a
Wade and so combine a real centaur, noble physical power controlled by
noble intelligence? At any rate, the horse understood the situation,
and though there was nothing like sentiment about the boss of the P
Ranch riders, his faith in Peroxide Jim was complete.

The other night horses were saddled and tied to the wheels of the
wagon. It was Wade’s custom to take his turn with the second watch;
but, shifting his saddle to Peroxide Jim, he rode out with the four of
the first watch, who, evenly spaced, were quietly circling the herd.

The night, for this part of the desert, was unusually warm; it was
close, silent, and without a sky. The near thick darkness blotted out
the stars. There is usually a breeze at night over these highest
rim-rock plains that, no matter how hot the day, crowds the cattle
together for warmth. To-night not a breath stirred the sage as Wade
wound in and out among the bushes, the hot dust stinging his eyes and
caking rough on his skin.

Round and round moved the weaving, shifting forms, out of the dark and
into the dark, a gray spectral line like a procession of ghosts, or
some slow morris of the desert’s sheeted dead. But it was not a line,
it was a sea of forms; not a procession, but the even surging of a
maelstrom of hoofs a mile around.

Wade galloped out on the plain for a breath of air and a look at the
sky. A quick cold rain would quiet them; but there was no feel of rain
in the darkness, no smell of it in the air. Only the powdery taste of
bitter sage.

The desert, where the herd had camped, was one of the highest of a
series of tablelands, or benches, that lay as level as a floor, and
rimmed by a sheer wall of rock over which it dropped to the bench of
sage below. The herd had been headed for a pass, and was now halted
within a mile of the rim rock on the east, where there was about three
hundred feet of perpendicular fall.

It was the last place an experienced plainsman would have chosen for a
camp; and every time Wade circled the herd and came in between the
cattle and the rim, he felt its nearness. The darkness helped to
bring it near. The height of his horse brought it near--he seemed to
look down from his saddle over it, into its dark depths. The herd in
its milling was surely warping slowly in the direction of the
precipice. But this was all fancy--the trick of the dark and of
nerves, if a plainsman has nerves.

At twelve o’clock the first guard came in and woke the second watch.
Wade had been in his saddle since dawn, but this was his regular
watch. More than that, his trained ear had timed the milling hoofs.
The movement of the herd had quickened.

If now he could keep them going and could prevent their taking any
sudden fright! They must not stop until they stopped from utter
weariness. Safety lay in their continued motion. So Wade, with the
fresh riders, flanked them closely, paced them, and urged them quietly
on. They must be kept milling, and they must be kept from fright.

In the taut silence of the starless desert night, with the tension of
the cattle at the snapping-point, any quick, unwonted sight or sound
would stampede the herd--the sneezing of a horse, the flare of a
match, enough to send the whole four thousand headlong--blind,
frenzied, tramping--till spent and scattered over the plain.

And so, as he rode, Wade began to sing. The rider ahead of him took up
the air and passed it on, until, above the stepping stir of the hoofs,
rose the faint voices of the men, and all the herd was bound about by
the slow, plaintive measure of some old song. It was not to soothe
their savage breasts that the riders sang to the cattle, but to
prevent the shock of any loud or sudden noise.

So they sang and rode, and the night wore on to one o’clock, when
Wade, coming up on the rim-rock side, felt a cool breeze fan his face,
and caught a breath of fresh, moist wind with the taste of water in
it.

He checked his horse instantly, listening as the wind swept past him
over the cattle. But they must already have smelled it, for they had
ceased their milling. The whole herd stood motionless, the indistinct
forms nearest him showing, in the dark, their bald faces lifted to
drink the sweet wet breath that came over the rim. Then they started
again, but faster, and with a rumbling from their hoarse throats that
tightened Wade’s grip on his reins.

The sound seemed to come out of the earth, a low, rumbling mumble, as
deep as the night and as wide as the plain, a thick, inarticulate
bellow that stood every rider stiff in his stirrups.

The breeze caught the dust and carried it back from the gray-coated,
ghostly shapes, and Wade saw that they were still moving in a circle.
If only he could keep them going! He touched his horse to ride on with
them, when across the black sky flashed a vivid streak of lightning.

There was a snort from the steers, a quick clap of horns and hoofs
from within the herd, a tremor of the plain, a roar, a surging
mass--and Wade was riding the flank of a wild stampede. Before him,
behind him, beside him, pressing hard upon his horse, galloped the
frenzied steers, and beyond them a multitude, borne on, and bearing
him on, by the heave of the galloping herd.

Wade was riding for his life. He knew it. His horse knew it. He was
riding to turn the herd, too,--back from the rim,--as the horse also
knew. The cattle were after water--water-mad--and would go over the
precipice to get it, carrying horse and rider with them.

Wade was the only rider between the herd and the rim. It was black as
death. He could see nothing in the sage, could scarcely discern the
pounding, panting shadows at his side; but he knew by the swish of the
brush and the plunging of the horse that the ground was growing
stonier, that they were nearing the rocks.

To outrun the cattle seemed his only chance. If he could come up with
the leaders he might yet head them off upon the plain and save the
herd. There were cattle still ahead of him,--how many, what part of
the herd, he could not tell. But the horse knew. The reins hung on his
straight neck, while Wade, yelling and firing into the air, gave him
the race to win, to lose.

Suddenly they veered and went high in the air, as a steer plunged
headlong into a draw almost beneath his feet. They cleared the narrow
ravine, landed on bare rock, and reeled on.

They were riding the rim. Close on their left bore down the flank of
the herd, and on their right, under their very feet, was the
precipice, so close that they felt its blackness--its three hundred
feet of fall.

A piercing, half-human bawl of terror told where a steer had been
crowded over. Would the next leap crowd them over too? Then Wade found
himself racing neck and neck with a big white steer, which the horse,
with marvelous instinct, seemed to pick from a bunch, and to cling to,
forcing him gradually ahead, till, cutting him free from the bunch
entirely, he bore him off into the sage.

The group coming on behind followed the leader, and after them swung
others. The tide was turning. Within a short time the whole herd had
veered, and, bearing off from the cliffs, was pounding over the open
plains.

Whose race was it? It was Peroxide Jim’s, according to Wade, for not
by word or by touch of hand or knee had he been directed in the run.
From the flash of the lightning the horse had taken the bit, had
covered an indescribably perilous path at top speed, had outrun the
herd and turned it from the edge of the rim rock, without a false step
or a shaken nerve.

[Illustration: (Page 7) “NECK AND NECK WITH A BIG WHITE STEER”]

Bred on the desert, broken in at the round-up, trained to think steer
as the rider thinks it, the horse knew, as swiftly, as clearly as his
rider, the work before him. But that he kept himself from fright, that
none of the wild herd-madness passed into him, is a thing for great
wonder. He was as thirsty as any of the herd; he knew his own peril, I
believe, as none of the herd had ever known anything, and yet such
coolness, courage, wisdom, and power!

Was it training? Superior intelligence? More intimate association with
the man on his back, and so a farther remove from the wild thing that
domestication does not seem to touch? Or was it all by suggestion, the
superior intelligence above him riding, not only the flesh, but the
spirit?

Not all suggestion, I believe. Perhaps a herd of horses could not be
stampeded so easily as these P Ranch cattle. In this race, however,
nothing of the wild herd-spirit touched the horse. Had the cattle been
horses, would Peroxide Jim have been able to keep himself outside the
stampede and above the spirit of the herd?




CHAPTER XI

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO DO THIS SUMMER


I

First, select some bird or beast or insect that lives with you in your
dooryard or house or near neighborhood, and keep track of his doings
all summer long, jotting down in a diary your observations. You might
take the white-faced hornet that builds the big paper nests in the
trees; or the mud wasp, or the toad under the steps, or the swifts in
the chimney, or the swallows in the barn. It hardly matters what you
take, for every life is interesting. The object is to learn how to
follow up your study, how to watch one life long enough, and under
circumstances different enough, to discover its many-sidedness, its
fascination and romance. Such careful and prolonged study will surely
reveal to you something no one else has seen, too. It will be good
training in patience and independence.


II

Along with this study of _one_ life, keep a list of all the beasts,
birds, insects, flowers, etc., that live--I mean, that build nests or
dig holes and rear families--in your dooryard or in this “haunt” that
I told you in “The Spring of the Year” (see page 42, Sections III and
IV) you ought to pick out as your own field of study. This list will
grow all through the summer and from year to year. I have a list of
seventy-six wild neighbors (not counting the butterflies and insects)
that are sharing my fourteen-acre farm with me. How many and _what_
wild things are sharing your dooryard, your park, your favorite haunt
or farm with you? Such a list of names, with a blank place left for
each where observations can be entered from time to time, would be one
of the most useful and interesting journals you could keep.


III

All through June and into July you should have a round of birds’ nests
that you visit daily, and to which you can take your friends and
visitors--that is, if you live in or near the country. One will be in
the big unused chimney of the house, perhaps, and that will be the
first; then one in the barn, or in a bird-house in the yard; or in the
pear-or apple-tree hole; one in the lilac or honeysuckle bushes, and
then down into the orchard, out into the meadow, on into the woods and
back--taking in twenty to thirty birds’ nests with eggs and young! Did
you ever do it? Can you do it this summer? Don’t you think it would be
quite as exciting and interesting as going to the circus? I can do it;
and if you come out to Mullein Hill in June or July, any one of my
small boys will take you on his “birds’ nest round.”


IV

You should camp out--even if you have to pitch your tent in the back
yard or up on the roof! You should go to sleep on a bed of
boughs,--pine, or spruce, or hickory, if possible,--or swing your
hammock between the trunks of sweet-smelling forest trees, and turn
your face up to the stars! You will never want to sleep in a room with
closed windows after that. To see the stars looking down upon you; to
see the tree-tops swaying over you; to feel the fresh night wind
stealing across your face and breathing into your very soul--yes, you
must sleep at least _one_ night this summer right out on a bed of
boughs; but with a blanket of wool and a piece of sail-cloth or rubber
coat over you and under you, and perhaps some mosquito-netting.


V

But you must _not_ build a fire in the woods, unless you have a guide
or older people with a permit along. Fires are terrible masters, and
it is almost as dangerous to build a fire in the woods as to build one
in the waste-paper basket in the basement of some large store. Along
the seashore or by the margin of a river or lake, if you take every
precaution, it might be safe enough; but in the woods, if camping out,
make all preparations by clearing a wide space down to the bare
ground, then see that it is bare ground and not a boggy, rooty
peat-bed beneath, that will take fire and smoulder and burn away down
under the surface out of sight, to break through, perhaps, a week
after you have gone, and set the whole mountain-side afire. Build your
fire on bare, sandy earth; have a shovel and can of water at hand, and
put the fire out when you are done with it. It is against the law in
most States to set a fire out of doors after the 1st of April, without
a permit from the fire-warden.

Now, after this caution, you ought to go out some evening by the shore
with a small party and roast some green corn in the husk; then,
wrapping some potatoes in clay, bake them; if you have fish, wrap them
in clay with their scales on, and bake them. The scales will come off
beautifully when the clay is cracked off, and leave you the tastiest
meal of fish and potatoes and corn you ever ate. Every boy and girl
ought to have a little camp-life and ought to have each his share of
camp-work to perform this summer.


VI

At the close of some stifling July day you ought to go out into the
orchard or woods and watch the evening come on--to notice how the wild
life revives, flowers open, birds sing, animals stir, breezes start,
leaves whisper, and all the world awakes.

Then follow that up by getting out the next morning before sunrise,
say at half-past three o’clock, an hour before the sun bursts over the
eastern hills. If you are not a stump or a stone, the sight and the
smell--the whole indescribable freshness and wonder of it all--will
thrill you. Would you go to the Pyramids or Niagara or the Yellowstone
Park? Yes, you would, and you would take a great deal of trouble to
see any one of these wonders! Just as great a wonder, just as
thrilling an experience, is right outside of your bedroom early any
June, July, or August morning! I know boys and girls who _never_ saw
the sun get up!


VII

You ought to spend some time this summer on a real farm. Boy or girl,
you need to feel ploughed ground under your feet; you need the contact
with growing things in the ground; you need to handle a hoe, gather
the garden vegetables, feed the chickens, feed the pigs, drive the
cows to pasture, help stow away the hay--and all the other interesting
experiences that make up the simple, elemental, and wonderfully varied
day of farm life. A mere visit is not enough. You need to take part in
the digging and weeding and planting. The other day I let out my cow
after keeping her all winter in the barn. The first thing she did was
to kick up her heels and run to a pile of fresh earth about a newly
planted tree and fall to eating it--not the tree, but the earth, the
raw, rich soil--until her muzzle was muddy halfway to her eyes. You do
not need to eat it; but the need to smell it, to see it, to feel it,
to work in it, is just as real as the cow’s need to eat it.


VIII

You ought to learn how to browse and nibble in the woods. What do I
mean? Why, just this: that you ought to learn how to taste the woods
as well as to see them. Maurice Thompson, in “Byways and Bird Notes,”
a book you ought to read (and that is another “ought to do” for this
summer), has a chapter called “Browsing and Nibbling” in which his
mountain guide says: “What makes me allus a-nibblin’ an’ a-browsin’ of
the bushes an’ things as I goes along? I kinder b’lieve hit keeps a
feller’s heart stiddy an’ his blood pure for to nibble an’ browse
kinder like a deer does. You know a deer is allus strong an’ active,
an’ hit is everlastin’ly a-nibblin’ an’ a-browsin’. Ef hit is good for
the annymel, hit otter be good for the feller.”

[Illustration: SASSAFRAS]

[Illustration: DEADLY NIGHTSHADE]

The guide may not be right about the strength to be had from tasting
the roots and barks and buds of things, but I know that I am right
when I tell you that the very sap of the summer woods will seem to
mingle with your blood at the taste of the aromatic sassafras root,
the spicy bark of the sweet birch and the biting bulb of the Indian
turnip. Many of the perfumes, odors, resins, gums, saps, and nectars
of the woods can be known to you only by sense of taste.


IX

[Illustration: POISON SUMACH]

“But I shall bite into something poisonous,” you say. Yes, you must
look out for that, and you must take the pains this summer to learn
the poisonous things of our woods and fields. So before you begin to
browse and nibble, make a business of learning the deadly nightshade
with its green or its red berries; the poison sumach with its _loose_
panicles or clusters of grayish-white berries; the three-leaved poison
ivy or “ground oak” (which you can easily tell from the five-leaved
Virginia creeper); and the deadly mushrooms with their _bulbous_
roots. These are the poisonous plants that you will meet with most
frequently, but there are a few others, and it will be safest not to
nibble any plant that is strange to you. Nor am I suggesting that you
make a meal on the pitch of the pine trees or anything else. Do not
_eat_ any of these things; taste them only. I was once made
desperately ill by eating poke root (I was a very little child) which
I took for sweet potato. Poke berries are not good to _eat_. Take
along a few good sandwiches from home to eat. But learn to know the
mints, the medicinal roots and barks, and that long list of
old-fashioned “herbs” that our grandmothers hung from the garret
rafters and made us take occasionally as “tea.”

[Illustration: POISON IVY]

[Illustration: VIRGINIA CREEPER]


X

[Illustration: THE DEADLY AMANITA]

Finally, as a lover of the woods and wild life, you ought to take a
personal responsibility for the preservation of the trees and woods in
your neighborhood, and of the birds and beasts and other lowlier forms
of wild life. Year by year the wild things are vanishing never to
return to your woods, and never to be seen again by man. Do what you
can to stop the hunting and ignorant killing of every sort. You ought
to get and read “Our Vanishing Wild Life,” by William T. Hornaday, and
then join the growing host of us who, alarmed at the fearful increase
of insect pests, and the loss to the beauty and interest of the
out-of-doors through the extermination of wild life, are doing our
best to save the wild things we still have and to increase their
numbers.

[Illustration: POKE]




CHAPTER XII

THE “CONY”


We were threading our slow way along the narrow divide of the Wallowa
Mountains that runs between the branches of the Snake River. Our guide
was a former “camp-tender,” one who carries provisions to the
sheep-herders in the mountains. As we were stopping a moment to
breathe our horses and to look down upon the head springs of Big Sheep
and Salt Lick Creeks on one side, and the narrow ribbon of the Imnaha
on the other, this guide and our mammal-collector rode on ahead. An
hour later I saw them round the breast of a peak far along on the
trail and disappear. That night they brought into camp a “cony,” or
pika, or little chief hare.

The year before, this camp-tender, in passing a certain rock-slide
among the high peaks of the pass, had heard and seen a peculiar little
animal about the size and shape of a small guinea-pig, whistling among
the broken rock. He had never seen the little creature before,--had
never heard of it. It was to this slide that he now took our
naturalist, in the hope of showing him the mountain guinea-pig, and,
sure enough, they brought one back with them, and showed me my first
“cony,” one of the rarest of American mammals.

But I was broken-hearted. That I should have been so near and missed
it! For we had descended to Aneroid Lake to camp that night, and there
were no cony slides below us on the trail.

While the men were busy about camp the next morning, I slipped off
alone on foot, and, following the trail, got back about ten o’clock to
the rock-slide where they had killed the cony.

A wilder, barrener, more desolate land of crags and peaks I never
beheld. Eternal silence seemed to wrap it round. The slide was of
broken pieces of rock, just as if the bricks from an immense chimney
had cracked off and rolled down into the valley of the roof. Stunted
vegetation grew around, with scraggly wild grass and a few snow-line
flowers, for this was on the snow-line, several melting banks
glistening in the morning sun about me.

I crept round the sharp slope of the peak and down to the edge of the
rock-slide. “Any living thing in that long heap of broken rock!” I
said to myself incredulously. That barren, blasted pile of splintered
peaks the home of an animal? Why, I was on the top of the world! A
great dark hawk was wheeling over toward Eagle Cap Mountain in the
distance; far below me flapped a band of ravens; and down, down,
immeasurably far down, glistened the small winding waters of the
Imnaha; while all about me were the peaks, lonely, solitary, mighty,
terrible! Such bleakness and desolation!

But here, they told me, they had shot the cony. I could not believe
it. Why should any animal live away up here on the roof of the world?
For several feet each side of the steep, piled-up rock grew spears of
thin, wiry grass about six inches high, and a few stunted
flowers,--pussy’s-paws, alpine phlox, and beardtongue, all of them
flat to the sand,--and farther down the sides of the ravine were low,
twisted pines,--mere prostrate mats of trees that had crept in narrow
ascending tongues, up and up, until they could hang on no longer to
the bare alpine slopes. But here above the stunted pines, here in the
slide rock, where only mosses and a few flat plants could
live,--plants that blossom in the snow,--dwell the conies.

I sat down on the edge of the slide, feeling that I had had my labor
for my pains. We had been climbing these peaks in the hope of seeing
one of the last small bands of mountain sheep that made these
fastnesses their home. But, much as I wished to see a wild mountain
sheep among the crags, I wished more to see the little cony among the
rocks. “As for the stork,” says the Bible, “the fir trees are her
house. The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats; and the rocks
for the conies.” I had always wondered about those conies--what they
looked like and how they lived among the rocks.

I knew that these little conies here in the slide (if indeed they
_could_ be here) were not those of the mountain-peaks of Palestine.
What of that! The very rocks might be different in kind from the rocks
of Nebo or Lebanon; but peaks are peaks, and rocks are rocks, and the
strange little “rabbits” that dwell in their broken slides are all
conies to me. The cony of the Bible is the little hyrax, a relative of
the elephant.

I sat for a while watching. Was this the place? I must make sure
before I settled down to waiting, for when in all my life again might
I have this chance?

Out in the middle of the slide was a pile of rocks with an uneven look
about them, as if they had been heaped up there by other hands than
those that hurled them from the peak. Going quietly out, I examined
them closely, and found the perfect print of a little bloody paw on
one of them.

This was the right place. Here was where they had shot the specimen
brought into camp. I got back to my seat, ready now to wait, even
while I knew that I was holding back the camp from its day’s march.

Perhaps I had been watching for half an hour, when from somewhere, in
the rock-slide surely, though I could not tell, there sounded a shrill
bleating whistle, not unlike the whistles of the ground squirrels and
marmots that I had heard all through the mountains, yet more
tremulous and not so piercing.

I waited. Presently a little gray form crept over a stone, stopped and
whistled, then disappeared. It was my cony!

If you can think of Molly Cottontail turned into the shape of a
guinea-pig about eight inches long, with positively no tail at all,
and with big round broad ears, and with all four legs of equal length
so that the creature walks instead of hopping,--if you can imagine
such a rabbit,--you will get a pretty clear picture of the cony, or
pika, or “little chief hare.”

I kept as still as the stones. Presently the plaintive, bleating
whistle sounded from nowhere again--behind me, beyond me, up the slide
or down, I could not tell. The rocks were rough, rusty chunks two or
three feet long, piled helter-skelter without form or order, so that
any one spot in the slide looked precisely like every other spot. I
could not tell just the piece the cony had crossed, once my eyes were
off of it, nor into which of the cracks he had disappeared. I could
only sit still and wait till I caught him moving, so completely did
his color blend with the rusty brown tone of the slide.

All the while the shrill, piteous call kept coming from anywhere in
the slide. But it was not the call of several voices, not a colony
whistling at once. The conies live in colonies, but, judging from the
single small haycock which they had curing in the sun, I think there
could not have been more than two or three pairs of them in this
particular slide. Possibly there was only the single pair, one of
which had been shot, for presently, when my eyes grew sharp enough to
pick the little creature out against the rocks, I found that one was
doing all the calling, and that for some reason he was greatly
disturbed.

Now he would stop on a slab and whistle, then dive into some long
passage under the stones, to reappear several feet or yards away. Here
he would pause to listen, and, hearing nothing, would call again,
waiting for an answer to his tremulous cry which did not come.

Under and over the stones, up and down the slide, now close to me, now
on the extreme opposite edge of the pile he traveled, nervously,
anxiously looking for something--for some _one_, I truly think; and my
heart smote me when I thought it might be for the dead mate whose
little bare foot-pads had left the bloody print upon the rock.

Up and down, in and out, he ran, calling, calling, calling, but
getting no answer back. He was the only one that showed himself, the
only live one I have ever seen, but this one I followed, as he went
searching and crying over the steep rock-slide, with my eye and with
the field-glasses, until long past noon--with a whole camp down the
cañon looking for me!

But they must know where to look. Let them climb out of the cañon,
back to the top of the world to the cony slide, if they could not wait
for me.

Higher up than the mountain sheep or the goat can live, where only the
burrowing pocket gopher and rare field mice are ever found, dwells the
cony. This particular slide was on one of the minor peaks,--loftier
ones towered all about,--nor do I know just how high it was, but the
cony dwells above the tree-line, up in the Arctic-Alpine Zone, in a
world of perpetual snow, from ten to fourteen thousand feet above the
sea.

By perpetual snow I mean that the snow-banks never melt in the
shadowed ravines and on the bare north slopes. Here, where I was
watching, the rock-slide lay open to the sun, the scanty grass was
green beyond the gully, and the squat alpine flowers were in bloom,
the saxifrage and a solitary aster (April and September together!)
blossoming in the edges of the snow just as fast as the melting banks
allowed them to lift their heads. But any day the wind might come down
from the north, keen and thick and white about the summits, and leave
the flowers and the cony slide covered deep beneath a drift.

Spring, summer, and autumn are all one season, all crowded together--a
kind of peak piercing for a few short weeks the long, bleak, unbroken
land of winter here on the roof of the world.

But during this brief period the thin grass springs up, and the conies
cut and cure it, enough of it to last them from the falling of the
September snows until the drifts are once more melted and their
rock-slide warms in another summer’s sun.

For the cony does not hibernate. He stays awake down in his catacombs.
Think of being buried alive in pitch-black night with snow twenty-five
feet thick above you for nine out of twelve months of the year! Yet
here they are away up on the sides of the wildest summits, living
their lives, keeping their houses, rearing their children, visiting
back and forth through their subways for all this long winter,
protected by the drifts which lie so deep that they keep out the cold.

As I looked about me I could not see grass enough to feed a pair of
conies for a winter. Right near me was one of their little haycocks,
nearly cured and ready for storing in their barns beneath the rocks;
but this would not last long. It was already early August and what
haying they had to do must be done quickly or winter would catch them
hungry.

They cut the grass that grows in the vicinity of the slide, and cock
it until it is cured, then they carry it all below against the coming
of the cold; and naturalists who have observed them describe with what
hurry and excitement the colony falls to taking in the hay when bad
weather threatens to spoil it.

Hardy little farmers! Bold small folk! Why climb for a home with your
tiny, bare-soled feet above the aerie of the eagle and the cave of the
soaring condor of the Sierras? Why not descend to the warm valleys,
where winter, indeed, comes, but cannot linger?--or farther down where
the grass is always green, with never a need to cut and cure a
winter’s hay?

I do not know why--nor why upon the tossing waves the little petrel
makes her bed; nor why, beneath the waves, “down to the dark, to the
utter dark” on

    “The great gray level plains of ooze,”

the “blind white sea-snakes” make their home; nor why at the north, in
the fearful, far-off, frozen north, the little lemmings dwell; nor
why, nor why. But as I sat there above the clouds, listening to the
plaintive, trembling whistle of the little cony, and hoping his mate
was not dead, and wondering why he stayed here in the barren peak, and
how he must fare in the black, bitter winter, I said over to myself
the lines of Kipling for an answer,--

    “And God who clears the grounding berg
    And steers the grinding floe,
    He hears the cry of the little kit-fox
    And the lemming on the snow.”

WINTER SUNSHINE




PREFATORY

The only part of my book I wish to preface is the last part,--the
foreign sketches,--and it is not much matter about these, since if they
do not contain their own proof, I shall not attempt to supply it here.

I have been told that De Lolme, who wrote a notable book on the English
Constitution, said that after he had been in England a few weeks, he
fully made up his mind to write a book on that country; after he had
lived there a year, he still thought of writing a book, but was not so
certain about it, but that after a residence of ten years he abandoned
his first design altogether. Instead of furnishing an argument against
writing out one's first impressions of a country, I think the
experience of the Frenchman shows the importance of doing it at once.
The sensations of the first day are what we want,--the first flush of
the traveler's thought and feeling, before his perception and
sensibilities become cloyed or blunted, or before he in any way becomes
a part of that which he would observe and describe. Then the American
in England is just enough at home to enable him to discriminate subtle
shades and differences at first sight which might escape a traveler of
another and antagonistic race. He has brought with him, but little
modified or impaired, his whole inheritance of English ideas and
predilections, and much of what he sees affects him like a memory. It
is his own past, his ante-natal life, and his long-buried ancestors
look through his eyes and perceive with his sense.

I have attempted only the surface, and to express my own first day's
uncloyed and unalloyed satisfaction. Of course, I have put these things
through my own processes and given them my own coloring, (as who would
not), and if other travelers do not find what I did, it is no fault of
mine; or if the "Britishers" do not deserve all the pleasant things I
say of them, why then so much the worse for them.

In fact, if it shall appear that I have treated this part in the same
spirit that I have the themes in the other chapters, reporting only
such things as impressed me and stuck to me and tasted good, I shall be
satisfied.

   ESOPUS-ON-HUDSON, November, 1875.



CONTENTS
    I. WINTER SUNSHINE
   II. THE EXHILARATIONS OF THE ROAD
  III. THE SNOW-WALKERS
   IV. THE FOX
    V. A MARCH CHRONICLE
   VI. AUTUMN TIDES
  VII. THE APPLE
 VIII. AN OCTOBER ABROAD:
             I. MELLOW ENGLAND
            II. ENGLISH CHARACTERISTICS
           III. A GLIMPSE OF FRANCE
            IV. FROM LONDON TO NEW YORK
        INDEX



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
 AN ENGLISH LANE
     From a photograph by Walmsley Brothers
 DRIFTS ABOUT A STONE WALL
     From a photograph by Herbert W.  Gleason
 DOWNY WOODPECKER
     From drawing by L.  A.  Fuertes
 COWS IN AN ENGLISH LANDSCAPE
     From a photograph by Walmsley Brothers
 St. PAUL'S CATHEDRAL
     From a photograph by Clifton Johnson
 IRISH COTTAGES
     From a photograph by Clifton Johnson




WINTER SUNSHINE

I. WINTER SUNSHINE

An American resident in England is reported as saying that the English
have an atmosphere but no climate. The reverse of this remark would
apply pretty accurately to our own case. We certainly have a climate, a
two-edged one that cuts both ways, threatening us with sun-stroke on
the one hand and with frost-stroke on the other; but we have no
atmosphere to speak of in New York and New England, except now and then
during the dog-days, or the fitful and uncertain Indian Summer. An
atmosphere, the quality of tone and mellowness in the near distance, is
the product of a more humid climate. Hence, as we go south from New
York,the atmospheric effects become more rich and varied, until on
reaching the Potomac you find an atmosphere as well as a climate. The
latter is still on the vehement American scale, full of sharp and
violent changes and contrasts, baking and blistering in summer, and
nipping and blighting in winter, but the spaces are not so purged and
bare; the horizon wall does not so often have the appearance of having
just been washed and scrubbed down. There is more depth and visibility
to the open air, a stronger infusion of the Indian Summer element
throughout the year, than is found farther north. The days are softer
and more brooding, and the nights more enchanting. It is here that Walt
Whitman saw the full moon

       "Pour down Night's nimbus floods,"

as any one may see her, during the full, from October to May.  There is
more haze and vapor in the atmosphere during that period, and every
pariticle seems to collect and hold the pure radiance until the world
swims with the lunar outpouring. Is not the full moon always on the
side of fair weather? I think it is Sir William Herschel who says her
influence tends to dispel the clouds. Certain it is her beauty is
seldom lost or even veiled in this southern or semi-southern clime.

       "Floods of the yellow gold of the gorgeous,
       Indolent sinking sun, burning, expanding the air,"

a description that would not apply with the same force farther north,
where the air seems thinner and less capable of absorbing and holding
the sunlight. Indeed, the opulence and splendor of our climate, at
least the climate of the Atlantic seaboard, cannot be fully appreciated
by the dweller north of the thirty-ninth parallel. It seemed as if I
had never seen but a second-rate article of sunlight or moonlight until
I had taken up my abode in the National Capital. It may be, perhaps,
because we have such splendid specimens of both at the period of the
year when one values such things highest, namely, in the fall and
winter and early spring. Sunlight is good any time, but a bright,
evenly tempered day is certainly more engrossing to the attention in
winter than in summer, and such days seem the rule, and not the
exception, in the Washington winter. The deep snows keep to the north,
the heavy rains to the south, leaving a blue space central over the
border States. And there is not one of the winter months but wears this
blue zone as a girdle.

I am not thinking especially of the Indian summer, that charming but
uncertain second youth of the New England year, but of regularly
recurring lucid intervals in the weather system of Virginia fall and
winter, when the best our climate is capable of stand
revealed,--southern days with northern blood in their veins,
exhilarating, elastic, full of action, the hyperborean oxygen of the
North tempered by the dazzling sun of the South, a little bitter in
winter to all travelers but the pedestrian,--to him sweet and
warming,--but in autumn a vintage that intoxicates all lovers of the
open air.

It is impossible not to dilate and expand under such skies.  One
breathes deeply and steps proudly, and if he have any of the eagle
nature in him, it comes to the surface then. There is a sense of
altitude about these dazzling November and December days, of
mountain-tops and pure ether. The earth in passing through the fire of
summer seems to have lost all its dross, and life all its impediments.

But what does not the dweller in the National Capital endure in
reaching these days! Think of the agonies of the heated term, the
ragings of the dog-star, the purgatory of heat and dust, of baking,
blistering pavements, of cracked and powdered fields, of dead, stifling
night air, from which every tonic and antiseptic quality seems
eliminated, leaving a residuum of sultry malaria and all-diffusing
privy and sewer gases, that lasts from the first of July to near the
middle of September! But when October is reached, the memory of these
things is afar off, and the glory of the days is a perpetual surprise.

I sally out in the morning with the ostensible purpose of gathering
chestnuts, or autumn leaves, or persimmons, or exploring some run or
branch. It is, say, the last of October or the first of November. The
air is not balmy, but tart and pungent, like the flavor of the
red-cheeked apples by the roadside. In the sky not a cloud, not a
speck; a vast dome of blue ether lightly suspended above the world. The
woods are heaped with color like a painter's palette,--great splashes
of red and orange and gold. The ponds and streams bear upon their
bosoms leaves of all tints, from the deep maroon of the oak to the pale
yellow of the chestnut. In the glens and nooks it is so still that the
chirp of a solitary cricket is noticeable. The red berries of the
dogwood and spice-bush and other shrubs shine in the sun like rubies
and coral. The crows fly high above the earth, as they do only on such
days, forms of ebony floating across the azure, and the buzzards look
like kingly birds, sailing round and round.

Or it may be later in the season, well into December.  The days are
equally bright, but a little more rugged. The mornings are ushered in
by an immense spectrum thrown upon the eastern sky. A broad bar of red
and orange lies along the low horizon, surmounted by an expanse of
color in which green struggles with yellow and blue with green half the
way to the zenith. By and by the red and orange spread upward and grow
dim, the spectrum fades, and the sky becomes suffused with yellow white
light, and in a moment the fiery scintillations of the sun begin to
break across the Maryland hills. Then before long the mists and vapors
uprise like the breath of a giant army, and for an hour or two, one is
reminded of a November morning in England. But by mid-forenoon the only
trace of the obscurity that remains is a slight haze, and the day is
indeed a summons and a challenge to come forth. If the October days
were a cordial like the sub-acids of a fruit, these are a tonic like
the wine of iron. Drink deep, or be careful how you taste this December
vintage. The first sip may chill, but a full draught warms and
invigorates. No loitering by the brooks or in the woods now, but
spirited, rugged walking along the public highway. The sunbeams are
welcome now. They seem like pure electricity,--like a friendly and
recuperating lightning. Are we led to think electricity abounds only in
the summer when we see storm-clouds, as it were, the veins and ore-beds
of it? I imagine it is equally abundant in winter, and more equable and
better tempered. Who ever breasted a snowstorm without being excited
and exhilarated, as if this meteor had come charged with latent aurorae
of the North, as doubtless it has? It is like being pelted with sparks
from a battery. Behold the frost-work on the pane,--the wild, fantastic
limnings and etchings! can there be any doubt but this subtle agent has
been here? Where is it not? It is the life of the crystal, the
architect of the flake, the fire of the frost, the soul of the sunbeam.
This crisp winter air is full of it. When I come in at night after an
all-day tramp I am charged like a Leyden jar; my hair crackles and
snaps beneath the comb like a cat's back, and a strange, new glow
diffuses itself through my system.

It is a spur that one feels at this season more than at any other.  How
nimbly you step forth! The woods roar, the waters shine, and the hills
look invitingly near. You do not miss the flowers and the songsters, or
wish the trees or the fields any different, or the heavens any nearer.
Every object pleases. A rail fence, running athwart the hills, now in
sunshine and now in shadow,--how the eye lingers upon it! Or the
strait, light-gray trunks of the trees, where the woods have recently
been laid open by a road or clearing,--how curious they look, and as if
surprised in undress! Next year they will begin to shoot out branches
and make themselves a screen. Or the farm scenes,--the winter barnyards
littered with husks and straw, the rough-coated horses, the cattle
sunning themselves or walking down to the spring to drink, the domestic
fowls moving about,--there is a touch of sweet, homely life in these
things that the winter sun enhances and brings out. Every sign of life
is welcome at this season. I love to hear dogs bark, hens cackle, and
boys shout; one has no privacy with nature now, and does not wish to
seek her in nooks and hidden ways. She is not at home if he goes there;
her house is shut up and her hearth cold; only the sun and sky, and
perchance the waters, wear the old look, and to-day we will make love
to them, and they shall abundantly return it.

Even the crows and the buzzards draw the eye fondly.  The National
Capital is a great place for buzzards, and I make the remark in no
double or allegorical sense either, for the buzzards I mean are black
and harmless as doves, though perhaps hardly dovelike in their tastes.
My vulture is also a bird of leisure, and sails through the ether on
long flexible pinions, as if that was the one delight of his life. Some
birds have wings, others have "pinions." The buzzard enjoys this latter
distinctions. There is something in the sound of the word that suggests
that easy, dignified, undulatory movement. He does not propel himself
along by sheer force of muscle, after the plebeian fashion of the crow,
for instance, but progresses by a kind of royal indirection that
puzzles the eye. Even on a windy winter day he rides the vast aerial
billows as placidly as ever, rising and falling as he comes up toward
you, carving his way through the resisting currents by a slight
oscillation to the right and left, but never once beating the air
openly.

This superabundance of wing power is very unequally distributed among
the feathered races, the hawks and vultures having by far the greater
share of it. They cannot command the most speed, but their apparatus
seems the most delicate and consummate. Apparently a fine play of
muscle, a subtle shifting of the power along the outstretched wings, a
perpetual loss and a perpetual recovery of the equipoise, sustains them
and bears them along. With them flying is a luxury, a fine art; not
merely a quicker and safer means of transit from one point to another,
but a gift so free and spontaneous that work becomes leisure and
movement rest. They are not so much going somewhere, from this perch to
that, as they are abandoning themselves to the mere pleasure of riding
upon the air.

And it is beneath such grace and high-bred leisure that Nature hides in
her creatures the occupation of scavenger and carrion-eater!

But the worst thing about the buzzard is his silence.  The crow caws,
the hawk screams, the eagle barks, but the buzzard says not a word. So
far as I have observed, he has no vocal powers whatever. Nature dare
not trust him to speak. In his case she preserves discreet silence.

The crow may not have the sweet voice which the fox in his flattery
attributed to him, but he has a good, strong, native speech,
nevertheless. How much character there is in it! How much thrift and
independence! Of course his plumage is firm, his color decided, his wit
quick. He understands you at once and tells you so; so does the hawk by
his scornful, defiant whir-r-r-r-r. Hardy, happy outlaws, the crows,
how I love them! Alert, social, republican, always able to look out for
himself, not afraid of the cold and the snow, fishing when flesh is
scarce, and stealing when other resources fail, the crow is a character
I would not willingly miss from the landscape. I love to see his track
in the snow or the mud, and his graceful pedestrianism about the brown
fields.

He is no interloper, but has the air and manner of being thoroughly at
home, and in rightful possession of the land. He is no sentimentalist
like some of the plaining, disconsolate song-birds, but apparently is
always in good health and good spirits. No matter who is sick, or
dejected, or unsatisfied, or what the weather is, or what the price of
corn, the crow is well and finds life sweet. He is the dusky embodiment
of worldly wisdom and prudence. Then he is one of Nature's
self-appointed constables and greatly magnifies his office. He would
fain arrest every hawk or owl or grimalkin that ventures abroad. I have
known a posse of them to beset the fox and cry "Thief!" till Reynard
hid himself for shame. Do I say the fox flattered the crow when he told
him he had a sweet voice? Yet one of the most musical sounds in nature
proceeds from the crow. All the crow tribe, from the blue jay up, are
capable of certain low ventriloquial notes that have peculiar cadence
and charm. I often hear the crow indulging in his in winter, and am
reminded of the sound of the dulcimer. The bird stretches up and exerts
himself like a cock in the act of crowing, and gives forth a peculiarly
clear, vitreous sound that is sure to arrest and reward your attention.
This is no doubt the song the fox begged to be favored with, as in
delivering it the crow must inevitably let drop the piece of meat.

The crow in his purity, I believe, is seen and heard only in the North.
Before you reach the Potomac there is an infusion of a weaker element,
the fish crow, whose helpless feminine call contrasts strongly with the
hearty masculine caw of the original Simon.

In passing from crows to colored men, I hope I am not guilty of any
disrespect toward the latter. In my walks about Washington, both winter
and summer, colored men are about the only pedestrians I meet; and I
meet them everywhere, in the fields and in the woods and in the public
road, swinging along with that peculiar, rambling, elastic gait, taking
advantage of the short cuts and threading the country with paths and
byways. I doubt if the colored man can compete with his white brother
as a walker; his foot is too flat and the calves of his legs too small,
but he is certainly the most picturesque traveler to be seen on the
road. He bends his knees more than the white man, and oscillates more
to and fro, or from side to side. The imaginary line which his head
describes is full of deep and long undulations. Even the boys and young
men sway as if bearing a burden.

Along the fences and by the woods I come upon their snares, dead-falls,
and rud box-traps. The freedman is a successful trapper and hunter, and
has by nature an insight into these things. I frequently see him in
market or on his way thither with a tame 'possum clinging timidly to
his shoulders, or a young coon or fox led by a chain. Indeed, the
colored man behaves precisely like the rude unsophisticated peasant
that he is, and there is fully as much virtue in him, using the word in
its true sense, as in the white peasant; indeed, much more than in the
poor whites who grew up by his side; while there is often a benignity
and a depth of human experience and sympathy about some of these dark
faces that comes home to one like the best one sees in art or reads in
books.

One touch of nature makes all the world akin, and there is certainly a
touch of nature about the colored man; indeed, I had almost said, of
Anglo-Saxon nature. They have the quaintness and homeliness of the
simple English stock. I seem to see my grandfather and grandmother in
the ways and doings of these old "uncles" and "aunties;" indeed, the
lesson comes nearer home than even that, for I seem to see myself in
them, and, what is more, I see that they see themselves in me, and that
neither party has much to boast of.

The negro is a plastic human creature, and is thoroughly domesticated
and thoroughly anglicized. The same cannot be said of the Indian, for
instance, between whom and us there can never exist any fellowship, any
community of feeling or interest; or is there any doubt but the
Chinaman will always remain to us the same impenetrable mystery he has
been from the first?

But there is no mystery about the negro, and he touches the Anglo-Saxon
at more points than the latter is always willing to own, taking as
kindly and naturally to all his customs and usages, yea, to all his
prejudices and superstitions, as if to the manner born. The colored
population in very many respects occupies the same position as that
occupied by our rural populations a generation or two ago, seeing signs
and wonders, haunted by the fear of ghosts and hobgoblins, believing in
witchcraft, charms, the evil eye, etc. In religious matters, also, they
are on the same level, and about the only genuine shouting Methodists
that remain are to be found in the colored churches. Indeed, I fear the
negro tries to ignore or forget himself as far as possible, and that he
would deem it felicity enough to play second fiddle to the white man
all his days. He liked his master, but he likes the Yankee better, not
because he regards him as his deliverer, but mainly because the
two-handed thrift of the Northerner, his varied and wonderful ability,
completely captivates the imagination of the black man, just learning
to shift for himself.

How far he has caught or is capable of being imbued with the Yankee
spirit of enterprise and industry, remains to be seen. In some things
he has already shown himself an apt scholar. I notice, for instance,
that he is about as industrious an office-seeker as the most patriotic
among us, and that he learns with amazing ease and rapidity all the
arts and wiles of the politicians. He is versed in parades, mass
meetings, caucuses, and will soon shine on the stump. I observe, also,
that he is not far behind us in the observance of the fashions, and
that he is as good a church-goer, theatre-goer, and pleasure-seeker
generally, as his means will allow.

As a bootblack or newsboy, he is an adept in all the tricks of the
trade; and as a fast young man about town among his kind, he is worthy
his white prototype: the swagger, the impertinent look, the coarse
remark, the loud laugh, are all in the best style. As a lounger and
starer also, on the street corners of a Sunday afternoon, he has taken
his degree.

On the other hand, I know cases among our colored brethren, plenty of
them, of conscientious and well-directed effort and industry in the
worthiest fields, in agriculture, in trade, in the mechanic arts, that
show the colored man has in him all the best rudiments of a citizen of
the States.

Lest my winter sunshine appear to have too many dark rays in
it,--buzzards, crows, and colored men,--I hasten to add the brown and
neutral tints; and maybe a red ray can be extracted from some of these
hard, smooth, sharp-gritted roads that radiate from the National
Capital. Leading out of Washington there are several good roads that
invite the pedestrian. There is the road that leads west or northwest
from Georgetown, the Tenallytown road, the very sight of which, on a
sharp, lustrous winter Sunday, makes the feet tingle. Where it cuts
through a hill or high knoll, it is so red it fairly glows in the
sunlight. I'll warrant you will kindle, and your own color will mount,
if you resign yourself to it. It will conduct you to the wild and rocky
scenery of the upper Potomac, to Great Falls, and on to Harper's Ferry,
if your courage holds out. Then there is the road that leads north over
Meridian Hill, across Piny Branch, and on through the wood of Crystal
Springs to Fort Stevens, and so into Maryland. This is the proper route
for an excursion in the spring to gather wild flowers, or in the fall
for a nutting expedition, as it lays open some noble woods and a great
variety of charming scenery; or for a musing moonlight saunter, say in
December, when the Enchantress has folded and folded the world in her
web, it is by all means the course to take. Your staff rings on the
hard ground; the road, a misty white belt, gleams and vanishes before
you; the woods are cavernous and still; the fields lie in a lunar
trance, and you will yourself return fairly mesmerized by the beauty of
the scene.

Or you can bend your steps eastward over the Eastern Branch, up Good
Hope Hill, and on till you strike the Marlborough pike, as a trio of us
did that cold February Sunday we walked from Washington to Pumpkintown
and back.

A short sketch of this pilgrimage is a fair sample of these winter
walks.

The delight I experienced in making this new acquisition to my
geography was of itself sufficient to atone for any aches or weariness
I may have felt. The mere fact that one may walk from Washington to
Pumpkintown was a discovery I had been all these years in making. I had
walked to Sligo, and to the Northwest Branch, and had made the Falls of
the Potomac in a circuitous route of ten miles, coming suddenly upon
the river in one of its wildest passes; but I little dreamed all the
while that there, in a wrinkle (or shall I say furrow?) of the Maryland
hills, almost visible from the outlook of the bronze squaw on the dome
of the Capitol, and just around the head of Oxen Run, lay Pumpkintown.

The day was cold but the sun was bright, and the foot took hold of
those hard, dry, gritty Maryland roads with the keenest relish. How the
leaves of the laurel glistened! The distant oak woods suggested
gray-blue smoke, while the recesses of the pines looked like the lair
of Night. Beyond the District limits we struck the Marlborough pike,
which, round and hard and white, held squarely to the east and was
visible a mile ahead. Its friction brought up the temperature amazingly
and spurred the pedestrians into their best time. As I trudged along,
Thoreau's lines came naturally to mind:--

       "When the spring stirs my blood
         With the instinct of travel,

       I can get enough gravel
         On the old Marlborough road."

Cold as the day was (many degrees below freezing), I heard and saw
bluebirds, and as we passed along, every sheltered tangle and overgrown
field or lane swarmed with snowbirds and sparrows,--the latter mainly
Canada or tree sparrows, with a sprinkling of the song, and, maybe, one
or two other varieties. The birds are all social and gregarious in
winter, and seem drawn together by common instinct. Where you find one,
you will not only find others of the same kind, but also several
different kinds. The regular winter residents go in little bands, like
a well-organized pioneer corps,--the jays and woodpeckers in advance,
doing the heavier work; the nuthatches next, more lightly armed; and
the creepers and kinglets, with their slender beaks and microscopic
eyes, last of all. [Footnote: It seems to me this is a borrowed
observation, but I do not know to whom to credit it.]

Now and then, among the gray and brown tints, there was a dash of
scarlet,--the cardinal grosbeak, whose presence was sufficient to
enliven any scene. In the leafless trees, as a ray of sunshine fell
upon him, he was visible a long way off, glowing like a crimson
spar,--the only bit of color in the whole landscape.

Maryland is here rather a level, unpicturesque country,--the gaze of
the traveler bounded, at no great distance, by oak woods, with here and
there a dark line of pine. We saw few travelers, passed a ragged squad
or two of colored boys and girls, and met some colored women on their
way to or from church, perhaps. Never ask a colored person--at least
the crude, rustic specimens--any question that involves a memory of
names, or any arbitrary signs; you will rarely get a satisfactory
answer. If you could speak to them in their own dialect, or touch the
right spring in their minds, you would, no doubt, get the desired
information. They are as local in their notions and habits as the
animals, and go on much the same principles, as no doubt we all do,
more or less. I saw a colored boy come into a public office one day,
and ask to see a man with red hair; the name was utterly gone from him.
The man had red whiskers, which was as near as he had come to the mark.
Ask your washerwoman what street she lives on, or where such a one has
moved to, and the chances are that she cannot tell you, except that it
is a "right smart distance" this way or that, or near Mr. So-and-so, or
by such and such a place, describing some local feature. I love to
amuse myself, when walking through the market, by asking the old
aunties, and the young aunties, too, the names of their various
"yarbs." It seems as if they must trip on the simplest names. Bloodroot
they generally call "grubroot;" trailing arbutus goes by the names of
"troling" arbutus, "training arbuty-flower," and ground "ivory;" in
Virginia they call woodchucks "moonacks."

On entering Pumpkintown--a cluster of five or six small, whitewashed
blockhouses, toeing squarely on the highway--the only inhabitant we saw
was a small boy, who was as frank and simple as if he had lived on
pumpkins and marrow squashes all his days.

Half a mile farther on, we turned to the right into a characteristic
Southern road,--a way entirely unkempt, and wandering free as the wind;
now fading out into a broad field; now contracting into a narrow track
between hedges; anon roaming with delightful abandon through swamps and
woods, asking no leave and keeping no bounds. About two o'clock we
stopped in an opening in a pine wood and ate our lunch. We had the good
fortune to hit upon a charming place. A wood-chopper had been there,
and let in the sunlight full and strong; and the white chips, the
newly-piled wood, and the mounds of green boughs, were welcome
features, and helped also to keep off the wind that would creep through
under the pines. The ground was soft and dry, with a carpet an inch
thick of pine-needles; and with a fire, less for warmth than to make
the picture complete, we ate our bread and beans with the keenest
satisfaction, and with a relish that only the open air can give.

A fire, of course,--an encampment in the woods at this season without a
fire would be like leaving Hamlet out of the play. A smoke is your
standard, your flag; it defines and locates your camp at once; you are
an interloper until you have made a fire; then you take possession;
then the trees and rocks seem to look upon you more kindly, and you
look more kindly upon them. As one opens his budget, so he opens his
heart by a fire. Already something has gone out from you, and comes
back as a faint reminiscence and home feeling in the air and place. One
looks out upon the crow or the buzzard that sails by as from his own
fireside. It is not I that am a wanderer and a stranger now; it is the
crow and the buzzard. The chickadees were silent at first, but now they
approach by little journeys, as if to make our acquaintance. The
nuthatches, also, cry "Yank! yank!" in no inhospitable tones; and those
purple finches there in the cedars,--are they not stealing our
berries?

How one lingers about a fire under such circumstances, loath to leave
it, poking up the sticks, throwing in the burnt ends, adding another
branch and yet another, and looking back as he turns to go to catch one
more glimpse of the smoke going up through the trees! I reckon it is
some remnant of the primitive man, which we all carry about with us. He
has not yet forgotten his wild, free life, his arboreal habitations,
and the sweet-bitter times he had in those long-gone ages. With me, he
wakes up directly at the smell of smoke, of burning branches in the
open air; and all his old love of fire and his dependence upon it, in
the camp or the cave, come freshly to mind.

On resuming our march, we filed off along a charming wood-path,--a
regular little tunnel through the dense pines, carpeted with silence,
and allowing us to look nearly the whole length of it through its soft
green twilight out into the open sunshine of the fields beyond. A pine
wood in Maryland or in Virginia is quite a different thing from a pine
wood in Maine or Minnesota,--the difference, in fact, between yellow
pine and white. The former, as it grows hereabout, is short and
scrubby, with branches nearly to the ground, and looks like the
dwindling remnant of a greater race.

Beyond the woods, the path led us by a colored man's habitation,--a
little, low frame house, on a knoll, surrounded by the quaint devices
and rude makeshifts of these quaint and rude people. A few poles stuck
in the ground, clapboarded with cedar-boughs and cornstalks, and
supporting a roof of the same, gave shelter to a rickety one-horse
wagon and some farm implements. Near this there was a large, compact
tent, made entirely of cornstalks, with, for door, a bundle of the
same, in the dry, warm, nest-like interior of which the husking of the
corn crop seemed to have taken place. A few rods farther on, we passed
through another humble dooryard, musical with dogs and dusky with
children. We crossed here the outlying fields of a large, thrifty,
well-kept-looking farm with a showy, highly ornamental frame house in
the centre. There was even a park with deer, and among the gayly
painted outbuildings I noticed a fancy dovecote, with an immense flock
of doves circling aboxe it; some whiskey-dealer from the city, we were
told, trying to take the poison out of his money by agriculture.

We next passed through some woods, when we emerged into a broad,
sunlit, fertile-looking valley, called Oxen Run. We stooped down and
drank of its clear white-pebbled stream, in the veritable spot, I
suspect, where the oxen do. There were clouds of birds here on the warm
slopes, with the usual sprinkling along the bushy margin of the stream
of scarlet grosbeaks. The valley of Oxen Run has many good-looking
farms, with old picturesque houses, and loose rambling barns, such as
artists love to put into pictures.

But it is a little awkward to go east.  It always seems left-handed.  I
think this is the feeling of all walkers, and that Thoreau's experience
in this respect was not singular. The great magnet is the sun, and we
follow him. I notice that people lost in the woods work to the
westward. When one comes out of his house and asks himself, "Which way
shall I walk?" and looks up and down and around for a sign or a token,
does he not nine times out of ten turn to the west? He inclines this
way as surely as the willow wand bends toward the water. There is
something more genial and friendly in this direction.

Occasionally in winter I experience a southern inclination, and cross
Long Bridge and rendezvous for the day in some old earthwork on the
Virginia hills. The roads are not so inviting in this direction, but
the line of old forts with rabbits burrowing in the bomb-proofs, and a
magazine, or officers' quarters turned into a cow stable by colored
squatters, form an interesting feature. But, whichever way I go, I am
glad I came. All roads lead up to the Jerusalem the walker seeks. There
is everywhere the vigorous and masculine winter air, and the impalpable
sustenance the mind draws from all natural forms.



II. THE EXHILARATIONS OF THE ROAD

       Afoot and light-hearted I take to the open road.
                                               WALT WHITMAN.

Ocasionally on the sidewalk, amid the dapper, swiftly moving,
high-heeled boots and gaiters, I catch a glimpse of the naked human
foot. Nimbly it scuffs along, the toes spread, the sides flatten, the
heel protrudes; it grasps the curbing, or bends to the form of the
uneven surfaces,--a thing sensuous and alive, that seems to take
cognizance of whatever it touches or passes. How primitive and uncivil
it looks in such company,--a real barbarian in the parlor! We are so
unused to the human anatomy, to simple, unadorned nature, that it looks
a little repulsive; but it is beautiful for all that. Though it be a
black foot and an unwashed foot, it shall be exalted. It is a thing of
life amid leather, a free spirit amid cramped, a wild bird amid caged,
an athlete amid consumptives. It is the symbol of my order, the Order
of Walkers. That unhampered, vitally playing piece of anatomy is the
type of the pedestrian, man returned to first principles, in direct
contact and intercourse with the earth and the elements, his faculties
unsheathed, his mind plastic, his body toughened, his heart light, his
soul dilated; while those cramped and distorted members in the calf and
kid are the unfortunate wretches doomed to carriages and cushions.

I am not going to advocate the disuse of boots and shoes, or the
abandoning of the improved modes of travel; but I am going to brag as
lustily as I can on behalf of the pedestrian, and show how all the
shining angels second and accompany the man who goes afoot, while all
the dark spirits are ever looking out for a chance to ride.

When I see the discomforts that able-bodied American men will put up
with rather than go a mile or half a mile on foot, the abuses they will
tolerate and encourage, crowding the street car on a little fall in the
temperature or the appearance of an inch or two of snow, packing up to
overflowing, dangling to the straps, treading on each other's toes,
breathing each other's breaths, crushing the women and children,
hanging by tooth and nail to a square inch of the platform, imperiling
their limbs and killing the horses,--I think the commonest tramp in the
street has good reason to felicitate himself on his rare privilege of
going afoot. Indeed, a race that neglects or despises this primitive
gift, that fears the touch of the soil, that has no footpaths, no
community of ownership in the land which they imply, that warns off the
walker as a trespasser, that knows no way but the highway, the
carriage-way, that forgets the stile, the foot-bridge, that even
ignores the rights of the pedestrian in the public road, providing no
escape for him but in the ditch or up the bank, is in a fair way to far
more serious degeneracy.

Shakespeare makes the chief qualification of the walker a merry
heart:--

       "Jog on, jog on, the footpath way,
          And merrily hent the stile-a;

       A merry heart goes all the day,
          Your sad tires in a mile-a."

The human body is a steed that goes freest and longest under a light
rider, and the lightest of all riders is a cheerful heart. Your sad, or
morose, or embittered, or preoccupied heart settles heavily into the
saddle, and the poor beast, the body, breaks down the first mile.
Indeed, the heaviest thing in the world is a heavy heart. Next to that,
the most burdensome to the walker is a heart not in perfect sympathy
and accord with the body,--a reluctant or unwilling heart. The horse
and rider must not only both be willing to go the same way, but the
rider must lead the way and infuse his own lightness and eagerness into
the steed. Herein is no doubt our trouble, and one reason of the decay
of the noble art in this country. We are unwilling walkers. We are not
innocent and simple-hearted enough to enjoy a walk. We have fallen from
that state of grace which capacity to enjoy a walk implies. It cannot
be said that as a people we are so positively sad, or morose, or
melancholic as that we are vacant of that sportiveness and surplusage
of animal spirits that characterized our ancestors, and that springs
from full and harmonious life,--a sound heart in accord with a sound
body. A man must invest himself near at hand and in common things, and
be content with a steady and moderate return, if he would know the
blessedness of a cheerful heart and the sweetness of a walk over the
round earth. This is a lesson the American has yet to
learn,--capability of amusement on a low key. He expects rapid and
extraordinary returns. He would make the very elemental laws pay usury.
He has nothing to invest in a walk; it is too slow, too cheap. We crave
the astonishing, the exciting, the far away, and do not know the
highways of the gods when we see them,--always a sign of the decay of
the faith and simplicity of man.

If I say to my neighbor, "Come with me, I have great wonders to show
you," he pricks up his ears and comes forthwith; but when I take him on
the hills under the full blaze of the sun, or along the country road,
our footsteps lighted by the moon and stars, and say to him, "Behold,
these are the wonders, these are the circuits of the gods, this we now
tread is a morning star," he feels defrauded, and as if I had played
him a trick. And yet nothing less than dilatation and enthusiasm like
this is the badge of the master walker.

If we are not sad, we are careworn, hurried, discontented, mortgaging
the present for the promise of the future. If we take a walk, it is as
we take a prescription, with about the same relish and with about the
same purpose; and the more the fatigue, the greater our faith in the
virtue of the medicine.

Of those gleesome saunters over the hills in spring, or those sallies
of the body in winter, those excursions into space when the foot
strikes fire at every step, when the air tastes like a new and finer
mixture, when we accumulate force and gladness as we go along, when the
sight of objects by the roadside and of the fields and woods pleases
more than pictures or than all the art in the world,--those ten or
twelve mile dashes that are but the wit and effluence of the corporeal
powers,--of such diversion and open road entertainment, I say, most of
us know very little.

I notice with astonishment that at our fashionable watering-places
nobody walks; that, of all those vast crowds of health-seekers and
lovers of country air, you can never catch one in the fields or woods,
or guilty of trudging along the country road with dust on his shoes and
sun-tan on his hands and face. The sole amusement seems to be to eat
and dress and sit about the hotels and glare at each other. The men
look bored, the women look tired, and all seem to sigh, "O Lord! what
shall we do to be happy and not be vulgar?" Quite different from our
British cousins across the water, who have plenty of amusement and
hilarity, spending most of the time at their watering-places in the
open air, strolling, picnicking, boating, climbing, briskly walking,
apparently with little fear of sun-tan or of compromising their
"gentility."

It is indeed astonishing with what ease and hilarity the English walk.
To an American it seems a kind of infatuation. When Dickens was in this
country, I imagine the aspirants to the honor of a walk with him were
not numerous. In a pedestrian tour of England by an American, I read
that, "after breakfast with the Independent minister, he walked with us
for six miles out of town upon our road. Three little boys and girls,
the youngest six years old, also accompanied us. They were romping and
rambling about all the while, and their morning walk must have been as
much as fifteen miles; but they thought nothing of it, and when we
parted were apparently as fresh as when they started, and very loath to
return."

I fear, also, the American is becoming disqualified for the manly art
of walking by a falling off in the size of his foot. He cherishes and
cultivates this part of his anatomy, and apparently thinks his taste
and good breeding are to be inferred from its diminutive size. A small,
trim foot, well booted or gaitered, is the national vanity. How we
stare at the big feet of foreigners, and wonder what may be the price
of leather in those countries, and where all the aristocratic blood is,
that these plebeian extremities so predominate! If we were admitted to
the confidences of the shoemaker to Her Majesty or to His Royal
Highness, no doubt we should modify our views upon this latter point,
for a truly large and royal nature is never stunted in the extremities;
a little foot never yet supported a great character.

It is said that Englishmen, when they first come to this country, are
for some time under the impression that American women all have
deformed feet, they are so coy of them and so studiously careful to
keep them hid. That there is an astonishing difference between the
women of the two countries in this respect, every traveler can testify;
and that there is a difference equally astonishing between the
pedestrian habits and capabilities of the rival sisters, is also
certain.

The English pedestrian, no doubt, has the advantage of us in the matter
of climate; for, notwithstanding the traditional gloom and moroseness
of English skies, they have in that country none of those relaxing,
sinking, enervating days, of which we have so many here, and which seem
especially trying to the female constitution,--days which withdraw all
support from the back and loins, and render walking of all things
burdensome. Theirs is a climate of which it has been said that "it
invites men abroad more days in the year and more hours in the day than
that of any other country."

Then their land is threaded with paths which invite the walker, and
which are scarcely less important than the highways. I heard of a surly
nobleman near London who took it into his head to close a footpath that
passed through his estate near his house, and open another a little
farther off. The pedestrians objected; the matter got into the courts,
and after protracted litigation the aristocrat was beaten. The path
could not be closed or moved. The memory of man ran not to the time
when there was not a footpath there, and every pedestrian should have
the right of way there still.

I remember the pleasure I had in the path that connects
Stratford-on-Avon with Shottery, Shakespeare's path when he went
courting Anne Hathaway. By the king's highway the distance is some
farther, so there is a well-worn path along the hedgerows and through
the meadows and turnip patches. The traveler in it has the privilege of
crossing the railroad track, an unusual privilege in England, and one
denied to the lord in his carriage, who must either go over or under
it. (It is a privilege, is it not, to be allowed the forbidden, even if
it be the privilege of being run over by the engine?) In strolling over
the South Downs, too, I was delighted to find that where the hill was
steepest some benefactor of the order of walkers had made notches in
the sward, so that the foot could bite the better and firmer; the path
became a kind of stairway, which I have no doubt the plowman respected.

When you see an English country church withdrawn, secluded, out of the
reach of wheels, standing amid grassy graves and surrounded by noble
trees, approached by paths and shaded lanes, you appreciate more than
ever this beautiful habit of the people. Only a race that knows how to
use its feet, and holds footpaths sacred, could put such a charm of
privacy and humility into such a structure. I think I should be tempted
to go to church myself if I saw all my neighbors starting off across
the fields or along paths that led to such charmed spots, and were sure
I should not be jostled or run over by the rival chariots of the
worshipers at the temple doors. I think that is what ails our religion;
humility and devoutness of heart leave one when he lays by his walking
shoes and walking clothes, and sets out for church drawn by something.

Indeed, I think it would be tantamount to an astonishing revival of
religion if the people would all walk to church on Sunday and walk home
again. Think how the stones would preach to them by the wayside; how
their benumbed minds would warm up beneath the friction of the gravel;
how their vain and foolish thoughts, their desponding thoughts, their
besetting demons of one kind and another, would drop behind them,
unable to keep up or to endure the fresh air! They would walk away from
their ennui, their worldly cares, their uncharitableness, their pride
of dress; for these devils always want to ride, while the simple
virtues are never so happy as when on foot. Let us walk by all means;
but if we will ride, get an ass.

Then the English claim that they are a more hearty and robust people
than we are. It is certain they are a plainer people, have plainer
tastes, dress plainer, build plainer, speak plainer, keep closer to
facts, wear broader shoes and coarser clothes, and place a lower
estimate on themselves,--all of which traits favor pedestrian habits.
The English grandee is not confined to his carriage; but if the
American aristocrat leaves his, he is ruined. Oh the weariness, the
emptiness, the plotting, the seeking rest and finding none, that go by
in the carriages! while your pedestrian is always cheerful, alert,
refreshed, with his heart in his hand and his hand free to all. He
looks down upon nobody; he is on the common level. His pores are all
open, his circulation is active, his digestion good. His heart is not
cold, nor are his faculties asleep. He is the only real traveler; he
alone tastes the "gay, fresh sentiment of the road." He is not
isolated, but is at one with things, with the farms and the industries
on either hand. The vital, universal currents play through him. He
knows the ground is alive; he feels the pulses of the wind, and reads
the mute language of things. His sympathies are all aroused; his senses
are continually reporting messages to his mind. Wind, frost, rain,
heat, cold, are something to him. He is not merely a spectator of the
panorama of nature, but a participator in it. He experiences the
country he passes through,--tastes it, feels it, absorbs it; the
traveler in his fine carriage sees it merely. This gives the fresh
charm to that class of books that may be called "Views Afoot," and to
the narratives of hunters, naturalists, exploring parties, etc. The
walker does not need a large territory. When you get into a railway car
you want a continent, the man in his carriage requires a township; but
a walker like Thoreau finds as much and more along the shores of Walden
Pond. The former, as it were, has merely time to glance at the headings
of the chapters, while the latter need not miss a line, and Thoreau
reads between the lines. Then the walker has the privilege of the
fields, the woods, the hills, the byways. The apples by the roadside
are for him, and the berries, and the spring of water, and the friendly
shelter; and if the weather is cold, he eats the frost grapes and the
persimmons, or even the white-meated turnip, snatched from the field he
passed through, with incredible relish.

Afoot and in the open road, one has a fair start in life at last.
There is no hindrance now. Let him put his best foot forward. He is on
the broadest human plane. This is on the level of all the great laws
and heroic deeds. From this platform he is eligible to any good
fortune. He was sighing for the golden age; let him walk to it. Every
step brings him nearer. The youth of the world is but a few days'
journey distant. Indeed, I know persons who think they have walked back
to that fresh aforetime of a single bright Sunday in autumn or early
spring. Before noon they felt its airs upon their cheeks, and by
nightfall, on the banks of some quiet stream, or along some path in the
wood, or on some hilltop, aver they have heard the voices and felt the
wonder and the mystery that so enchanted the early races of men.

I think if I could walk through a country, I should not only see many
things and have adventures that I should otherwise miss, but that I
should come into relations with that country at first hand, and with
the men and women in it, in a way that would afford the deepest
satisfaction. Hence I envy the good fortune of all walkers, and feel
like joining myself to every tramp that comes along. I am jealous of
the clergyman I read about the other day, who footed it from Edinburgh
to London, as poor Effie Deans did, carrying her shoes in her hand most
of the way, and over the ground that rugged Ben Jonson strode, larking
it to Scotland, so long ago. I read with longing of the pedestrian
feats of college youths, so gay and light-hearted, with their coarse
shoes on their feet and their knapsacks on their backs. It would have
been a good draught of the rugged cup to have walked with Wilson the
ornithologist, deserted by his companions, from Niagara to Philadelphia
through the snows of winter. I almost wish that I had been born to the
career of a German mechanic, that I might have had that delicious
adventurous year of wandering over my country before I settled down to
work. I think how much richer and firmer-grained life would be to me if
I could journey afoot through Florida and Texas, or follow the windings
of the Platte or the Yellowstone, or stroll through Oregon, or browse
for a season about Canada. In the bright, inspiring days of autumn I
only want the time and the companion to walk back to the natal spot,
the family nest, across two States and into the mountains of a third.
What adventures we would have by the way, what hard pulls, what
prospects from hills, what spectacles we would behold of night and day,
what passages with dogs, what glances, what peeps into windows, what
characters we should fall in with, and how seasoned and hardy we should
arrive at our destination!

For companion I should want a veteran of the war!  Those marches put
something into him I like. Even at this distance his mettle is but
little softened. As soon as he gets warmed up, it all comes back to
him. He catches your step and away you go, a gay, adventurous,
half-predatory couple. How quickly he falls into the old ways of jest
and anecdote and song! You may have known him for years without having
heard him hum an air, or more than casually revert to the subject of
his experience during the war. You have even questioned and
cross-questioned him without firing the train you wished. But get him
out on a vacation tramp, and you can walk it all out of him. By the
camp-fire at night, or swinging along the streams by day, song,
anecdote, adventure, come to the surface, and you wonder how your
companion has kept silent so long.

It is another proof of how walking brings out the true character of a
man. The devil never yet asked his victims to take a walk with him. You
will not be long in finding your companion out. All disguises will fall
away from him. As his pores open his character is laid bare. His
deepest and most private self will come to the top. It matters little
with whom you ride, so he be not a pickpocket; for both of you will,
very likely, settle down closer and firmer in your reserve, shaken down
like a measure of corn by the jolting as the journey proceeds. But
walking is a more vital copartnership; the relation is a closer and
more sympathetic one, and you do not feel like walking ten paces with a
stranger without speaking to him.

Hence the fastidiousness of the professional walker in choosing or
admitting a companion, and hence the truth of a remark of Emerson, that
you will generally fare better to take your dog than to invite your
neighbor. Your cur-dog is a true pedestrian, and your neighbor is very
likely a small politician. The dog enters thoroughly into the spirit of
the enterprise; he is not indifferent or preoccupied; he is constantly
sniffing adventure, laps at every spring, looks upon every field and
wood as a new world to be explored, is ever on some fresh trail, knows
something important will happen a little farther on, gazes with the
true wonder-seeing eyes, whatever the spot or whatever the road finds
it good to be there,--in short, is just that happy, delicious,
excursive vagabond that touches one at so many points, and whose human
prototype in a companion robs miles and leagues of half their power to
fatigue.

Persons who find themselves spent in a short walk to the market or the
post-office, or to do a little shopping, wonder how it is that their
pedestrian friends can compass so many weary miles and not fall down
from sheer exhaustion; ignorant of the fact that the walker is a kind
of projectile that drops far or near according to the expansive force
of the motive that set it in motion, and that it is easy enough to
regulate the charge according to the distance to be traversed. If I am
loaded to carry only one mile and am compelled to walk three, I
generally feel more fatigue than if I had walked six under the proper
impetus of preadjusted resolution. In other words, the will or
corporeal mainspring, whatever it be, is capable of being wound up to
different degrees of tension, so that one may walk all day nearly as
easy as half that time, if he is prepared beforehand. He knows his
task, and he measures and distributes his powers accordingly. It is for
this reason that an unknown road is always a long road. We cannot cast
the mental eye along it and see the end from the beginning. We are
fighting in the dark, and cannot take the measure of our foe. Every
step must be preordained and provided for in the mind. Hence also the
fact that to vanquish one mile in the woods seems equal to compassing
three in the open country. The furlongs are ambushed, and we magnify
them.

Then, again, how annoying to be told it is only five miles to the next
place when it is really eight or ten! We fall short nearly half the
distance, and are compelled to urge and roll the spent ball the rest of
the way. In such a case walking degenerates from a fine art to a
mechanic art; we walk merely; to get over the ground becomes the one
serious and engrossing thought; whereas success in walking is not to
let your right foot know what your left foot doeth. Your heart must
furnish such music that in keeping time to it your feet will carry you
around the globe without knowing it. The walker I would describe takes
no note of distance; his walk is a sally, a bonmot, an unspoken jeu
d'esprit; the ground is his butt, his provocation; it furnishes him the
resistance his body craves; he rebounds upon it, he glances off and
returns again, and uses it gayly as his tool.

I do not think I exaggerate the importance or the charms of
pedestrianism, or our need as a people to cultivate the art. I think it
would tend to soften the national manners, to teach us the meaning of
leisure, to acquaint us with the charms of the open air, to strengthen
and foster the tie between the race and the land. No one else looks out
upon the world so kindly and charitably as the pedestrian; no one else
gives and takes so much from the country he passes through. Next to the
laborer in the fields, the walker holds the closest relation to the
soil; and he holds a closer and more vital relation to nature because
he is freer and his mind more at leisure.

Man takes root at his feet, and at best he is no more than a potted
plant in his house or carriage till he has established communication
with the soil by the loving and magnetic touch of his soles to it. Then
the tie of association is born; then spring those invisible fibres and
rootlets through which character comes to smack of the soil, and which
make a man kindred to the spot of earth he inhabits.

The roads and paths you have walked along in summer and winter weather,
the fields and hills which you have looked upon in lightness and
gladness of heart, where fresh thoughts have come into your mind, or
some noble prospect has opened before you, and especially the quiet
ways where you have walked in sweet converse with your friend, pausing
under the trees, drinking at the spring,--henceforth they are not the
same; a new charm is added; those thoughts spring there perennial, your
friend walks there forever.

We have produced some good walkers and saunderers, and some noted
climbers; but as a staple recreation, as a daily practice, the mass of
the people dislike and despise walking. Thoreau said he was a good
horse, but a poor roadster. I chant the virtues of the roadster as
well. I sing of the sweetness of gravel, good sharp quartz-grit. It is
the proper condiment for the sterner seasons, and many a human gizzard
would be cured of half its ills by a suitable daily allowance of it. I
think Thoreau himself would have profited immensely by it. His diet was
too exclusively vegetable. A man cannot live on grass alone. If one has
been a lotus-eater all summer, he must turn gravel-eater in the fall
and winter. Those who have tried it know that gravel possesses an equal
though an opposite charm.

It spurs to action.  The foot tastes it and henceforth rests not.  The
joy of moving and surmounting, of attrition and progression, the thirst
for space, for miles and leagues of distance, for sights and prospects,
to cross mountains and thread rivers, and defy frost, heat, snow,
danger, difficulties, seizes it; and from that day forth its possessor
is enrolled in the noble army of walkers.



III. THE SNOW-WALKERS

He who marvels at the beauty of the world in summer will find equal
cause for wonder and admiration in winter. It is true the pomp and the
pageantry are swept away, but the essential elements remain,--the day
and the night, the mountain and the valley, the elemental play and
succession and the perpetual presence of the infinite sky. In winter
the stars seem to have rekindled their fires, the moon achieves a
fuller triumph, and the heavens wear a look of a more exalted
simplicity. Summer is more wooing and seductive, more versatile and
human, appeals to the affections and the sentiments, and fosters
inquiry and the art impulse. Winter is of a more heroic cast, and
addresses the intellect. The severe studies and disciplines come easier
in winter. One imposes larger tasks upon himself, and is less tolerant
of his own weaknesses.

The tendinous part of the mind, so to speak, is more developed in
winter; the fleshy, in summer. I should say winter had given the bone
and sinew to Literature, summer the tissues and blood.

The simplicity of winter has a deep moral.  The return of nature, after
such a career of splendor and prodigality, to habits so simple and
austere, is not lost upon either the head or the heart. It is the
philosopher coming back from the banquet and the wine to a cup of water
and a crust of bread.

And then this beautiful masquerade of the elements,--the novel
disguises our nearest friends put on! Here is another rain and another
dew, water that will not flow, nor spill, nor receive the taint of an
unclean vessel. And if we see truly, the same old beneficence and
willingness to serve lurk beneath all.

Look up at the miracle of the falling snow,--the air a dizzy maze of
whirling, eddying flakes, noiselessly transforming the world, the
exquisite crystals dropping in ditch and gutter, and disguising in the
same suit of spotless livery all objects upon which they fall. How
novel and fine the first drifts! The old, dilapidated fence is suddenly
set off with the most fantastic ruffles, scalloped and fluted after an
unheard-of fashion! Looking down a long line of decrepit stone wall, in
the trimming of which the wind had fairly run riot, I saw, as for the
first time, what a severe yet master artist old Winter is. Ah, a severe
artist! How stern the woods look, dark and cold and as rigid against
the horizon as iron!

All life and action upon the snow have an added emphasis and
significance. Every expression is underscored. Summer has few finer
pictures than this winter one of the farmer foddering his cattle from a
stack upon the clean snow,--the movement, the sharply defined figures,
the great green flakes of hay, the long file of patient cows, the
advance just arriving and pressing eagerly for the choicest
morsels,--and the bounty and providence it suggests. Or the chopper in
the woods,--the prostrate tree, the white new chips scattered about,
his easy triumph over the cold, his coat hanging to a limb, and the
clear, sharp ring of his axe. The woods are rigid and tense, keyed up
by the frost, and resound like a stringed instrument. Or the
road-breakers, sallying forth with oxen and sleds in the still, white
world, the day after the storm, to restore the lost track and demolish
the beleaguering drifts.

All sounds are sharper in winter; the air transmits better.  At night I
hear more distinctly the steady roar of the North Mountain. In summer
it is a sort of complacent purr, as the breezes stroke down its sides;
but in winter always the same low, sullen growl.

A severe artist!  No longer the canvas and the pigments, but the marble
and the chisel. When the nights are calm and the moon full, I go out to
gaze upon the wonderful purity of the moonlight and the snow. The air
is full of latent fire, and the cold warms me--after a different
fashion from that of the kitchen stove. The world lies about me in a
"trance of snow." The clouds are pearly and iridescent, and seem the
farthest possible remove from the condition of a storm,--the ghosts of
clouds, the indwelling beauty freed from all dross. I see the hills,
bulging with great drifts, lift themselves up cold and white against
the sky, the black lines of fences here and there obliterated by the
depth of the snow. Presently a fox barks away up next the mountain, and
I imagine I can almost see him sitting there, in his furs, upon the
illuminated surface, and looking down in my direction. As I listen, one
answers him from behind the woods in the valley. What a wild winter
sound, wild and weird, up among the ghostly hills! Since the wolf has
ceased to howl upon these mountains, and the panther to scream, there
is nothing to be compared with it. So wild! I get up in the middle of
the night to hear it. It is refreshing to the ear, and one delights to
know that such wild creatures are among us. At this season Nature makes
the most of every throb of life that can withstand her severity. How
heartily she indorses this fox! In what bold relief stand out the lives
of all walkers of the snow! The snow is a great tell-tale, and blabs as
effectually as it obliterates. I go into the woods, and know all that
has happened. I cross the fields, and if only a mouse has visited his
neighbor, the fact is chronicled.

The red fox is the only species that abounds in my locality; the little
gray fox seems to prefer a more rocky and precipitous country, and a
less rigorous climate; the cross fox is occasionally seen, and there
are traditions of the silver gray among the oldest hunters. But the red
fox is the sportsman's prize, and the only fur-bearer worthy of note in
these mountains.
[Footnote: A spur of the catskills.]

I go out in the morning, after a fresh fall of snow, and see at all
points where he has crossed the road. Here he has leisurely passed
within rifle-range of the house, evidently reconnoitring the premises
with an eye to the hen-roost. That clear, sharp track,--there is no
mistaking it for the clumsy footprint of a little dog. All his wildness
and agility are photographed in it. Here he has taken fright, or
suddenly recollected an engagement, and in long, graceful leaps, barely
touching the fence, has gone careering up the hill as fleet as the
wind.

The wild, buoyant creature, how beautiful he is!  I had often seen his
dead carcass, and at a distance had witnessed the hounds drive him
across the upper fields; but the thrill and excitement of meeting him
in his wild freedom in the woods were unknown to me till, one cold
winter day, drawn thither by the baying of a hound, I stood near the
summit of the mountain, waiting a renewal of the sound, that I might
determine the course of the dog and choose my position,--stimulated by
the ambition of all young Nimrods to bag some notable game. Long I
waited, and patiently, till, chilled and benumbed, I was about to turn
back, when, hearing a slight noise, I looked up and beheld a most
superb fox, loping along with inimitable grace and ease, evidently
disturbed, but not pursued by the hound, and so absorbed in his private
meditations that he failed to see me, though I stood transfixed with
amazement and admiration, not ten yards distant. I took his measure at
a glance,--a large male, with dark legs, and massive tail tipped with
white,--a most magnificent creature; but so astonished and fascinated
was I by this sudden appearance and matchless beauty, that not till I
had caught the last glimpse of him, as he disappeared over a knoll, did
I awake to my duty as a sportsman, and realize what an opportunity to
distinguish myself I had unconsciously let slip. I clutched my gun,
half angrily, as if it was to blame, and went home out, of humor with
myself and all fox-kind. But I have since thought better of the
experience, and concluded that I bagged the game after all, the best
part of it, and fleeced Reynard of something more valuable than his
fur, without his knowledge.

This is thoroughly a winter sound,--this voice of the hound upon the
mountain,--and one that is music to many ears. The long trumpet-like
bay, heard for a mile or more,--now faintly back in the deep recesses
of the mountain,--now distinct, but still faint, as the hound comes
over some prominent point and the wind favors,--anon entirely lost in
the gully,--then breaking out again much nearer, and growing more and
more pronounced as the dog approaches, till, when he comes around the
brow of the mountain, directly above you, the barking is loud and
sharp. On he goes along the northern spur, his voice rising and sinking
as the wind and the lay of the ground modify it, till lost to hearing.

The fox usually keeps half a mile ahead, regulating his speed by that
of the hound, occasionally pausing a moment to divert himself with a
mouse, or to contemplate the landscape, or to listen for his pursuer.
If the hound press him too closely, he leads off from mountain to
mountain, and so generally escapes the hunter; but if the pursuit be
slow, he plays about some ridge or peak, and falls a prey, though not
an easy one, to the experienced sportsman.

A most spirited and exciting chase occurs when the farm-dog gets close
upon one in the open field, as sometimes happens in the early morning.
The fox relies so confidently upon his superior speed, that I imagine
he half tempts the dog to the race. But if the dog be a smart one, and
their course lie downhill, over smooth ground, Reynard must put his
best foot forward, and then sometimes suffer the ignominy of being run
over by his pursuer, who, however, is quite unable to pick him up,
owing to the speed. But when they mount the hill, or enter the woods,
the superior nimbleness and agility of the fox tell at once, and he
easily leaves the dog far in his rear. For a cur less than his own size
he manifests little fear, especially if the two meet alone, remote from
the house. In such cases, I have seen first one turn tail, then the
other.

A novel spectacle often occurs in summer, when the female has young.
You are rambling on the mountain, accompanied by your dog, when you are
startled by that wild, half-threatening squall, and in a moment
perceive your dog, with inverted tail, and shame and confusion in his
looks, sneaking toward you, the old fox but a few rods in his rear. You
speak to him sharply, when he bristles up, turns about, and, barking,
starts off vigorously, as if to wipe out the dishonor; but in a moment
comes sneaking back more abashed than ever, and owns himself unworthy
to be called a dog. The fox fairly shames him out of the woods. The
secret of the matter is her sex, though her conduct, for the honor of
the fox be it said, seems to be prompted only by solicitude for the
safety of her young.

One of the most notable features of the fox is his large and massive
tail. Seen running on the snow at a distance, his tail is quite as
conspicuous as his body; and, so far from appearing a burden, seems to
contribute to his lightness and buoyancy. It softens the outline of his
movements, and repeats or continues to the eye the ease and poise of
his carriage. But, pursued by the hound on a wet, thawy day, it often
becomes so heavy and bedraggled as to prove a serious inconvenience,
and compels him to take refuge in his den. He is very loath to do this;
both his pride and the traditions of his race stimulate him to run it
out, and win by fair superiority of wind and speed; and only a wound or
a heavy and moppish tail will drive him to avoid the issue in this
manner.

To learn his surpassing shrewdness and cunning, attempt to take him
with a trap. Rogue that he is, he always suspects some trick, and one
must be more of a fox than he is himself to overreach him. At first
sight it would appear easy enough. With apparent indifference he
crosses your path, or walks in your footsteps in the field, or travels
along the beaten highway, or lingers in the vicinity of stacks and
remote barns. Carry the carcass of a pig, or a fowl, or a dog, to a
distant field in midwinter, and in a few nights his tracks cover the
snow about it.

The inexperienced country youth, misled by this seeming carelessness of
Reynard, suddenly conceives a project to enrich himself with fur, and
wonders that the idea has not occurred to him before, and to others. I
knew a youthful yeoman of this kind, who imagined he had found a mine
of wealth on discovering on a remote side-hill, between two woods, a
dead porker, upon which it appeared all the foxes of the neighborhood
had nightly banqueted. The clouds were burdened with snow; and as the
first flakes commenced to eddy down, he set out, trap and broom in
hand, already counting over in imagination the silver quarters he would
receive for his first fox-skin. With the utmost care, and with a
palpitating heart, he removed enough of the trodden snow to allow the
trap to sink below the surface. Then, carefully sifting the light
element over it and sweeping his tracks full, he quickly withdrew,
laughing exultingly over the little surprise he had prepared for the
cunning rogue. The elements conspired to aid him, and the falling snow
rapidly obliterated all vestiges of his work. The next morning at dawn
he was on his way to bring in his fur. The snow had done its work
effectually, and, he believed, had kept his secret well. Arrived in
sight of the locality, he strained his vision to make out his prize
lodged against the fence at the foot of the hill. Approaching nearer,
the surface was unbroken, and doubt usurped the place of certainty in
his mind. A slight mound marked the site of the porker, but there was
no footprint near it. Looking up the hill, he saw where Reynard had
walked leisurely down toward his wonted bacon till within a few yards
of it, when he had wheeled, and with prodigious strides disappeared in
the woods. The young trapper saw at a glance what a comment this was
upon his skill in the art, and, indignantly exhuming the iron, he
walked home with it, the stream of silver quarters suddenly setting in
another direction.

The successful trapper commences in the fall, or before the first deep
snow. In a field not too remote, with an old axe he cuts a small place,
say ten inches by fourteen, in the frozen ground, and removes the earth
to the depth of three or four inches, then fills the cavity with dry
ashes, in which are placed bits of roasted cheese. Reynard is very
suspicious at first, and gives the place a wide berth. It looks like
design, and he will see how the thing behaves before he approaches too
near. But the cheese is savory and the cold severe. He ventures a
little closer every night, until he can reach and pick a piece from the
surface. Emboldened by success, like other mortals, he presently digs
freely among the ashes, and, finding a fresh supply of the delectable
morsels every night, is soon thrown off his guard and his suspicions
quite lulled. After a week of baiting in this manner, and on the eve of
a light fall of snow, the trapper carefully conceals his trap in the
bed, first smoking it thoroughly with hemlock boughs to kill or
neutralize the smell of the iron. If the weather favors and the proper
precautions have been taken, he may succeed, though the chances are
still greatly against him.

Reynard is usually caught very lightly, seldom more than the ends of
his toes being between the jaws. He sometimes works so cautiously as to
spring the trap without injury even to his toes, or may remove the
cheese night after night without even springing it. I knew an old
trapper who, on finding himself outwitted in this manner, tied a bit of
cheese to the pan, and next morning had poor Reynard by the jaw. The
trap is not fastened, but only encumbered with a clog, and is all the
more sure in its hold by yielding to every effort of the animal to
extricate himself.

When Reynard sees his captor approaching, he would fain drop into a
mouse-hole to render himself invisible. He crouches to the ground and
remains perfectly motionless until he perceives himself discovered,
when he makes one desperate and final effort to escape, but ceases all
struggling as you come up, and behaves in a manner that stamps him a
very timid warrior,--cowering to the earth with a mingled look of
shame, guilt, and abject fear. A young farmer told me of tracing one
with his trap to the border of a wood, where he discovered the cunning
rogue trying to hide by embracing a small tree. Most animals, when
taken in a trap, show fight; but Reynard has more faith in the
nimbleness of his feet than in the terror of his teeth.

Entering the woods, the number and variety of the tracks contrast
strongly with the rigid, frozen aspect of things. Warm jets of life
still shoot and I play amid this snowy desolation. Fox-tracks are far
less numerous than in the fields; but those of hares, skunks,
partridges, squirrels, and mice abound. The mice tracks are very
pretty, and look like a sort of fantastic stitching on the coverlid of
the snow. One is curious to know what brings these tiny creatures from
their retreats; they do not seem to be in quest of food, but rather to
be traveling about for pleasure or sociability, though always going
post-haste, and linking stump with stump and tree with tree by fine,
hurried strides. That is when they travel openly; but they have hidden
passages and winding galleries under the snow, which undoubtedly are
their main avenues of communication. Here and there these passages rise
so near the surface as to be covered by only a frail arch of snow, and
a slight ridge betrays their course to the eye. I know him well. He is
known to the farmer as the "deer mouse," to the naturalist as the
white-footed mouse,--a very beautiful creature, nocturnal in his
habits, with large ears, and large, fine eyes full of a wild, harmless
look. He is daintily marked, with white feet and a white belly. When
disturbed by day he is very easily captured, having none of the cunning
or viciousness of the common Old World mouse.

It is he who, high in the hollow trunk of some tree, lays by a store of
beechnuts for winter use. Every nut is carefully shelled, and the
cavity that serves as storehouse lined with grass and leaves. The
wood-chopper frequently squanders this precious store. I have seen half
a peck taken from one tree, as clean and white as if put up by the most
delicate hands,--as they were. How long it must have taken the little
creature to collect this quantity, to hull them one by one, and convey
them up to his fifth-story chamber! He is not confined to the woods,
but is quite as common in the fields, particularly in the fall, amid
the corn and potatoes. When routed by the plow, I have seen the old one
take flight with half a dozen young hanging to her teats, and with such
reckless speed that some of the young would lose their hold and fly off
amid the weeds. Taking refuge in a stump with the rest of her family,
the anxious mother would presently come back and hunt up the missing
ones.

The snow-walkers are mostly night-walkers also, and the record they
leave upon the snow is the main clew one has to their life and doings.
The hare is nocturnal in its habits, and though a very lively creature
at night, with regular courses and run-ways through the wood, is
entirely quiet by day. Timid as he is, he makes little effort to
conceal himself, usually squatting beside a log, stump, or tree, and
seeming to avoid rocks and ledges, where he might be partially housed
from the cold and the snow, but where also--and this consideration
undoubtedly determines his choice--he would be more apt fall a prey to
his enemies. In this, as well as in many other respects, he differs
from the rabbit proper: he never burrows in the ground, or takes refuge
in a den or hole, when pursued. If caught in the open fields, he is
much confused and easily overtaken by the dog; but in the woods, he
leaves him at a bound. In summer, when first disturbed, he beats the
ground violently with his feet, by which means he would express to you
his surprise or displeasure; it is a dumb way he has of scolding. After
leaping a few yards, he pauses an instant, as if to determine the
degree of danger, and then hurries away with a much lighter tread.

His feet are like great pads, and his track has little of the sharp,
articulated expression of Reynard's, or of animals that climb or dig.
Yet it is very pretty like all the rest, and tells its own tale. There
is nothing bold or vicious or vulpine in it, and his timid, harmless
character is published at every leap. He abounds in dense woods,
preferring localities filled with a small undergrowth of beech and
birch, upon the bark of which he feeds. Nature is rather partial to
him, and matches his extreme local habits and character with a suit
that corresponds with his surroundings,--reddish gray in summer and
white in winter.

The sharp-rayed track of the partridge adds another figure to this
fantastic embroidery upon the winter snow. Her course is a clear,
strong line, sometimes quite wayward, but generally very direct,
steering for the densest, most impenetrable places,--leading you over
logs and through brush, alert and expectant, till, suddenly, she bursts
up a few yards from you, and goes humming through the trees,--the
complete triumph of endurance and vigor. Hardy native bird, may your
tracks never be fewer, or your visits to the birch-tree less frequent!

The squirrel tracks--sharp, nervous, and wiry--have their histories
also. But how rarely we see squirrels in winter! The naturalists say
they are mostly torpid; yet evidently that little pocket-faced
depredator, the chipmunk, was not carrying buckwheat for so many days
to his hole for nothing: was he anticipating a state of torpidity, or
providing against the demands of a very active appetite? Red and gray
squirrels are more or less active all winter, though very shy, and, I
am inclined to think, partially nocturnal in their habits. Here a gray
one has just passed,--came down that tree and went up this; there he
dug for a beechnut, and left the burr on the snow. How did he know
where to dig? During an unusually severe winter I have known him to
make long journeys to a barn, in a remote field, where wheat was
stored. How did he know there was wheat there? In attempting to return,
the adventurous creature was frequently run down and caught in the deep
snow.

His home is in the trunk of some old birch or maple, with an entrance
far up amid the branches. In the spring he builds himself a
summer-house of small leafy twigs in the top of a neighboring beech,
where the young are reared and much of the time is passed. But the
safer retreat in the maple is not abandoned, and both old and young
resort thither in the fall, or when danger threatens. Whether this
temporary residence amid the branches is for elegance or pleasure, or
for sanitary reasons or domestic convenience, the naturalist has
forgotten to mention.

The elegant creature, so cleanly in its habits, so graceful in its
carriage, so nimble and daring in its movements, excites feelings of
admiration akin to those awakened by the birds and the fairer forms of
nature. His passage through the trees is almost a flight. Indeed, the
flying squirrel has little or no advantage over him, and in speed and
nimbleness cannot compare with him at all. If he miss his footing and
fall, he is sure to catch on the next branch; if the connection be
broken, he leaps recklessly for the nearest spray or limb, and secures
his hold, even if it be by the aid of his teeth.

His career of frolic and festivity begins in the fall, after the birds
have left us and the holiday spirit of nature has commenced to subside.
How absorbing the pastime of the sportsman who goes to the woods in the
still October morning in quest of him! You step lightly across the
threshold of the forest, and sit down upon the first log or rock to
await the signals. It is so still that the ear suddenly seems to have
acquired new powers, and there is no movement to confuse the eye.
Presently you hear the rustling of a branch, and see it sway or spring
as the squirrel leaps from or to it; or else you hear a disturbance in
the dry leaves, and mark one running upon the ground. He has probably
seen the intruder, and, not liking his stealthy movements, desires to
avoid a nearer acquaintance. Now he mounts a stump to see if the way is
clear, then pauses a moment at the foot of a tree to take his bearings,
his tail, as he skims along, undulating behind him, and adding to the
easy grace and dignity of his movements. Or else you are first advised
of his proximity by the dropping of a false nut, or the fragments of
the shucks rattling upon the leaves. Or, again, after contemplating you
awhile unobserved, and making up his mind that you are not dangerous,
he strikes an attitude on a branch, and commences to quack and bark,
with an accompanying movement of his tail. Late in the afternoon, when
the same stillness reigns, the same scenes are repeated. There is a
black variety, quite rare, but mating freely with the gray, from which
he seems to be distinguished only in color.

The track of the red squirrel may be known by its smaller size.  He is
more common and less dignified than the gray, and oftener guilty of
petty larceny about the barns and grain-fields. He is most abundant in
old barkpeelings, and low, dilapidated hemlocks, from which he makes
excursions to the fields and orchards, spinning along the tops of the
fences, which afford not only convenient lines of communication, but a
safe retreat if danger threatens. He loves to linger about the orchard;
and, sitting upright on the topmost stone in the wall, or on the
tallest stake in the fence, chipping up an apple for the seeds, his
tail conforming to the curve of his back, his paws shifting and turning
the apple, he is a pretty sight, and his bright, pert appearance atones
for all the mischief he does. At home, in the woods, he is the most
frolicsome and loquacious. The appearance of anything unusual, if,
after contemplating it a moment, he concludes it not dangerous, excites
his unbounded mirth and ridicule, and he snickers and chatters, hardly
able to contain himself; now darting up the trunk of a tree and
squealing in derision, then hopping into position on a limb and dancing
to the music of his own cackle, and all for your special benefit.

There is something very human in this apparent mirth and mockery of the
squirrels. It seems to be a sort of ironical laughter, and implies
self-conscious pride and exultation in the laugher. "What a ridiculous
thing you are, to be sure!" he seems to say; "how clumsy and awkward,
and what a poor show for a tail! Look at me, look at me!"--and he
capers about in his best style. Again, he would seem to tease you and
provoke your attention; then suddenly assumes a tone of good-natured,
childlike defiance and derision. That pretty little imp, the chipmunk,
will sit on the stone above his den and defy you, as plainly as if he
said so, to catch him before he can get into his hole if you can. You
hurl a stone at him, and "No you didn't!" comes up from the depth of
his retreat.

In February another track appears upon the snow, slender and delicate,
about a third larger than that of the gray squirrel, indicating no
haste or speed, but, on the contrary, denoting the most imperturbable
ease and leisure, the footprints so close together that the trail
appears like a chain of curiously carved links. Sir Mephitis mephitica,
or, in plain English, the skunk, has awakened from his six weeks' nap,
and come out into society again. He is a nocturnal traveler, very bold
and impudent, coming quite up to the barn and outbuildings, and
sometimes taking up his quarters for the season under the haymow. There
is no such word as hurry in his dictionary, as you may see by his path
upon the snow. He has a very sneaking, insinuating way, and goes
creeping about the fields and woods, never once in a perceptible degree
altering his gait, and, if a fence crosses his course, steers for a
break or opening to avoid climbing. He is too indolent even to dig his
own hole, but appropriates that of a woodchuck, or hunts out a crevice
in the rocks, from which he extends his rambling in all directions,
preferring damp, thawy weather. He has very little discretion or
cunning, and holds a trap in utter contempt, stepping into it as soon
as beside it, relying implicitly for defense against all forms of
danger upon the unsavory punishment he is capable of inflicting. He is
quite indifferent to both man and beast, and will not hurry himself to
get out of the way of either. Walking through the summer fields at
twilight, I have come near stepping upon him, and was much the more
disturbed of the two. When attacked in the open field he confounds the
plans of his enemies by the unheard-of tactics of exposing his rear
rather than his front. "Come if you dare," he says, and his attitude
makes even the farm-dog pause. After a few encounters of this kind, and
if you entertain the usual hostility towards him, your mode of attack
will speedily resolve itself into moving about him in a circle, the
radius of which will be the exact distance at which you can hurl a
stone with accuracy and effect.

He has a secret to keep and knows it, and is careful not to betray
himself until he can do so with the most telling effect. I have known
him to preserve his serenity even when caught in a steel trap, and look
the very picture of injured innocence, manoeuvring carefully and
deliberately to extricate his foot from the grasp of the naughty jaws.
Do not by any means take pity on him, and lend a helping hand!

How pretty his face and head!  How fine and delicate his teeth, like a
weasel's or a cat's! When about a third grown, he looks so well that
one covets him for a pet. He is quite precocious, however, and capable,
even at this tender age, of making a very strong appeal to your sense
of smell.

No animal is more cleanly in his habits than he.  He is not an awkward
boy who cuts his own face with his whip; and neither his flesh nor his
fur hints the weapon with which he is armed. The most silent creature
known to me, he makes no sound, so far as I have observed, save a
diffuse, impatient noise, like that produced by beating your hand with
a whisk-broom, when the farm-dog has discovered his retreat in the
stone fence. He renders himself obnoxious to the farmer by his
partiality for hens' eggs and young poultry. He is a confirmed epicure,
and at plundering hen-roosts an expert. Not the full-grown fowls are
his victims, but the youngest and most tender. At night Mother Hen
receives under her maternal wings a dozen newly hatched chickens, and
with much pride and satisfaction feels them all safely tucked away in
her feathers. In the morning she is walking about disconsolately,
attended by only two or three of all that pretty brood. What has
happened?  Where are they gone?  That pickpocket, Sir Mephitis, could
solve the mystery. Quietly has he approached, under cover of darkness,
and one by one relieved her of her precious charge. Look closely and
you will see their little yellow legs and beaks, or part of a mangled
form, lying about on the ground. Or, before the hen has hatched, he may
find her out, and, by the same sleight of hand, remove every egg,
leaving only the empty blood-stained shells to witness against him. The
birds, especially the ground-builders, suffer in like manner from his
plundering propensities.

The secretion upon which he relies for defense, and which is the chief
source of his unpopularity, while it affords good reasons against
cultivating him as a pet, and mars his attractiveness as game, is by no
means the greatest indignity that can be offered to a nose. It is a
rank, living smell, and has none of the sickening qualities of disease
or putrefaction. Indeed, I think a good smeller will enjoy its most
refined intensity. It approaches the sublime, and makes the nose
tingle. It is tonic and bracing, and, I can readily believe, has rare
medicinal qualities. I do not recommend its use as eyewater, though an
old farmer assures me it has undoubted virtues when thus applied.
Hearing, one night, a disturbance among his hens, he rushed suddenly
out to catch the thief, when Sir Mephitis, taken by surprise, and no
doubt much annoyed at being interrupted, discharged the vials of his
wrath full in the farmers face, and with such admirable effect that,
for a few minutes, he was completely blinded, and powerless to revenge
himself upon the rogue, who embraced the opportunity to make good his
escape; but he declared that afterwards his eyes felt as if purged by
fire, and his sight was much clearer.

In March that brief summary of a bear, the raccoon, comes out of his
den in the ledges, and leaves his sharp digitigrade track upon the
snow,--traveling not unfrequently in pairs,--a lean, hungry couple,
bent on pillage and plunder. They have an unenviable time of
it,--feasting in the summer and fall, hibernating in winter, and
starving in spring. In April I have found the young of the previous
year creeping around the fields, so reduced by starvation as to be
quite helpless, and offering no resistance to my taking them up by the
tail and carrying them home.

The old ones also become very much emaciated, and come boldly up to the
barn or other outbuildings in quest of food. I remember, one morning in
early spring, of hearing old Cuff, the farm-dog, barking vociferously
before it was yet light. When we got up we discovered him, at the foot
of an ash-tree standing about thirty rods from the house, looking up at
some gray objects in the leafless branches, and by his manners and his
voice evincing great impatience that we were so tardy in coming to his
assistance. Arrived on the spot, we saw in the tree a coon of unusual
size. One bold climber proposed to go up and shake him down. This was
what old Cuff wanted, and he fairly bounded with delight as he saw his
young master shinning up the tree. Approaching within eight or ten feet
of the coon, he seized the branch to which it clung and shook long and
fiercely. But the coon was in no danger of losing its hold, and, when
the climber paused to renew his hold, it turned toward him with a
growl, and showed very clearly a purpose to advance to the attack. This
caused his pursuer to descend to the ground with all speed. When the
coon was finally brought down with a gun, he fought the dog, which was
a large, powerful animal, with great fury, returning bite for bite for
some moments; and after a quarter of an hour had elapsed and his
unequal antagonist had shaken him as a terrier does a rat, making his
teeth meet through the small of his back, the coon still showed fight.

They are very tenacious of life, and like the badger will always whip a
dog of their own size and weight. A woodchuck can bite severely, having
teeth that cut like chisels, but a coon has agility and power of limb
as well.

They are considered game only in the fall, or towards the close of
summer, when they become fat. and their flesh sweet. At this time,
cooning in the remote interior is a famous pastime. As this animal is
entirely nocturnal in its habits, it is hunted only at night. A piece
of corn on some remote side-hill near the mountain, or between two
pieces of woods, is most apt to be frequented by them. While the corn
is yet green they pull the ears down like hogs, and, tearing open the
sheathing of husks, eat the tender, succulent kernels, bruising and
destroying much more than they devour. Sometimes their ravages are a
matter of serious concern to the farmer. But every such neighborhood
has its coon-dog, and the boys and young men dearly love the sport. The
party sets out about eight or nine o'clock of a dark, moonless night,
and stealthily approaches the cornfield. The dog knows his business,
and when he is put into a patch of corn and told to "hunt them up" he
makes a thorough search, and will not be misled by any other scent. You
hear him rattling through the corn, hither and yon, with great speed.
The coons prick up their ears, and leave on the opposite side of the
field. In the stillness you may sometimes hear a single stone rattle on
the wall as they hurry toward the woods. If the dog finds nothing, he
comes back to his master in a short time, and says in his dumb way, "No
coon there." But if he strikes a trail, you presently hear a louder
rattling on the stone wall, and then a hurried bark as he enters the
woods, followed in a few minutes by loud and repeated barking as he
reaches the foot of the tree in which the coon has taken refuge. Then
follows a pellmell rush of the cooning party up the hill, into the
woods, through the brush and the darkness, falling over prostrate
trees, pitching into gullies and hollows, losing hats and tearing
clothes, till finally, guided by the baying of the faithful dog, the
tree is reached. The first thing now in order is to kindle a fire, and,
if its light reveals the coon, to shoot him; if not, to fell the tree
with an axe. If this happens to be too great a sacrifice of timber and
of strength, to sit down at the foot of the tree till morning.

But with March our interest in these phases of animal life, which
winter has so emphasized and brought out, begins to decline. Vague
rumors are afloat in the air of a great and coming change. We are eager
for Winter to be gone, since he, too, is fugitive and cannot keep his
place. Invisible hands deface his icy statuary; his chisel has lost its
cunning. The drifts, so pure and exquisite, are now earth-stained and
weather-worn,--the flutes and scallops, and fine, firm lines, all gone;
and what was a grace and an ornament to the hills is now a
disfiguration. Like worn and unwashed linen appear the remains of that
spotless robe with which he clothed the world as his bride.

But he will not abdicate without a struggle.  Day after day he rallies
his scattered forces, and night after night pitches his white tents on
the hills, and would fain regain his lost ground; but the young prince
in every encounter prevails. Slowly and reluctantly the gray old hero
retreats up the mountain, till finally the south rain comes in earnest,
and in a night he is dead.



IV. THE FOX

I have already spoken of the fox at some length, but it will take a
chapter by itself to do half justice to his portrait.

He furnishes, perhaps, the only instance that can be cited of a
fur-bearing animal that not only holds its own, but that actually
increases in the face of the means that are used for its extermination.
The beaver, for instance, was gone before the earliest settlers could
get a sight of him; and even the mink and marten are now only rarely
seen, or not seen at all, in places where they were once abundant.

But the fox has survived civilization, and in some localities is no
doubt more abundant now than in the time of the Revolution. For half a
century at least he has been almost the only prize, in the way of fur,
that was to be found on our mountains, and he has been hunted and
trapped and waylaid, sought for as game and pursued in enmity, taken by
fair means and by foul, and yet there seems not the slightest danger of
the species becoming extinct.

One would think that a single hound in a neighborhood, filling the
mountains with his bayings, and leaving no nook or byway of them
unexplored, was enough to drive and scare every fox from the country.
But not so. Indeed, I am almost tempted to say, the more hounds, the
more foxes.

I recently spent a summer month in a mountainous district in the State
of New York, where, from its earliest settlement, the red fox has been
the standing prize for skill in the use of the trap and gun. At the
house where I was staying were two foxhounds, and a neighbor half a
mile distant had a third. There were many others in the township, and
in season they were well employed, too; but the three spoken of,
attended by their owners, held high carnival on the mountains in the
immediate vicinity. And many were the foxes that, winter after winter,
fell before them, twenty-five having been shot, the season before my
visit, on one small range alone. And yet the foxes were apparently
never more abundant than they were that summer, and never bolder,
coming at night within a few rods of the house, and of the unchained
alert hounds, and making havoc among the poultry.

One morning a large, fat goose was found minus her head and otherwise
mangled. Both hounds had disappeared, and, as they did not come back
till near night, it was inferred that they had cut short Reynard's
repast, and given him a good chase into the bargain. But next night he
was back again, and this time got safely off with the goose. A couple
of nights after he must have come with recruits, for next morning three
large goslings were reported missing. The silly geese now got it
through their noddles that there was danger about, and every night
thereafter came close up to the house to roost.

A brood of turkeys, the old one tied to a tree a few rods to the rear
of the house, were the next objects of attack. The predaceous rascal
came, as usual, in the latter half of the night. I happened to be
awake, and heard the helpless turkey cry "quit," "quit," with great
emphasis. Another sleeper, on the floor above me, who, it seems, had
been sleeping with one ear awake for several nights in apprehension for
the safety of his turkeys, heard the sound also, and instantly divined
its cause. I heard the window open and a voice summon the dogs. A loud
bellow was the response, which caused Reynard to take himself off in a
hurry. A moment more, and the mother turkey would have shared the fate
of the geese. There she lay at the end of her tether, with extended
wings, bitten and rumpled. The young ones, roosting in a row on the
fence near by, had taken flight on the first alarm.

Turkeys, retaining many of their wild instincts, are less easily
captured by the fox than any other of our domestic fowls. On the
slightest show of danger they take to wing, and it is not unusual, in
the locality of which I speak, to find them in the morning perched in
the most unwonted places, as on the peak of the barn or hay-shed, or on
the tops of the apple-trees, their tails spread and their manners
showing much excitement. Perchance one turkey is minus her tail, the
fox having succeeded in getting only a mouthful of quills.

As the brood grows and their wings develop, they wander far from the
house in quest of grasshoppers. At such times they are all watchfulness
and suspicion. Crossing the fields one day, attended by a dog that much
resembled a fox, I came suddenly upon a brood about one third grown,
which were feeding in a pasture just beyond a wood. It so happened that
they caught sight of the dog without seeing me, when instantly, with
the celerity of wild game, they launched into the air, and, while the
old one perched upon a treetop, as if to keep an eye on the supposed
enemy, the young went sailing over the trees toward home.

The two hounds above referred to, accompanied by a cur-dog, whose
business it was to mind the farm, but who took as much delight in
running away from prosy duty as if he had been a schoolboy, would
frequently steal off and have a good hunt all by themselves, just for
the fun of the thing, I suppose. I more than half suspect that it was
as a kind of taunt or retaliation, that Reynard came and took the geese
from under their very noses. One morning they went off and stayed till
the afternoon of the next day; they ran the fox all day and all night,
the hounds baying at every jump, the cur-dog silent and tenacious. When
the trio returned, they came dragging themselves along, stiff,
footsore, gaunt, and hungry. For a day or two afterward they lay about
the kennels, seeming to dread nothing so much as the having to move.
The stolen hunt was their "spree," their "bender," and of course they
must take time to get over it.

Some old hunters think the fox enjoys the chase as much as the hound,
especially when the latter runs slow, as the best hounds do. The fox
will wait for the hound, will sit down and listen, or play about,
crossing and recrossing and doubling upon his track, as if enjoying a
mischievous consciousness of the perplexity he would presently cause
his pursuer. It is evident, however, that the fox does not always have
his share of the fun: before a swift dog, or in a deep snow, or on a
wet day, when his tail gets heavy, he must put his best foot forward.
As a last resort he "holes up." Sometimes he resorts to numerous
devices to mislead and escape the dog altogether. He will walk in the
bed of a small creek, or on a rail-fence. I heard of an instance of a
fox, hard and long pressed, that took to a rail-fence, and, after
walking some distance, made a leap to one side to a hollow stump, in
the cavity of which he snugly stowed himself. The ruse succeeded, and
the dogs lost the trail; but the hunter, coming up, passed by chance
near the stump, when out bounded the fox, his cunning availing him less
than he deserved. On another occasion the fox took to the public road,
and stepped with great care and precision into a sleigh-track. The
hard, polished snow took no imprint of the light foot, and the scent
was no doubt less than it would have been on a rougher surface. Maybe,
also, the rogue had considered the chances of another sleigh coming
along, before the hound, and obliterating the trail entirely.

Audubon tells us of a certain fox, which, when started by the hounds,
always managed to elude them at a certain point. Finally the hunter
concealed himself in the locality, to discover, if possible, the trick.
Presently along came the fox, and, making a leap to one side, ran up
the trunk of a fallen tree which had lodged some feet from the ground,
and concealed himself in the top. In a few minutes the hounds came up,
and in their eagerness passed some distance beyond the point, and then
went still farther, looking for the lost trail. Then the fox hastened
down, and, taking his back-track, fooled the dogs completely.

I was told of a silver-gray fox in northern New York, which, when
pursued by the hounds, would run till it had hunted up another fox, or
the fresh trail of one, when it would so manoeuvre that the hound would
invariably be switched off on the second track.

In cold, dry weather the fox will sometimes elude the hound, at least
delay him much, by taking to a bare, plowed field. The hard dry earth
seems not to retain a particle of the scent, and the hound gives a
loud, long, peculiar bark, to signify he has trouble. It is now his
turn to show his wit, which he often does by passing completely around
the field, and resuming the trail again where it crosses the fence or a
strip of snow.

The fact that any dry, hard surface is unfavorable to the hound
suggests, in a measure, the explanation of the wonderful faculty that
all dogs in a degree possess to track an animal by the scent of the
foot alone. Did you ever think why a dog's nose is always wet? Examine
the nose of a foxhound, for instance; how very moist and sensitive!
Cause this moisture to dry up, and the dog would be as powerless to
track an animal as you are! The nose of the cat, you may observe, is
but a little moist, and, as you know, her sense of smell is far
inferior to that of the dog. Moisten your own nostrils and lips, and
this sense is plainly sharpened. The sweat of a dog's nose, therefore,
is no doubt a vital element in its power, and, without taking a very
long logical stride, we may infer how much a damp, rough surface aids
him in tracking game.

A fox hunt in this country is, of course, quite a different thing from
what it is in England, where all the squires and noblemen of a borough,
superbly mounted, go riding over the country, guided by the yelling
hounds, till the fox is literally run down and murdered. Here the
hunter prefers a rough, mountainous country, and, as probably most
persons know, takes advantage of the disposition of the fox, when
pursued by the hound, to play or circle around a ridge or bold point,
and, taking his stand near the run-way, shoots him down.

I recently had the pleasure of a turn with some experienced hunters.
As we ascended the ridge toward the mountain, keeping in our ears the
uncertain baying of the hounds as they slowly unraveled an old trail,
my companions pointed out to me the different run-ways,--a gap in the
fence here, a rock just below the brow of the hill there, that tree
yonder near the corner of the woods, or the end of that stone wall
looking down the side-hill, or commanding a cow-path, or the outlet of
a wood-road. A half-wild apple orchard near a cross-road was pointed
out as an invariable run-way, where the fox turned toward the mountain
again, after having been driven down the ridge. There appeared to be no
reason why the foxes should habitually pass any particular point, yet
the hunters told me that year after year they took about the same
turns, each generation of foxes running through the upper corner of
that field, or crossing the valley near yonder stone wall, when pursued
by the dog. It seems the fox when he finds himself followed is
perpetually tempted to turn in his course, to deflect from a right
line, as a person would undoubtedly be under similar circumstances. If
he is on this side of the ridge, when he hears the dog break around on
his trail he speedily crosses to the other side; if he is in the
fields, he takes again to the woods; if in the valley, he hastens to
the high land, and evidently enjoys running along the ridge and
listening to the dogs, slowly tracing out his course in the fields
below. At such times he appears to have but one sense, hearing, and
that seems to be reverted toward his pursuers. He is constantly
pausing, looking back and listening, and will almost run over the
hunter if he stands still, even though not at all concealed.

Animals of this class depend far less upon their sight than upon their
hearing and sense of smell. Neither the fox nor the dog is capable of
much discrimination with the eye; they seem to see things only in the
mass; but with the nose they can analyze and define, and get at the
most subtle shades of difference. The fox will not read a man from a
stump or a rock, unless he gets his scent, and the dog does not know
his master in a crowd until he has smelled him.

On the occasion to which I refer, it was not many minutes after the
dogs entered the woods on the side of the mountain before they gave out
sharp and eager, and we knew at once that the fox was started. We were
then near a point that had been designated as a sure run-way, and
hastened to get into position with all speed. For my part I was so
taken with the music of the hounds, as it swelled up over the ridge,
that I quite forgot the game. I saw one of my companions leveling his
gun, and, looking a few rods to the right, saw the fox coming right on
to us. I had barely time to note the silly and abashed expression that
came over him as he saw us in his path, when he was cut down as by a
flash of lightning. The rogue did not appear frightened, but ashamed
and out of countenance, as one does when some trick has been played
upon him, or when detected in some mischief.

Late in the afternoon, as we were passing through a piece of woods in
the valley below, another fox, the third that day, broke from his cover
in an old treetop, under our very noses, and drew the fire of three of
our party, myself among the number, but, thanks to the interposing
trees and limbs, escaped unhurt. Then the dogs took up the trail and
there was lively music again. The fox steered through the fields direct
for the ridge where we had passed up in the morning. We knew he would
take a turn here and then point for the mountain, and two of us, with
the hope of cutting him off by the old orchard, through which we were
again assured he would surely pass, made a precipitous rush for that
point. It was nearly half a mile distant, most of the way up a steep
side-hill, and if the fox took the circuit indicated he would probably
be there in twelve or fifteen minutes. Running up an angle of 45
degrees seems quite easy work for a four-footed beast like a dog or a
fox, but for a two-legged animal like a man it is very heavy and
awkward. Before I got halfway up there seemed to be a vacuum all about
me, so labored was my breathing, and when I reached the summit my head
swam and my knees were about giving out; but pressing on, I had barely
time to reach a point in the road abreast of the orchard, when I heard
the hounds, and, looking under the trees, saw the fox, leaping high
above the weeds and grass, coming straight toward me. He evidently had
not got over the first scare, which our haphazard fusillade had given
him, and was making unusually quick time. I was armed with a rifle, and
said to myself that now was the time to win the laurels I had coveted.
For half a day previous I had been practicing on a pumpkin which a
patient youth had rolled down a hill for me, and had improved my shot
considerably. Now a yellow pumpkin was coming which was not a pumpkin,
and for the first time during the day opportunity favored me. I
expected the fox to cross the road a few yards below me, but just then
I heard him whisk through the grass, and he bounded upon the fence a
few yards above. He seemed to cringe as he saw his old enemy, and to
depress his fur to half his former dimensions. Three bounds and he had
cleared the road, when my bullet tore up the sod beside him, but to
this hour I do not know whether I looked at the fox without seeing my
gun, or whether I did sight him across its barrel. I only know that I
did not distinguish myself in the use of the rifle on that occasion,
and went home to wreak my revenge upon another pumpkin; but without
much improvement of my skill, for, a few days after, another fox ran
under my very nose with perfect impunity. There is something so
fascinating in the sudden appearance of the fox that the eye is quite
mastered, and, unless the instinct of the sportsman is very strong and
quick, the prey will slip through his grasp.

A still hunt rarely brings you in sight of a fox, as his ears are much
sharper than yours, and his tread much lighter. But if the fox is
mousing in the fields, and you discover him before he does you, you
may, the wind favoring, call him within a few paces of you. Secrete
yourself behind the fence, or some other object, and squeak as nearly
like a mouse as possible. Reynard will hear the sound at an incredible
distance. Pricking up his ears, he gets the direction, and comes
trotting along as unsuspiciously as can be. I have never had an
opportunity to try the experiment, but I know perfectly reliable
persons who have. One man, in the pasture getting his cows, called a
fox which was too busy mousing to get the first sight, till it jumped
upon the wall just over where he sat secreted. Giving a loud whoop and
jumping up at the same time, the fox came as near being frightened out
of his skin as I suspect a fox ever was.

In trapping for a fox, you get perhaps about as much "fun" and as
little fur as in any trapping amusement you can engage in. The one
feeling that ever seems present to the mind of Reynard is suspicion. He
does not need experience to teach him, but seems to know from the jump
that there is such a thing as a trap, and that a trap has a way of
grasping a fox's paw that is more frank than friendly. Cornered in a
hole or a den, a trap can be set so that the poor creature has the
desperate alternative of being caught or starving. He is generally
caught, though not till he has braved hunger for a good many days.

But to know all his cunning and shrewdness, bait him in the field, or
set your trap by some carcass where he is wont to come. In some cases
he will uncover the trap, and leave the marks of his contempt for it in
a way you cannot mistake, or else he will not approach within a rod of
it. Occasionally, however, he finds in a trapper more than his match,
and is fairly caught. When this happens, the trap, which must be of the
finest make, is never touched with the bare hand, but, after being
thoroughly smoked and greased, is set in a bed of dry ashes or chaff in
a remote field, where the fox has been emboldened to dig for several
successive nights for morsels of toasted cheese.

A light fall of snow aids the trapper's art and conspires to Reynard's
ruin. But how lightly he is caught, when caught at all! barely the end
of his toes, or at most a spike through the middle of his foot. I once
saw a large painting of a fox struggling with a trap which held him by
the hind leg, above the gambrel-joint! A painting alongside of it
represented a peasant driving an ox-team from the offside! A fox would
be as likely to be caught above the gambrel-joint as a farmer would to
drive his team from the off-side. I knew one that was caught by the tip
of the lower jaw. He came nightly, and took the morsel of cheese from
the pan of the trap without springing it. A piece was then secured to
the pan by a thread, with the result as above stated.

I have never been able to see clearly why the mother fox generally
selects a burrow or hole in the open field in which to have her young,
except it be, as some hunters maintain, for better security. The young
foxes are wont to come out on a warm day, and play like puppies in
front of the den. The view being unobstructed on all sides by trees or
bushes, in the cover of which danger might approach, they are less
liable to surprise and capture. On the slightest sound they disappear
in the hole. Those who have watched the gambols of young foxes speak of
them as very amusing, even more arch and playful than those of kittens,
while a spirit profoundly wise and cunning seems to look out of their
young eyes. The parent fox can never be caught in the den with them,
but is hovering near the woods, which are always at hand, and by her
warning cry or bark tells them when to be on their guard. She usually
has at least three, dens, at no great distance apart, and moves
stealthily in the night with her charge from one to the other, so as to
mislead her enemies. Many a party of boys, and of men, too, discovering
the whereabouts of a litter, have gone with shovels and picks, and,
after digging away vigorously for several hours, have found only an
empty hole for their pains. The old fox, finding her secret had been
found out, had waited for darkness, in the cover of which to transfer
her household to new quarters; or else some old fox-hunter, jealous of
the preservation of his game, and getting word of the intended
destruction of the litter, had gone at dusk the night before, and made
some disturbance about the den, perhaps flashed some powder in its
mouth,--a hint which the shrewd animal knew how to interpret.

The more scientific aspects of the question may not be without interest
to some of my readers. The fox belongs to the great order of
flesh-eating animals called Carnivora, and of the family called
Canidae, or dogs. The wolf is a kind of wild dog, and the fox is a kind
of wolf. Foxes, unlike wolves, however, never go in packs or companies,
but hunt singly. The fox has a kind of bark which suggests the dog, as
have all the members of this family. The kinship is further shown by
the fact that during certain periods, for the most part in the summer,
the dog cannot be made to attack or even to pursue the female fox, but
will run from her in the most shamefaced manner, which he will not do
in the case of any other animal except a wolf. Many of the ways and
manners of the fox, when tamed, are also like the dog's. I once saw a
young red fox exposed for sale in the market in Washington. A colored
man had him, and said he had caught him out in Virginia. He led him by
a small chain, as he would a puppy, and the innocent young rascal would
lie on his side and bask and sleep in the sunshine, amid all the noise
and chaffering around him, precisely like a dog. He was about the size
of a full-grown cat, and there was a bewitching beauty about him that I
could hardly resist. On another occasion, I saw a gray fox, about two
thirds grown, playing with a dog of about the same size, and by nothing
in the manners of either could you tell which was the dog and which the
fox.

Some naturalists think there are but two permanent species of the fox
in the United States, namely, the gray fox and the red fox, though
there are five or six varieties. The gray fox, which is much smaller
and less valuable than the red, is the Southern species, and is said to
be rarely found north of Maryland, though in certain rocky localities
along the Hudson it is common.

In the Southern States this fox is often hunted in the English fashion,
namely, on horseback, the riders tearing through the country in pursuit
till the animal is run down and caught. This is the only fox that will
tree. When too closely pressed, instead of taking to a den or a hole,
it climbs beyond the reach of the dogs in some small tree.

The red fox is the Northern species, and is rarely found farther south
than the mountainous districts of Virginia. In the Arctic regions it
gives place to the Arctic fox, which most of the season is white.

The prairie fox, the cross fox, and the black or silver-gray fox seem
only varieties of the red fox, as the black squirrel breeds from the
gray, and the black woodchuck is found with the brown. There is little
to distinguish them from the red, except the color, though the prairie
fox is said to be the larger of the two.

The cross fox is dark brown on its muzzle and extremities, with a cross
of red and black on its shoulders and breast, which peculiarity of
coloring, and not any trait in its character, gives it its name. It is
very rare, and few hunters have ever seen one. The American Fur Company
used to obtain annually from fifty to one hundred skins. The skins
formerly sold for twenty-five dollars, though I believe they now bring
only about five dollars.

The black or silver-gray fox is the rarest of all, and its skin the
most valuable. The Indians used to estimate it equal to forty beaver
skins. The great fur companies seldom collect in a single season more
than four or five skins at any one post. Most of those of the American
Fur Company come from the head-waters of the Mississippi. One of the
younger Audubons shot one in northern New York. The fox had been seen
and fired at many times by the hunters of the neighborhood, and had
come to have the reputation of leading a charmed life, and of being
invulnerable to anything but a silver bullet. But Audubon brought her
down (for it was a female) on the second trial. She had a litter of
young in the vicinity, which he also dug out, and found the nest to
hold three black and four red ones, which fact settled the question
with him that black and red often have the same parentage, and are in
truth the same species.

The color of this fox, in a point-blank view, is black, but viewed at
an angle it is a dark silvergray, whence has arisen the notion that the
black and the silver-gray are distinct varieties. The tip of the tail
is always white.

In almost every neighborhood there are traditions of this fox, and it
is the dream of young sportsmen; but I have yet to meet the person who
has seen one. I should go well to the north, into the British
Possessions, if I were bent on obtaining a specimen.

One more item from the books.  From the fact that in the bone caves in
this country skulls of the gray fox are found, but none of the red, it
is inferred by some naturalists that the red fox is a descendant from
the European species, which it resembles in form but surpasses in
beauty, and its appearance on this continent is of comparatively recent
date.



V. A MARCH CHRONICLE

ON THE POTOMAC

March 1.--The first day of spring and the first spring day!  I felt the
change the moment I put my head out of doors in the morning. A fitful,
gusty south wind was blowing, though the sky was clear. But the
sunlight was not the same. There was an interfusion of a new element.
Not ten days before there had been a day just as bright,--even brighter
and warmer,--a clear, crystalline day of February, with nothing vernal
in it; but this day was opaline; there was a film, a sentiment in it, a
nearer approach to life. Then there was that fresh, indescribable odor,
a breath from the Gulf, or from Florida and the Carolinas,--a subtle,
persuasive influence that thrilled the sense. Every root and rootlet
under ground must have felt it; the buds of the soft maple and silver
poplar felt it, and swelled perceptibly during the day. The robins knew
it, and were here that morning; so were the crow blackbirds. The shad
must have known it, down deep in their marine retreats, and leaped and
sported about the mouths of the rivers, ready to dart up them if the
genial influence continued. The bees in the hive also, or in the old
tree in the woods, no doubt awoke to new life; and the hibernating
animals, the bears and woodchucks, rolled up in their subterranean
dens,--I imagine the warmth reached even them, and quickened their
sluggish circulation.

Then in the afternoon there was the smell of smoke,--the first spring
fires in the open air. The Virginia farmer is raking together the
rubbish in his garden, or in the field he is preparing for the plow,
and burning it up. In imagination I am there to help him. I see the
children playing about, delighted with the sport and the resumption of
work; the smoke goes up through the shining haze; the farmhouse door
stands open, and lets in the afternoon sun; the cow lows for her calf,
or hides it in the woods; and in the morning the geese, sporting in the
spring-sun, answer the call of the wild flock steering northward above
them.

As I stroll through the market I see the signs here.  That old colored
woman has brought spring in her basket in those great green flakes of
moss, with arbutus showing the pink; and her old man is just in good
time with his fruit trees and gooseberry bushes. Various bulbs and
roots are also being brought out and offered, and the onions are
sprouting on the stands. I see bunches of robins and cedar-birds
also,--so much melody and beauty cut off from the supply going north.
The fish-market is beginning to be bright with perch and bass, and with
shad from the Southern rivers, and wild ducks are taking the place of
prairie hens and quails.

In the Carolinas, no doubt, the fruit trees are in bloom, and the rice
land is being prepared for the seed. In the mountains of Virginia and
in Ohio they are making maple sugar; in Kentucky and Tennessee they are
sowing oats; in Illinois they are, perchance, husking the corn which
has remained on the stalk in the field all winter. Wild geese and ducks
are streaming across the sky from the lower Mississippi toward the
great lakes, pausing awhile on the prairies, or alighting in the great
cornfields, making the air resound with the noise of their wings upon
the stalks and dry shucks as they resume their journey. About this
time, or a little later, in the still spring morning, the prairie hens
or prairie cocks set up that low, musical cooing or crowing that defies
the ear to trace or locate. The air is filled with that soft,
mysterious undertone; and, save that a bird is seen here and there
flitting low over the ground, the sportsman walks for hours without
coming any nearer the source of the elusivc sound.

All over a certain belt of the country the rivers and streams are
roily, and chafe their banks. There is a movement of the soils. The
capacity of the water to take up and hold in solution the salt and
earths seemed never so great before. The frost has relinquished its
hold, and turned everything over to the water. Mud is the mother now;
and out of it creep the frogs, the turtles, the crawfish.

In the North how goes the season?  The winter is perchance just
breaking up. The old frost king is just striking, or preparing to
strike, his tents. The ice is going out of the rivers, and the first
steamboat on the Hudson is picking its way through the blue lanes and
channels. The white gulls are making excursions up from the bay, to see
what the prospects are. In the lumber countries, along the upper
Kennebec and Penobscot, and along the northern Hudson, starters are at
work with their pikes and hooks starting out the pine logs on the first
spring freshet. All winter, through the deep snows, they have been
hauling them to the bank of the stream, or placing them where the tide
would reach them. Now, in countless, numbers, beaten and bruised, the
trunks of the noble trees come, borne by the angry flood. The snow that
furnishes the smooth bed over which they were drawn, now melted,
furnishes the power that carries them down to the mills. On the
Delaware the raftsmen are at work running out their rafts. Floating
islands of logs and lumber go down the swollen stream, bending over the
dams, shooting through the rapids, and bringing up at last in
Philadelphia or beyond.

In the inland farming districts what are the signs?  Few and faint, but
very suggestive. The sun has power to melt the snow; and in the meadows
all the knolls are bare, and the sheep are gnawing them industriously.
The drifts on the side-hills also begin to have a worn and dirty look,
and, where they cross the highway, to become soft, letting the teams in
up to their bellies. The oxen labor and grunt, or patiently wait for
the shovel to release them; but the spirited horse leaps and flounders,
and is determined not to give up. In the woods the snow is melted
around the trees, and the burrs and pieces of bark have absorbed the
heat till they have sunk halfway through to the ground. The snow is
melting on the under side; the frost is going out of the ground: now
comes the trial of your foundations.

About the farm buildings there awakens the old familiar chorus, the
bleating of calves and lambs, and the answering bass of their
distressed mothers; while the hens are cackling in the hay-loft, and
the geese are noisy in the spring run. But the most delightful of all
farm work, or of all rural occupations, is at hand, namely,
sugar-making. In New York and northern New England the beginning of
this season varies from the first to the middle of March, sometimes
even holding off till April. The moment the contest between the sun and
frost fairly begins, sugar weather begins; and the more even the
contest, the more the sweet. I do not know what the philosophy of it
is, but it seems a kind of see-saw, as if the sun drew the sap up and
the frost drew it down; and an excess of either stops the flow. Before
the sun has got power to unlock the frost, there is no sap; and after
the frost has lost its power to lock up again the work of the sun,
there is no sap. But when it freezes soundly at night, with a bright,
warm sun next day, wind in the west, and no signs of a storm, the veins
of the maples fairly thrill. Pierce the bark anywhere, and out gushes
the clear, sweet liquid. But let the wind change to the south and blow
moist and warm, destroying that crispness of the air, and the flow
slackens at once, unless there be a deep snow in the woods to
counteract or neutralize the warmth, in which case the run may continue
till the rain sets in. The rough-coated old trees,--one would not think
they could scent a change so quickly through that wrapper of dead, dry
bark an inch or more thick. I have to wait till I put my head out of
doors, and feel the air on my bare cheek, and sniff it with my nose;
but their nerves of taste and smell are no doubt under ground, imbedded
in the moisture, and if there is anything that responds quickly to
atmospheric changes, it is water. Do not the fish, think you, down deep
in the streams, feel every wind that blows, whether it be hot or cold?
Do not the frogs and newts and turtles under the mud feel the warmth,
though the water still seems like ice? As the springs begin to rise in
advance of the rain, so the intelligence of every change seems to
travel ahead under ground and forewarn things.

A "sap-run" seldom lasts more than two or three days.  By that time
there is a change in the weather, perhaps a rainstorm, which takes the
frost nearly all out of the ground. Then, before there can be another
run, the trees must be wound up again, the storm must have a white
tail, and "come off" cold. Presently the sun rises clear again, and
cuts the snow or softens the hard-frozen ground with his beams, and the
trees take a fresh start. The boys go through the wood, emptying out
the buckets or the pans, and reclaiming those that have blown away, and
the delightful work is resumed. But the first run, like first love, is
always the best, always the fullest, always the sweetest; while there
is a purity and delicacy of flavor about the sugar that far surpasses
any subsequent yield.

Trees differ much in the quantity as well as in the quality of sap
produced in a given season. Indeed, in a bush or orchard of fifty or
one hundred trees, as wide a difference may be observed in this respect
as among that number of cows in regard to the milk they yield. I have
in my mind now a "sugar-bush" nestled in the lap of a spur of the
Catskills, every tree of which is known to me, and assumes a distinct
individuality in my thought. I know the look and quality of the whole
two hundred; and when on my annual visit to the old homestead I find
one has perished, or fallen before the axe, I feel a personal loss.
They are all veterans, and have yielded up their life's blood for the
profit of two or three generations. They stand in little groups for
couples. One stands at the head of a spring-run, and lifts a large dry
branch high above the woods, where hawks and crows love to alight. Half
a dozen are climbing a little hill; while others stand far out in the
field, as if they had come out to get the sun. A file of five or six
worthies sentry the woods on the northwest, and confront a steep
side-hill where sheep and cattle graze. An equal number crowd up to the
line on the east; and their gray, stately trunks are seen across
meadows or fields of grain. Then there is a pair of Siamese twins, with
heavy, bushy tops; while in the forks of a wood-road stand the two
brothers, with their arms around each other's neck, and their bodies in
gentle contact for a distance of thirty feet.

One immense maple, known as the "old-creampan-tree," stands, or did
stand, quite alone among a thick growth of birches and beeches. But it
kept its end up, and did the work of two or three ordinary trees, as
its name denotes. Next to it, the best milcher in the lot was a
shaggy-barked tree in the edge of the field, that must have been badly
crushed or broken when it was little, for it had an ugly crook near the
ground, and seemed to struggle all the way up to get in an upright
attitude, but never quite succeeded; yet it could outrun all its
neighbors nevertheless. The poorest tree in the lot was a shortbodied,
heavy-topped tree that stood in the edge of a spring-run. It seldom
produced half a gallon of sap during the whole season; but this half
gallon was very sweet,--three or four times as sweet as the ordinary
article. In the production of sap, top seems far less important than
body. It is not length of limb that wins in this race, but length of
trunk. A heavy, bushy-topped tree in the open field, for instance, will
not, according to my observation, compare with a tall, long-trunked
tree in the woods, that has but a small top. Young, thrifty,
thin-skinned trees start up with great spirit, indeed, fairly on a run;
but they do not hold out, and their blood is very diluted. Cattle are
very fond of sap; so are sheep, and will drink enough to kill them. The
honey-bees get here their first sweet, and the earliest bug takes up
his permanent abode on the "spile." The squirrels also come timidly
down the trees, and sip the sweet flow; and occasionally an ugly
lizard, just out of its winter quarters and in quest Of novelties,
creeps up into the pan or bucket. Soft maple makes a very fine white
sugar, superior in quality, but far less in quantity.

I think any person who has tried it will agree with me about the charm
of sugar-making, though he have no tooth for the sweet itself. It is
enough that it is the first spring work, and takes one to the woods.
The robins are just arriving, and their merry calls ring through the
glades. The squirrels are now venturing out, and the woodpeckers and
nuthatches run briskly up the trees. The crow begins to caw, with his
accustomed heartiness and assurance; and one sees the white rump and
golden shafts of the high-hole as he flits about the open woods. Next
week, or the week after, it may be time to begin plowing, and other
sober work about the farm; but this week we will picnic among the
maples, and our camp-fire shall be an incense to spring. Ah, I am there
now! I see the woods flooded with sunlight; I smell the dry leaves, and
the mould under them just quickened by the warmth; the long-trunked
maples in their gray, rough liveries stand thickly about; I see the
brimming pans and buckets, always on the sunny side of the trees, and
hear the musical dropping of the sap; the "boiling-place," with its
delightful camp features, is just beyond the first line, with its great
arch looking to the southwest. The sound of its axe rings through the
woods. Its huge kettles or broad pans boil and foam; and I ask no other
delight than to watch and tend them all day, to dip the sap from the
great casks into them, and to replenish the fire with the newly-cut
birch and beech wood. A slight breeze is blowing from the west; I catch
the glint here and there in the afternoon sun of the little rills and
creeks coursing down the sides of the hills; the awakening sounds about
the farm and the woods reach my ear; and every rustle or movement of
the air or on the earth seems like a pulse of returning life in nature.
I sympathize with that verdant Hibernian who liked sugar-making so well
that he thought he should follow it the whole year. I should at least
be tempted to follow the season up the mountains, camping this week on
one terrace, next week on one farther up, keeping just on the hem of
Winter's garment, and just in advance of the swelling buds, until my
smoke went up through the last growth of maple that surrounds the
summit.

Maple sugar is peculiarly an American product, the discovery of it
dating back into the early history of New England. The first settlers
usually caught the sap in rude troughs, and boiled it down in kettles
slung to a pole by a chain, the fire being built around them. The first
step in the way of improvement was to use tin pans instead of troughs,
and a large stone arch in which the kettles or caldrons were set with
the fire beneath them. But of late years, as the question of fuel has
become a more important one, greater improvements have been made. The
arch has given place to an immense stove designed for that special
purpose; and the kettles to broad, shallow, sheet-iron pans, the object
being to economize all the heat, and to obtain the greatest possible
extent of evaporating surface.

March 15.--From the first to the middle of March the season made steady
progress. There were no checks, no drawbacks. Warm, copious rains from
the south and southwest, followed by days of unbroken sunshine. In the
moist places--and what places are not moist at this season?--the sod
buzzed like a hive. The absorption and filtration among the network of
roots was an audible process.

The clod fairly sang.  How the trees responded also!  The silver
poplars were masses of soft gray bloom, and the willows down toward the
river seemed to have slipped off their old bark and on their new in a
single night. The soft maples, too, when massed in the distance, their
tops deeply dyed in a bright maroon color,--how fair they looked!

The 15th of the month was "one of those charmed days when the genius of
God doth flow." The wind died away by mid-forenoon, and the day settled
down so softly and lovingly upon the earth, touching everything,
filling everything. The sky visibly came down. You could see it among
the trees and between the hills. The sun poured himself into the earth
as into a cup, and the atmosphere fairly swam with warmth and light. In
the afternoon I walked out over the country roads north of the city.
Innumerable columns of smoke were going up all around the horizon from
burning brush and weeds, fields being purified by fire. The farmers
were hauling out manure; and I am free to confess, the odor of it, with
its associations of the farm and the stable, of cattle and horses, was
good in my nostrils. In the woods the liverleaf and arbutus had just
opened doubtingly; and in the little pools great masses of frogs'
spawn, with a milky tinge, were deposited. The youth who accompanied me
brought some of it home in his handkerchief, to see it hatch in a
goblet.

The month came in like a lamb, and went out like a lamb, setting at
naught the old adage. The white fleecy clouds lay here and there, as if
at rest, on the blue sky. The fields were a perfect emerald; and the
lawns, with the new gold of the first dandelions sprinkled about, were
lush with grass. In the parks and groves there was a faint mist of
foliage, except among the willows, where there was not only a mist, but
a perfect fountain-fall of green. In the distance the river looked
blue; the spring freshets at last over, the ground settled, the jocund
season steps forth into April with a bright and confident look.


VI. AUTUMN TIDES

The season is always a little behind the sun in our climate, just as
the tide is always a little behind the moon. According to the calendar,
the summer ought to culminate about the 21st of June, but in reality it
is some weeks later; June is a maiden month all through. It is not high
noon in nature till about the first or second week in July. When the
chestnut-tree blooms, the meridian of the year is reached. By the first
of August it is fairly one o'clock. The lustre of the season begins to
dim, the foliage of the trees and woods to tarnish, the plumage of the
birds to fade, and their songs to cease. The hints of approaching fall
are on every hand. How suggestive this thistle-down, for instance,
which, as I sit by the open window, comes in and brushes softly across
my hand! The first snowflake tells of winter not more plainly than this
driving down heralds the approach of fall. Come here, my fairy, and
tell me whence you come and whither you go? What brings you to port
here, you gossamer ship sailing the great sea? How exquisitely frail
and delicate! One of the lightest things in nature; so light that in
the closed room here it will hardly rest in my open palm. A feather is
a clod beside it. Only a spider's web will hold it; coarser objects
have no power over it. Caught in the upper currents of the air and
rising above the clouds, it might sail perpetually. Indeed, one fancies
it might almost traverse the interstellar ether and drive against the
stars. And every thistle-head by the roadside holds hundreds of these
sky rovers,--imprisoned Ariels unable to set themselves free. Their
liberation may be by the shock of the wind, or the rude contact of
cattle, but it is oftener the work of the goldfinch with its
complaining brood. The seed of the thistle is the proper food of this
bird, and in obtaining it myriads of these winged creatures are
scattered to the breeze. Each one is fraught with a seed which it
exists to sow, but its wild careering and soaring does not fairly begin
till its burden is dropped, and its spheral form is complete. The seeds
of many plants and trees are disseminated through the agency of birds;
but the thistle furnishes its own birds,--flocks of them, with wings
more ethereal and tireless than were ever given to mortal creature.
From the pains Nature thus takes to sow the thistle broadcast over the
land, it might be expected to be one of the most troublesome and
abundant of weeds. But such is not the case; the more pernicious and
baffling weeds, like snapdragon or blind nettles, are more local and
restricted in their habits, and unable to fly at all.

In the fall, the battles of the spring are fought over again, beginning
at the other or little end of the series. There is the same advance and
retreat, with many feints and alarms, between the contending forces,
that was witnessed in April and May. The spring comes like a tide
running against a strong wind; it is ever beaten back, but ever gaining
ground, with now and then a mad "push upon the land" as if to overcome
its antagonist at one blow. The cold from the north encroaches upon us
in about the same fashion. In September or early in October it usually
makes a big stride forward and blackens all the more delicate plants,
and hastens the "mortal ripening" of the foliage of the trees, but it
is presently beaten back again, and the genial warmth repossesses the
land. Before long, however, the cold returns to the charge with
augmented forces and gains much ground.

The course of the seasons never does run smooth, owing to the unequal
distribution of land and water, mountain, wood, and plain.

An equilibrium, however, is usually reached in our climate in October,
sometimes the most marked in November, forming the delicious Indian
summer; a truce is declared, and both forces, heat and cold, meet and
mingle in friendly converse on the field. In the earlier season, this
poise of the temperature, this slack-water in nature, comes in May and
June; but the October calm is most marked. Day after day, and sometimes
week after week, you cannot tell which way the current is setting.
Indeed, there is no current, but the season seems to drift a little
this way or a little that, just as the breeze happens to freshen a
little in one quarter or the other. The fall of '74 was the most
remarkable in this respect I remember ever to have seen. The
equilibrium of the season lasted from the middle of October till near
December, with scarcely a break. There were six weeks of Indian summer,
all gold by day, and, when the moon came, all silver by night. The
river was so smooth at times as to be almost invisible, and in its
place was the indefinite continuation of the opposite shore down toward
the nether world. One seemed to be in an enchanted land, and to breathe
all day the atmosphere of fable and romance. Not a smoke, but a kind of
shining nimbus filled all the spaces. The vessels would drift by as if
in mid-air with all their sails set. The gypsy blood in one, as Lowell
calls it, could hardly stay between four walls and see such days go by.
Living in tents, in groves and on the hills, seemed the only natural
life.

Late in December we had glimpses of the same weather,--the earth had
not yet passed all the golden isles. On the 27th of that month, I find
I made this entry in my note-book: "A soft, hazy day, the year asleep
and dreaming of the Indian summer again. Not a breath of air and not a
ripple on the river. The sunshine is hot as it falls across my table."

But what a terrible winter followed! what a savage chief the fair
Indian maiden gave birth to!

This halcyon period of our autumn will always in some way be associated
with the Indian. It is red and yellow and dusky like him. The smoke of
his camp-fire seems again in the air. The memory of him pervades the
woods. His plumes and moccasins and blanket of skins form just the
costume the season demands. It was doubtless his chosen period. The
gods smiled upon him then if ever. The time of the chase, the season of
the buck and the doe, and of the ripening of all forest fruits; the
time when all men are incipient hunters, when the first frosts have
given pungency to the air, when to be abroad on the hills or in the
woods is a delight that both old and young feel,--if the red aborigine
ever had his summer of fullness and contentment, it must have been at
this season, and it fitly bears his name.

In how many respects fall imitates or parodies the spring!  It is
indeed, in some of its features, a sort of second youth of the year.
Things emerge and become conspicuous again. The trees attract all eyes
as in May. The birds come forth from their summer privacy and parody
their spring reunions and rivalries; some of them sing a little after a
silence of months. The robins, bluebirds, meadowlarks, sparrows, crows,
all sport, and call, and behave in a manner suggestive of spring. The
cock grouse drums in the woods as he did in April and May. The pigeons
reappear, and the wild geese and ducks. The witch-hazel blooms. The
trout spawns. The streams are again full. The air is humid, and the
moisture rises in the ground. Nature is breaking camp, as in spring she
was going into camp. The spring yearning and restlessness is
represented in one by the increased desire to travel.

Spring is the inspiration, fall the expiration.  Both seasons have
their equinoxes, both their filmy, hazy air, their ruddy forest tints,
their cold rains, their drenching fogs, their mystic moons; both have
the same solar light and warmth, the same rays of the sun; yet, after
all, how different the feelings which they inspire! One is the morning,
the other the evening; one is youth, the other is age.

The difference is not merely in us; there is a subtle difference in the
air, and in the influences that emanate upon us from the dumb forms of
nature. All the senses report a difference. The sun seems to have
burned out. One recalls the notion of Herodotus that he is grown
feeble, and retreats to the south because he can no longer face the
cold and the storms from the north. There is a growing potency about
his beams in spring, a waning splendor about them in fall. One is the
kindling fire, the other the subsiding flame.

It is rarely that an artist succeeds in painting unmistakably the
difference between sunrise and sunset; and it is equally a trial of his
skill to put upon canvas the difference between early spring and late
fall, say between April and November. It was long ago observed that the
shadows are more opaque in the morning than in the evening; the
struggle between the light and the darkness more marked, the gloom more
solid, the contrasts more sharp. The rays of the morning sun chisel out
and cut down the shadows in a way those of the setting sun do not. Then
the sunlight is whiter and newer in the morning,--not so yellow and
diffused. A difference akin to this is true of the two seasons I am
speaking of. The spring is the morning sunlight, clear and determined;
the autumn, the afternoon rays, pensive, lessening, golden.

Does not the human frame yield to and sympathize with the seasons?  Are
there not more births in the spring and more deaths in the fall? In the
spring one vegetates; his thoughts turn to sap; another kind of
activity seizes him; he makes new wood which does not harden till past
midsummer. For my part, I find all literary work irksome from April to
August; my sympathies run in other channels; the grass grows where
meditation walked. As fall approaches, the currents mount to the head
again. But my thoughts do not ripen well till after there has been a
frost. The burrs will not open much before that. A man's thinking, I
take it, is a kind of combustion, as is the ripening of fruits and
leaves, and he wants plenty of oxygen in the air.

Then the earth seems to have become a positive magnet in the fall; the
forge and anvil of the sun have had their effect. In the spring it is
negative to all intellectual conditions, and drains one of his
lightning.

To-day, October 21, I found the air in the bushy fields and lanes under
the woods loaded with the perfume of the witch-hazel,--a sweetish,
sickening odor. With the blooming of this bush, Nature says,
"Positively the last." It is a kind of birth in death, of spring in
fall, that impresses one as a little uncanny. All trees and shrubs form
their flower-buds in the fall, and keep the secret till spring. How
comes the witch-hazel to be the one exception, and to celebrate its
floral nuptials on the funeral day of its foliage? No doubt it will be
found that the spirit of some lovelorn squaw has passed into this bush,
and that this is why it blooms in the Indian summer rather than in the
white man's spring.

But it makes the floral series of the woods complete.  Between it and
the shad-blow of earliest spring lies the mountain of bloom; the latter
at the base on one side, this at the base on the other, with the
chestnut blossoms at the top in midsummer.

A peculiar feature of our fall may sometimes be seen of a clear
afternoon late in the season. Looking athwart the fields under the
sinking sun, the ground appears covered with a shining veil of
gossamer. A fairy net, invisible at midday and which the position of
the sun now reveals, rests upon the stubble and upon the spears of
grass, covering acres in extent,--the work of innumerable little
spiders. The cattle walk through it, but do not seem to break it.
Perhaps a fly would make his mark upon it. At the same time, stretching
from the tops of the trees, or from the top of a stake in the fence,
and leading off toward the sky, may be seen the cables of the flying
spider,--a fairy bridge from the visible to the invisible. Occasionally
seen against a deep mass of shadow, and perhaps enlarged by clinging
particles of dust, they show quite plainly and sag down like a
stretched rope, or sway and undulate like a hawser in the tide.

They recall a verse of our rugged poet, Walt Whitman:--

         "A noiseless patient spider,
   I mark'd where, in a little promontory, it stood isolated:
   Mark'd how, to explore the vacant, vast surrounding,
   It launch'd forth filament, filament, filament out of itself;
   Ever unreeling them--ever tireless spreading them.

   "And you, O my soul, where you stand,
   Surrounded, surrounded, in measureless oceans of space,
   Ceaselessly musing, venturing, throwing,--
   Seeking the spheres to connect them;
   Till the bridge you will need be formed--till the ductile
         anchor hold;
   Till the gossamer thread you fling, catch somewhere, O my
         soul."

To return a little, September may be described as the month of tall
weeds. Where they have been suffered to stand, along fences, by
roadsides, and in forgotten corners,--redroot, pigweed, ragweed,
vervain, goldenrod, burdock, elecampane, thistles, teasels, nettles,
asters, etc.,--how they lift themselves up as if not afraid to be seen
now! They are all outlaws; every man's hand is against them; yet how
surely they hold their own! They love the roadside, because here they
are comparatively safe; and ragged and dusty, like the common tramps
that they are, they form one of the characteristic features of early
fall.

I have often noticed in what haste certain weeds are at times to
produce their seeds. Redroot will grow three or four feet high when it
has the whole season before it; but let it get a late start, let it
come up in August, and it scarcely gets above the ground before it
heads out, and apparently goes to work with all its might and main to
mature its seed. In the growth of most plants or weeds, April and May
represent their root, June and July their stalk, and August and
September their flower and seed. Hence, when the stalk months are
stricken out, as in the present case, there is only time for a shallow
root and a foreshortened head. I think most weeds that get a late start
show this curtailment of stalk, and this solicitude to reproduce
themselves. But I have not observed that any of the cereals are so
worldly wise. They have not had to think and to shift for themselves as
the weeds have. It does indeed look like a kind of forethought in the
redroot. It is killed by the first frost, and hence knows the danger of
delay.

How rich in color, before the big show of the tree foliage has
commenced, our roadsides are in places in early autumn,--rich to the
eye that goes hurriedly by and does not look too closely,--with the
profusion of goldenrod and blue and purple asters dashed in upon here
and there with the crimson leaves of the dwarf sumac; and at intervals,
rising out of the fence corner or crowning a ledge of rocks, the dark
green of the cedar with the still fire of the woodbine at its heart. I
wonder if the waysides of other lands present any analogous spectacles
at this season.

Then, when the maples have burst out into color, showing like great
bonfires along the hills, there is indeed a feast for the eye. A maple
before your windows in October, when the sun shines upon it, will make
up for a good deal of the light it has excluded; it fills the room with
a soft goldenglow.

Thoreau, I believe, was the first to remark upon the individuality of
trees of the same species with respect to their foliage,--some maples
ripening their leaves early and some late, and some being of one tint
and some of another; and, moreover, that each tree held to the same
characteristics, year after year. There is, indeed, as great a variety
among the maples as among the trees of an apple orchard; some are
harvest apples, some are fall apples, and some are winter apples, each
with a tint of its own. Those late ripeners are the winter
varieties,--the Rhode Island greenings or swaars of their kind. The red
maple is the early astrachan. Then come the red-streak, the
yellow-sweet, and others. There are windfalls among them, too, as among
the apples, and one side or hemisphere of the leaf is usually brighter
than the other.

The ash has been less noticed for its autumnal foliage than it
deserves. The richest shades of plum-color to be seen--becoming by and
by, or in certain lights, a deep maroon--are afforded by this tree.
Then at a distance there seems to be a sort of bloom on it, as upon the
grape or plum. Amid a grove of yellow maple, it makes a most pleasing
contrast.

By mid-October, most of the Rip Van Winkles among our brute creatures
have lain down for their winter nap. The toads and turtles have buried
themselves in the earth. The woodchuck is in his hibernaculum, the
skunk in his, the mole in his; and the black bear has his selected, and
will go in when the snow comes. He does not like the looks of his big
tracks in the snow. They publish his goings and comings too plainly.
The coon retires about the same time. The provident wood-mice and the
chipmunk are laying by a winter supply of nuts or grain, the former
usually in decayed trees, the latter in the ground. I have observed
that any unusual disturbance in the woods, near where the chipmunk has
his den, will cause him to shift his quarters. One October, for many
successive days, I saw one carrying into his hole buckwheat which he
had stolen from a near field. The hole was only a few rods from where
we were getting out stone, and as our work progressed, and the racket
and uproar increased, the chipmunk became alarmed. He ceased carrying
in, and after much hesitating and darting about, and some prolonged
absences, he began to carry out; he had determined to move; if the
mountain fell, he, at least, would be away in time. So, by mouthfuls or
cheekfuls, the grain was transferred to a new place. He did not make a
"bee" to get it done, but carried it all himself, occupying several
days, and making a trip about every ten minutes.

The red and gray squirrels do not lay by winter stores; their cheeks
are made without pockets, and whatever they transport is carried in the
teeth. They are more or less active all winter, but October and
November are their festal months. Invade some butternut or hickory-nut
grove on a frosty October morning and hear the red squirrel beat the
"juba" on a horizontal branch. It is a most lively jig, what the boys
call a "regular break-down," interspersed with squeals and snickers and
derisive laughter. The most noticeable peculiarity about the vocal part
of it is the fact that it is a kind of duet. In other words, by some
ventriloquial tricks, he appears to accompany himself, as if his voice
split up, a part forming a low guttural sound, and a part a shrill
nasal sound.

The distant bark of the more wary gray squirrel may be heard about the
same time. There is a teasing and ironical tone in it also, but the
gray squirrel is not the Puck the red is

Insects also go into winter-quarters by or before this time; the
bumble-bee, hornet, and wasp. But here only royalty escapes; the
queen-mother alone foresees the night of winter coming and the morning
of spring beyond. The rest of the tribe try gypsying for a while, but
perish in the first frosts. The present October I surprised the queen
of the yellow-jackets in the woods looking out a suitable retreat. The
royal dame was house-hunting, and, on being disturbed by my inquisitive
poking among the leaves, she got up and flew away with a slow, deep
hum. Her body was unusually distended, whether with fat or eggs I am
unable to say. In September I took down the nest of the black hornet
and found several large queens in it, but the workers had all gone. The
queens were evidently weathering the first frosts and storms here, and
waiting for the Indian summer to go forth and seek a permanent winter
abode. If the covers could be taken off the fields and woods at this
season, how many interesting facts of natural history would be
revealed!--the crickets, ants, bees, reptiles, animals, and, for aught
I know, the spiders and flies asleep or getting ready to sleep in their
winter dormitories; the fires of life banked up, and burning just
enough to keep the spark over till spring.

The fish all run down the stream in the fall except the trout; it runs
up or stays up and spawns in November, the male becoming as brilliantly
tinted as the deepest-dyed maple leaf. I have often wondered why the
trout spawns in the fall, instead of in the spring like other fish. Is
it not because a full supply of clear spring water can be counted on at
that season more than at any other? The brooks are not so liable to be
suddenly muddied by heavy showers, and defiled with the whashings of
the roads and fields, as they are in spring and summer. The artificial
breeder finds that absolute purity of water is necessary to hatch the
spawn; also that shade and a low temperature are indispensable.

Our northern November day itself is like spring water.  It is melted
frost, dissolved snow. There is a chill in it and an exhilaration also.
The forenoon is all morning and the afternoon all evening. The shadows
seem to come forth and to revenge themselves upon the day. The sunlight
is diluted with darkness. The colors fade from the landscape, and only
the sheen of the river lights up the gray and brown distance.



VII. THE APPLE

      Lo! sweetened with the summer light,
      The full-juiced apple, waxing over-mellow,
      Drops in silent autumn night.
                                    TENNYSON.

Not a little of the sunshine of our northern winters is surely wrapped
up in the apple. How could we winter over without it! How is life
sweetened by its mild acids! A cellar well filled with apples is more
valuable than a chamber filled with flax and wool. So much sound, ruddy
life to draw upon, to strike one's roots down into, as it were.

Especially to those whose soil of life is inclined to be a little
clayey and heavy, is the apple a winter necessity. It is the natural
antidote of most of the ills the flesh is heir to. Full of vegetable
acids and aromatics, qualities which act as refrigerants and
antiseptics, what an enemy it is to jaundice, indigestion, torpidity of
liver, etc.! It is a gentle spur and tonic to the whole biliary system.
Then I have read that it has been found by analysis to contain more
phosphorus than any other vegetable. This makes it the proper food of
the scholar and the sedentary man; it feeds his brain and it stimulates
his liver. Nor is this all. Besides its hygienic properties, the apple
is full of sugar and mucilage, which make it highly nutritious. It is
said "the operators of Cornwall, England, consider ripe apples nearly
as nourishing as bread, and far more so than potatoes. In the year
1801--which was a year of much scarcity--apples, instead of being
converted into cider, were sold to the poor, and the laborers asserted
that they could 'stand their work' on baked apples without meat;
whereas a potato diet required either meat or some other substantial
nutriment. The French and Germans use apples extensively; so do the
inhabitants of all European nations. The laborers depend upon them as
an article of food, and frequently make a dinner of sliced apples and
bread."

Yet the English apple is a tame and insipid affair, compared with the
intense, sun-colored, and sunsteeped fruit our orchards yield. The
English have no sweet apple, I am told, the saccharine element
apparently being less abundant in vegetable nature in that sour and
chilly climate than in our own.

It is well known that the European maple yields no sugar, while both
our birch and hickory have sweet in their veins. Perhaps this fact
accounts for our excessive love of sweets, which may be said to be a
national trait.

The Russian apple has a lovely complexion, smooth and transparent, but
the Cossack is not yet all eliminated from it. The only one I have
seen--the Duchess of Oldenburg--is as beautiful as a Tartar princess,
with a distracting odor, but it is the least bit puckery to the taste.

The best thing I know about Chili is, not its guano beds, but this fact
which I learn from Darwin's "Voyage," namely, that the apple thrives
well there. Darwin saw a town there so completely buried in a wood of
apple-trees, that its streets were merely paths in an orchard. The
tree, indeed, thrives so well, that large branches cut off in the
spring and planted two or three feet deep in the ground send out roots
and develop into fine, fullbearing trees by the third year. The people
know the value of the apple, too. They make cider and wine of it, and
then from the refuse a white and finely flavored spirit; then, by
another process, a sweet treacle is obtained, called honey. The
children and the pigs eat little or no other food. He does not add that
the people are healthy and temperate, but I have no doubt they are. We
knew the apple had many virtues, but these Chilians have really opened
a deep beneath a deep. We had found out the cider and the spirits, but
who guessed the wine and the honey, unless it were the bees? There is a
variety in our orchards called the winesap, a doubly liquid name that
suggests what might be done with this fruit.

The apple is the commonest and yet the most varied and beautiful of
fruits. A dish of them is as becoming to the centre-table in winter as
was the vase of flowers in the summer,--a bouquet of spitzenburgs and
greenings and northern spies. A rose when it blooms, the apple is a
rose when it ripens. It pleases every sense to which it can be
addressed, the touch, the smell, the sight, the taste; and when it
falls, in the still October days, it pleases the ear. It is a call to a
banquet, it is a signal that the feast is ready. The bough would fain
hold it, but it can now assert its independence; it can now live a life
of its own.

Daily the stem relaxes its hold, till finally it lets go completely and
down comes the painted sphere with a mellow thump to the earth, toward
which it has been nodding so long. It bounds away to seek its bed, to
hide under a leaf, or in a tuft of grass. It will now take time to
meditate and ripen! What delicious thoughts it has there nestled with
its fellows under the fence, turning acid into sugar, and sugar into
wine!

How pleasing to the touch!  I love to stroke its polished rondure with
my hand, to carry it in my pocket on my tramp over the winter hills, or
through the early spring woods. You are company, you red-checked spitz,
or you salmon-fleshed greening! I toy with you; press your face to
mine, toss you in the air, roll you on the ground, see you shine out
where you lie amid the moss and dry leaves and sticks. You are so
alive! You glow like a ruddy flower. You look so animated I almost
expect to see you move! I postpone the eating of you, you are so
beautiful! How compact; how exquisitely tinted! Stained by the sun and
varnished against the rains. An independent vegetable existence, alive
and vascular as my own flesh; capable of being wounded, bleeding,
wasting away, or almost of repairing damages!

How it resists the cold! holding out almost as long as the red cheeks
of the boys do. A frost that destroys the potatoes and other roots only
makes the apple more crisp and vigorous; it peeps out from the chance
November snows unscathed. When I see the fruit-vender on the street
corner stamping his feet and beating his hands to keep them warm, and
his naked apples lying exposed to the blasts, I wonder if they do not
ache, too, to clap their hands and enliven their circulation. But they
can stand it nearly as long as the vender can.

Noble common fruit, best friend of man and most loved by him, following
him, like his dog or his cow, wherever he goes! His homestead is not
planted till you are planted, your roots intertwine with his; thriving
best where he thrives best, loving the limestone and the frost, the
plow and the pruning-knife: you are indeed suggestive of hardy,
cheerful industry, and a healthy life in the open air. Temperate,
chaste fruit! you mean neither luxury nor sloth, neither satiety nor
indolence, neither enervating heats nor the frigid zones. Uncloying
fruit,--fruit whose best sauce is the open air, whose finest flavors
only he whose taste is sharpened by brisk work or walking knows; winter
fruit, when the fire of life burns brightest; fruit always a little
hyperborean, leaning toward the cold; bracing, sub-acid, active fruit!
I think you must come from the north, you are so frank and honest, so
sturdy and appetizing. You are stocky and homely like the northern
races. Your quality is Saxon. Surely the fiery and impetuous south is
not akin to you. Not spices or olives, or the sumptuous liquid fruits,
but the grass, the snow, the grains, the coolness, is akin to you. I
think if I could subsist on you, or the like of you, I should never
have an intemperate or ignoble thought, never be feverish or
despondent. So far as I could absorb or transmute your quality, I
should be cheerful, continent, equitable, sweet-blooded, long-lived,
and should shed warmth and contentment around.

Is there any other fruit that has so much facial expression as the
apple? What boy does not more than half believe they can see with that
single eye of theirs? Do they not look and nod to him from the bough?
The swaar has one look, the rambo another, the spy another. The youth
recognizes the seek-no-further, buried beneath a dozen other varieties,
the moment he catches a glance of its eye, or the bonny-cheeked Newtown
pippin, or the gentle but sharp-nosed gillyflower. He goes to the great
bin in the cellar, and sinks his shafts here and there in the garnered
wealth of the orchards, mining for his favorites, sometimes coming
plump upon them, sometimes catching a glimpse of them to the right or
left, or uncovering them as keystones in an arch made up of many
varieties.

In the dark he can usually tell them by the sense of touch.  There is
not only the size and shape, but there is the texture and polish. Some
apples are coarse-grained and some are fine; some are thinskinned and
some are thick. One variety is quick and vigorous beneath the touch,
another gentle and yielding. The pinnock has a thick skin with a spongy
lining; a bruise in it becomes like a piece of cork. The tallow apple
has an unctuous feel, as its name suggests. It sheds water like a duck.
What apple is that with a fat curved stem that blends so prettily with
its own flesh,--the wine apple? Some varieties impress me as
masculine,--weatherstained, freckled, lasting, and rugged; others are
indeed lady apples, fair, delicate, shining, mildflavored,
white-meated, like the egg-drop and the lady-finger. The practiced hand
knows each kind by the touch.

Do you remember the apple hole in the garden or back of the house, Ben
Bolt? In the fall, after the bins in the cellar had been well stocked,
we excavated a circular pit in the warm mellow earth, and, covering the
bottom with clean rye straw, emptied in basketful after basketful of
hardy choice varieties, till there was a tent-shaped mound several feet
high of shining variegated fruit. Then, wrapping it about with a thick
layer of long rye straw, and tucking it up snug and warm, the mound was
covered with a thin coating of earth, a flat stone on the top holding
down the straw. As winter set in, another coating of earth was put upon
it, with perhaps an overcoat of coarse dry stable manure, and the
precious pile was left in silence and darkness till spring. No marmot,
hibernating under ground in his nest of leaves and dry grass, more cozy
and warm. No frost, no wet, but fragrant privacy and quiet. Then how
the earth tempers and flavors the apples! It draws out all the acrid
unripe qualities, and infuses into them a subtle refreshing taste of
the soil. Some varieties perish, but the ranker, hardier kinds, like
the northern spy, the greening, or the black apple, or the russet, or
the pinnock, how they ripen and grow in grace, how the green becomes
gold, and the bitter becomes sweet!

As the supply in the bins and barrels gets low and spring approaches,
the buried treasures in the garden are remembered. With spade and axe
we go out and penetrate through the snow and frozen earth till the
inner dressing of straw is laid bare. It is not quite as clear and
bright as when we placed it there last fall, but the fruit beneath,
which the hand soon exposes, is just as bright and far more luscious.
Then, as day after day you resort to the hole, and, removing the straw
and earth from the opening, thrust your arm into the fragrant pit, you
have a better chance than ever before to become acquainted with your
favorites by the sense of touch. How you feel for them, reaching to the
right and left! Now you have got a Talman sweet; you imagine you can
feel that single meridian line that divides it into two hemispheres.
Now a greening fills your hand; you feel its fine quality beneath its
rough coat. Now you have hooked a swaar, you recognize its full face;
now a Vandevere or a King rolls down from the apex above and you bag it
at once. When you were a schoolboy, you stowed these away in your
pockets, and ate them along the road and at recess, and again at
noontime; and they, in a measure, corrected the effects of the cake and
pie with which your indulgent mother filled your lunchbasket.

The boy is indeed the true apple-eater, and is not to be questioned how
he came by the fruit with which his pockets are filled. It belongs to
him, and he may steal it if it cannot be had in any other way. His own
juicy flesh craves the juicy flesh of the apple. Sap draws sap. His
fruit-eating has little reference to the state of his appetite. Whether
he be full of meat or empty of meat, he wants the apple just the same.
Before meal or after meal it never comes amiss. The farm-boy munches
apples all day long. He has nests of them in the haymow, mellowing, to
which he makes frequent visits. Sometimes old Brindle, having access
through the open door, smells them out and makes short work of them.

In some countries the custom remains of placing a rosy apple in the
hand of the dead, that they may find it when they enter paradise. In
northern mythology the giants eat apples to keep off old age.

The apple is indeed the fruit of youth.  As we grow old we crave apples
less. It is an ominous sign. When you are ashamed to be seen eating
them on the street; when you can carry them in your pocket and your
hand not constantly find its way to them; when your neighbor has aples
and you have none, and you make no nocturnal visits to his orchard;
when you lunch-basket is without them, and you can pass a winter's
night by the fireside with not thought of the fruit at your
elbow,--then be assured you are no longer a boy, either in heart or in
years.

The genuine apple-eater comforts himself with an apple in its season,
as others do with a pipe or a cigar. When he has nothing else to do, or
is bored, he eats an apple. While he is waiting for the train he eats
an apple, sometimes several of them. Whe he takes a walk he arms
himself with apples. His traveling-bag is full of apples. He offers an
apple to his companion, and takes one himself. They are his chief
solace when on the road. He sows their seed all along the route. He
tosses the core from the car winedow and from the top of the
stage-coach. He would, in time, make the land one vast orchard. He
dispenses with a knife. He prefers that his teeth shall have the first
taste. Then he knows that the best flavor is immediately beneath the
skin, and that in a pared apple this is lost. If you will stew the
apple, he says, instead of baking it, by all means leave the skin on.
It improves the color and vastly heightens the flavor of the dish.

The apple is a masculine fruit; hence women are poor apple-eaters.  It
belongs to the open air, and requires an open-air taste and relish.

I instantly sympathized with that clergyman I read of, who on pulling
out his pocket-handkerchief in the midst of his discourse, pulled out
two bouncing apples with it that went rolling across the pulpit floor
and down the pulpit stairs. These apples were, do doubt, to be eaten
after the sermon, on his way home, or to his next appointment. They
would take the taste of it out of his mouth. Then, would a minister be
apt to grow tiresome with tow big apples in his coat-tail pockets?
Would he not naturally hasten along to "lastly" and the big apples? If
they were the dominie apples, and it was April or May, he certainly
would.

How the early settlers prized the apple!  When their trees broke down
or were split asunder by the storms, the neighbors turned out, the
divided tree was put together again and fastened with iron bolts. In
some of the oldest orchards one may still occasionally see a large
dilapidated tree with the rusty iron bolt yet visible. Poor, sour
fruit, too, but sweet in those early pioneer days. My grandfather, who
was one of these heroes of the stump, used every fall to make a journey
of forty miles for a few apples, which he brought home in a bag on
horseback. He frequently started from home by two or three o'clock in
the morning, and at one time both he and his horse were much frightened
by the screaming of panthers in a narrow pass in the mountains through
which the road led.

Emerson, I believe, has spoken of the apple as the social fruit of New
England. Indeed, what a promoter or abettor of social intercourse among
our rural population the apple has been, the company growing more merry
and unrestrained as soon as the basket of apples was passed round! When
the cider followed, the introduction and good understanding were
complete. Then those rural gatherings that enlivened the autumn in the
country, known as "apple-cuts," now, alas! nearly obsolete, where so
many things were cut and dried besides apples! The larger and more
loaded the orchard, the more frequently the invitations went round and
the higher the social and convivial spirit ran. Ours is eminently a
country of the orchard. Horace Greeley said he had seen no land in
which the orchard formed such a prominent feature in the rural and
agricultural districts. Nearly every farmhouse in the Eastern and
Northern States has its setting or its background of apple-trees, which
generally date back to the first settlement of the farm. Indeed, the
orchard, more than almost any other thing, tends to soften and humanize
the country, and to give the place of which it is an adjunct a settled,
domestic look. The apple-tree takes the rawness and wildness off any
scene. On the top of a mountain, or in remote pastures, it sheds the
sentiment of home. It never loses its domestic air, or lapses into a
wild state. And in planting a homestead, or in choosing a building-site
for the new house, what a help it is to have a few old, maternal
apple-trees near by,--regular old grandmothers, who have seen trouble,
who have been sad and glad through so many winters and summers, who
have blossomed till the air about them is sweeter than elsewhere, and
borne fruit till the grass beneath them has become thick and soft from
human contact, and who have nourisbed robins and finches in their
branches till they have a tender, brooding look! The ground, the turf,
the atmosphere of an old orchard, seem several stages nearer to man
than that of the adjoining field, as if the trees had given back to the
soil more than they had taken from it; as if they had tempered the
elements, and attracted all the genial and beneficent influences in the
landscape around.

An apple orchard is sure to bear you several crops beside the apple.
There is the crop of sweet and tender reminiscences, dating from
childhood and spanning the seasons from May to October, and making the
orchard a sort of outlying part of the household. You have played there
as a child, mused there as a youth or lover, strolled there as a
thoughtful, sad-eyed man. Your father, perhaps, planted the trees, or
reared them from the seed, and you yourself have pruned and grafted
them, and worked among them, till every separate tree has a peculiar
history and meaning in your mind. Then there is the never-failing crop
of birds,--robins, goldfinches, kingbirds, cedar-birds, hairbirds,
orioles, starlings,--all nesting and breeding in its branches, and
fitly described by Wilson Flagg as "Birds of the Garden and Orchard."
Whether the pippin and sweet bough bear or not, the "punctual birds"
can always be depended on. Indeed, there are few better places to study
ornithology than in the orchard. Besides its regular occupants, many of
the birds of the deeper forest find occasion to visit it during the
season. The cuckoo comes for the tent-caterpillar, the jay for frozen
apples, the ruffed grouse for buds, the crow foraging for birds' eggs,
the woodpecker and chickadees for their food, and the high-hole for
ants. The redbird comes, too, if only to see what a friendly covert its
branches form; and the wood thrush now and then comes out of the grove
near by, and nests alongside of its cousin, the robin. The smaller
hawks know that this is a most likely spot for their prey, and in
spring the shy northern warblers may be studied as they pause to feed
on the fine insects amid its branches. The mice love to dwell here
also, and hither come from the near woods the squirrel and the rabbit.
The latter will put his head through the boy's slipper-noose any time
for a taste of the sweet apple, and the red squirrel and chipmunk
esteem its seeds a great rarity.

All the domestic animals love the apple, but none so much as the cow.
The taste of it wakes her up as few other things do, and bars and
fences must be well looked after. No need to assort them or to pick out
the ripe ones for her. An apple is an apple, and there is no best about
it. I heard of a quick-witted old cow that learned to shake them down
from the tree. While rubbing herself she had observed that an apple
sometimes fell. This stimulated her to rub a little harder, when more
apples fell. She then took the hint, and rubbed her shoulder with such
vigor that the farmer had to check her and keep an eye on her, to save
his fruit.

But the cow is the friend of the apple.  How many trees she has planted
about the farm, in the edge of the woods, and in remote fields and
pastures! The wild apples, celebrated by Thoreau, are mostly of her
planting. She browses them down, to be sure, but they are hers, and why
should she not?

What an individuality the apple-tree has, each variety being nearly as
marked by its form as by its fruit. What a vigorous grower, for
instance, is the Ribston pippin, an English apple,--wide-branching like
the oak; its large ridgy fruit, in late fall or early winter, is one of
my favorites. Or the thick and more pendent top of the bellflower, with
its equally rich, sprightly, uncloying fruit.

Sweet apples are perhaps the most nutritious, and when baked are a
feast in themselves. With a tree of the Jersey sweet or of the Talman
sweet in bearing, no man's table need be devoid of luxuries and one of
the most wholesome of all desserts. Or the red astrachan, an August
apple,--what a gap may be filled in the culinary department of a
household at this season by a single tree of this fruit! And what a
feast is its shining crimson coat to the eye before its snow-white
flesh has reached the tongue! But the apple of apples for the household
is the spitzenburg. In this casket Pomona has put her highest flavors.
It can stand the ordeal of cooking, and still remain a spitz. I
recently saw a barrel of these apples from the orchard of a
fruit-grower in the northern part of New York, who has devoted especial
attention to this variety. They were perfect gems. Not large,--that had
not been the aim,--but small, fair, uniform, and red to the core. How
intense, how spicy and aromatic!

But all the excellences of the apple are not confined to the cultivated
fruit. Occasionally a seedling springs up about the farm that produces
fruit of rare beauty and worth. In sections peculiarly adapted to the
apple, like a certain belt along the Hudson River, I have noticed that
most of the wild, unbidden trees bear good, edible fruit. In cold and
ungenial districts the seedlings are mostly sour and crabbed, but in
more favorable soils they are oftener mild and sweet. I know wild
apples that ripen in August, and that do not need, if it could be had,
Thoreau's sauce of sharp, November air to be eaten with. At the foot of
a hill near me, and striking its roots deep in the shale, is a giant
specimen of native tree that bears an apple that has about the
clearest, waxiest, most transparent complexion I ever saw. It is of
good size, and the color of a tea rose. Its quality is best appreciated
in the kitchen. I know another seedling of excellent quality, and so
remarkable for its firmness and density that it is known on the farm
where it grows as the "heavy apple."

I have alluded to Thoreau, to whom all lovers of the apple and its tree
are under obligation. His chapter on Wild Apples is a most delicious
piece of writing. It has a "tang and smack" like the fruit it
celebrates, and is dashed and streaked with color in the same manner.
It has the hue and perfume of the crab, and the richness and raciness
of the pippin. But Thoreau loved other apples than the wild sorts, and
was obliged to confess that his favorites could not be eaten indoors.
Late in November he found a blue-pearmain tree growing within the edge
of a swamp, almost as good as wild. "You would not suppose," he says,
"that there was any fruit left there on the first survey, but you must
look according to system. Those which lie exposed are quite brown and
rotten now, or perchance a few still show one blooming cheek here and
there amid the wet leaves. Nevertheless, with experienced eyes I
explore amid the bare alders, and the huckleberry bushes, and the
withered sedge, and in the crevices of the rocks, which are full of
leaves, and pry under the fallen and decaying ferns which, with apple
and alder leaves, thickly strew the ground. For I know that they lie
concealed, fallen into hollows long since, and covered up by the leaves
of the tree itself,--a proper kind of packing. From these
lurkingplaces, anywhere within the circumference of the tree, I draw
forth the fruit all wet and glossy, maybe nibbled by rabbits and
hollowed out by crickets, and perhaps with a leaf or two cemented to it
(as Curzon an old manuscript from a monastery's mouldy cellar), but
still with a rich bloom on it, and at least as ripe and well kept, if
not better than those in barrels, more crisp and lively than they. If
these resources fail to yield anything, I have learned to look between
the bases of the suckers which spring thickly from some horizontal
limb, for now and then one lodges there, or in the very midst of an
alderclump, where they are covered by leaves, safe from cows which may
have smelled them out. If I am sharp-set,--for I do not refuse the
blue-pearmain,--I fill my pockets on each side; and as I retrace my
steps in the frosty eve, being perhaps four or five miles from home, I
eat one first from this side, and then from that, to keep my balance."



VIII. AN OCTOBER ABROAD

       I. MELLOW ENGLAND

I will say at the outset, as I believe some one else has said on a like
occasion, that in this narrative I shall probably describe myself more
than the objects I look upon. The facts and particulars of the case
have already been set down in the guidebooks and in innumerable books
of travel. I shall only attempt to give an account of the pleasure and
satisfaction I had in coming face to face with things in the mother
country, seeing them as I did with kindred and sympathizing eyes.

The ocean was a dread fascination to me,--a world whose dominion I had
never entered; but I proved to be such a wretched sailor that I am
obliged to confess, Hibernian fashion, that the happiest moment I spent
upon the sea was when I set my foot upon the land.

It is a wide and fearful gulf that separates the two worlds.  The
landsman can know little of the wildness, savageness, and mercilessness
of nature till he has been upon the sea. It is as if he had taken a
leap off into the interstellar spaces. In voyaging to Mars or Jupiter,
he might cross such a desert,--might confront such awful purity and
coldness. An astronomic solitariness and remoteness encompass the sea.
The earth and all remembrance of it is blotted out; there is no hint of
it anywhere. This is not water, this cold, blue-black, vitreous liquid.
It suggests, not life, but death. Indeed, the regions of everlasting
ice and snow are not more cold and inhuman than is the sea.

Almost the only thing about my first sea voyage that I remember with
pleasure is the circumstance of the little birds that, during the first
few days out, took refuge on the steamer. The first afternoon, just as
we were losing sight of land, a delicate little wood-bird, the black
and white creeping warbler,--having lost its reckoning in making
perhaps its first southern voyage,--came aboard. It was much fatigued,
and had a disheartened, demoralized look. After an hour or two it
disappeared, having, I fear, a hard pull to reach the land in the face
of the wind that was blowing, if indeed it reached it at all.

The next day, just at night, I observed a small hawk sailing about
conveniently near the vessel, but with a very lofty, independent mien,
as if he had just happened that way on his travels, and was only
lingering to take a good view of us. It was amusing to observe his
coolness and haughty unconcern in that sad plight he was in; by nothing
in his manner betraying that he was several hundred miles at sea, and
did not know how he was going to get back to land. But presently I
noticed he found it not inconsistent with his dignity to alight on the
rigging under friendly cover of the tops'l, where I saw his feathers
rudely ruffled by the wind, till darkness set in. If the sailors did
not disturb him during the night, he certainly needed all his fortitude
in the morning to put a cheerful face on his situation.

The third day, when we were perhaps off Nova Scotia or Newfoundland,
the American pipit or titlark, from the far north, a brown bird about
the size of a sparrow, dropped upon the deck of the ship, so nearly
exhausted that one of the sailors was on the point of covering it with
his hat. It stayed about the vessel nearly all day, flitting from point
to point, or hopping along a few feet in front of the promenaders, and
prying into every crack and crevice for food. Time after time I saw it
start off with a reassuring chirp, as if determined to seek the land;
but before it had got many rods from the ship its heart would seem to
fail it, and, after circling about for a few moments, back it would
come, more discouraged than ever.

These little waifs from the shore!  I gazed upon them with a strange,
sad interest. They were friends in distress; but the sea-birds,
skimming along indifferent to us, or darting in and out among those
watery hills, I seemed to look upon as my natural enemies. They were
the nurslings and favorites of the sea, and I had no sympathy with
them.

No doubt the number of our land-birds that actually perish in the sea
during their autumn migration, being carried far out of their course by
the prevailing westerly winds of this season, is very great.
Occasionally one makes the passage to Great Britain by following the
ships, and finding them at convenient distances along the route; and I
have been told that over fifty different species of our more common
birds, such as robins, starlings, grosbeaks, thrushes, etc., have been
found in Ireland, having, of course, crossed in this way. What numbers
of these little navigators of the air are misled and wrecked, during
those dark and stormy nights, on the lighthouses alone that line the
Atlantic coast! Is it Celia Thaxter who tells of having picked up her
apron full of sparrows, warblers, flycatchers, etc., at the foot of the
lighthouse on the Isles of Shoals, one morning after a storm, the
ground being still strewn with birds of all kinds that had dashed
themselves against the beacon, bewildered and fascinated by its
tremendous light?

If a land-bird perishes at sea, a sea-bird is equally cast away upon
the land; and I have known the sooty tern, with its almost omnipotent
wing, to fall down, utterly famished and exhausted, two hundred miles
from salt water.

But my interest in these things did not last beyond the third day.
About this time we entered what the sailors call the "devil's hole,"
and a very respectably sized hole it is, extending from the banks of
Newfoundland to Ireland, and in all seasons and weathers it seems to be
well stirred up.

Amidst the tossing and rolling, the groaning of penitent travelers, and
the laboring of the vessel as she climbed those dark unstable
mountains, my mind reverted feebly to Huxley's statement, that the
bottom of this sea, for over a thousand miles, presents to the eye of
science a vast chalk plain, over which one might drive as over a floor,
and I tried to solace myself by dwelling upon the spectacle of a
solitary traveler whipping up his steed across it. The imaginary rattle
of his wagon was like the sound of lutes and harps, and I would rather
have clung to his axletree than have been rocked in the best berth in
the ship.


LAND

On the tenth day, about four o'clock in the afternoon, we sighted
Ireland. The ship came up from behind the horizon, where for so many
days she had been buffeting with the winds and the waves, but had never
lost the clew, bearing straight as an arrow for the mark. I think, if
she had been aimed at a fair-sized artillery target, she would have
crossed the ocean and struck the bull's-eye.

In Ireland, instead of an emerald isle rising out of the sea, I beheld
a succession of cold, purplish mountains, stretching along the
northeastern horizon, but I am bound to say that no tints of bloom or
verdure were ever half so welcome to me as were those dark,
heather-clad ranges. It is a feeling which a man can have but once in
his life, when he first sets eyes upon a foreign land; and in my case,
to this feeling was added the delightful thought that the "devil's
hole" would soon be cleared and my long fast over.

Presently, after the darkness had set in, signal rockets were let off
from the stern of the vessel, writing their burning messages upon the
night; and when answering rockets rose slowly up far ahead, I suppose
we all felt that the voyage was essentially done, and no doubt a
message flashed back under the ocean that the Scotia had arrived.

The sight of the land had been such medicine to me that I could now
hold up my head and walk about, and so went down for the first time and
took a look at the engines,--those twin monsters that had not stopped
once, or apparently varied their stroke at all, since leaving Sandy
Hook; I felt like patting their enormous cranks and shafts with my
hand,--then at the coal bunks, vast cavernous recesses in the belly of
the ship, like the chambers of the original mine in the mountains, and
saw the men and firemen at work in a sort of purgatory of heat and
dust. When it is remembered that one of these ocean steamers consumes
about one hundred tons of coal per day, it is easy to imagine what a
burden the coal for a voyage alone must be, and one is not at all
disposed to laugh at Dr. Lardner, who proved so convincingly that no
steamship could ever cross the ocean, because it could not carry coal
enough to enable it to make the passage.

On the morrow, a calm, lustrous day, we steamed at our leisure up the
Channel and across the Irish Sea, the coast of Wales, and her groups of
lofty mountains, in full view nearly all day. The mountains were in
profile like the Catskills viewed from the Hudson below, only it was
evident there were no trees or shrubbery upon them, and their summits,
on this last day of September, were white with snow.


ASHORE

The first day or half day ashore is, of course, the most novel and
exciting; but who, as Mr. Higginson says, can describe his sensations
and emotions this first half day? It is a page of travel that has not
yet been written. Paradoxical as it may seem, one generally comes out
of pickle much fresher than he went in. The sea has given him an
enormous appetite for the land. Every one of his senses is like a
hungry wolf clamorous to be fed. For my part, I had suddenly emerged
from a condition bordering on that of the hibernating animals--a
condition in which I had neither eaten, nor slept, nor thought, nor
moved, when I could help it--into not only a full, but a keen and
joyous, possession of my health and faculties. It was almost a
metamorphosis. I was no longer the clod I had been, but a bird exulting
in the earth and air, and in the liberty of motion. Then to remember it
was a new earth and a new sky that I was beholding,--that it was
England, the old mother at last, no longer a faith or a fable, but an
actual fact there before my eyes and under my feet,--why should I not
exult? Go to! I will be indulged. Those trees, those fields, that bird
darting along the hedge-rows, those men and boys picking blackberries
in October, those English flowers by the roadside (stop the carriage
while I leap out and pluck them), the homely, domestic looks of things,
those houses, those queer vehicles, those thick-coated horses, those
big-footed, coarsely clad, clear-skinned men and women, this massive,
homely, compact architecture,--let me have a good look, for this is my
first hour in England, and I am drunk with the joy of seeing! This
house-fly even, let me inspect it [Footnote: The English house-fly
actually seemed coarser and more hairy than ours.]; and that swallow
skimming along so familiarly,--is he the same I saw trying to cling to
the sails of the vessel the third day out? or is the swallow the
swallow the world over? This grass I certainly have seen before, and
this red and white clover, but this daisy and dandelion are not the
same; and I have come three thousand miles to see the mullein
cultivated in a garden, and christened the velvet plant.

As we sped through the land, the heart of England, toward London, I
thought my eyes would never get their fill of the landscape, and that I
would lose them out of my head by their eagerness to catch every object
as we rushed along! How they reveled, how they followed the birds and
the game, how they glanced ahead on the track--that marvelous
track!--or shot off over the fields and downs, finding their delight in
the streams, the roads, the bridges, the splendid breeds of cattle and
sheep in the fields, the superb husbandry, the rich mellow soil, the
drainage, the hedges,--in the inconspicuousness of any given feature,
and the mellow tone and homely sincerity of all; now dwelling fondly
upon the groups of neatly modeled stacks, then upon the field
occupations, the gathering of turnips and cabbages, or the digging of
potatoes,--how I longed to turn up the historic soil, into which had
passed the sweat and virtue of so many generations, with my own
spade,--then upon the quaint, old, thatched houses, or the cluster of
tiled roofs, then catching at a church spire across a meadow (and it is
all meadow), or at the remains of tower or wall overrun with ivy.

Here, something almost human looks out at you from the landscape;
Nature here has been so long under the dominion of man, has been taken
up and laid down by him so many times, worked over and over with his
hands, fed and fattened by his toil and industry, and, on the whole,
has proved herself so willing and tractable, that she has taken on
something of his image, and seems to radiate his presence. She is
completely domesticated, and no doubt loves the titillation of the
harrow and plow. The fields look half conscious; and if ever the cattle
have "great and tranquil thoughts," as Emerson suggests they do, it
must be when lying upon these lawns and meadows. I noticed that the
trees, the oaks and elms, looked like fruit trees, or as if they had
felt the humanizing influences of so many generations of men, and were
betaking themselves from the woods to the orchard. The game is more
than half tame, and one could easily understand that it had a keeper.

But the look of those fields and parks went straight to my heart.  It
is not merely that they were so smooth and cultivated, but that they
were so benign and maternal, so redolent of cattle and sheep and of
patient, homely farm labor. One gets only here and there a glimpse of
such in this country. I see occasionally about our farms a patch of an
acre or half acre upon which has settled this atmosphere of ripe and
loving husbandry; a choice bit of meadow about the barn or orchard, or
near the house, which has had some special fattening, perhaps been the
site of some former garden, or barn, or homestead, or which has had the
wash of some building, where the feet of children have played for
generations, and the flocks and herds have been fed in winter, and
where they love to lie and ruminate at night,--a piece of sward thick
and smooth, and full of warmth and nutriment, where the grass is
greenest and freshest in spring, and the hay finest and thickest in
summer.

This is the character of the whole of England that I saw.  I had been
told I should see a garden, but I did not know before to what an extent
the earth could become a living repository of the virtues of so many
generations of gardeners. The tendency to run to weeds and wild growths
seems to have been utterly eradicated from the soil; and if anything
were to spring upspontaneously, I think it would be cabbage and
turnips, or grass and grain.

And yet, to American eyes, the country seems quite uninhabited, there
are so few dwellings and so, few people. Such a landscape at home would
be dotted all over with thrifty farmhouses, each with its group of
painted outbuildings, and along every road and highway would be seen
the well-to-do turnouts of the independent freeholders. But in England
the dwellings of the people, the farmers, are so humble and
inconspicuous and are really so far apart, and the halls and the
country-seats of the aristocracy are so hidden in the midst of vast
estates, that the landscape seems almost deserted, and it is not till
you see the towns and great cities that you can understand where so
vast a population keeps itself.

Another thing that would be quite sure to strike my eye on this my
first ride across British soil, and on all subsequent rides, was the
enormous number of birds and fowls of various kinds that swarmed in the
air or covered the ground. It was truly amazing It seemed as if the
feathered life of a whole continent must have been concentrated on this
island. Indeed, I doubt if a sweeping together of all the birds of the
United States into any two of the largest States would people the earth
and air more fully. There appeared to be a plover, a crow, a rook, a
blackbird, and a sparrow to every square yard of ground. They know the
value of birds in Britain,--that they are the friends, not the enemies,
of the farmer. It must be the paradise of crows and rooks. It did me
good to see them so much at home about the fields and even in the
towns. I was glad also to see that the British crow was not a stranger
to me, and that he differed from his brother on the American side of
the Atlantic only in being less alert and cautious, having less use for
these qualities.

Now and then the train would start up some more tempting game.  A brace
or two of partridges or a covey of quails would settle down in the
stubble, or a cock pheasant drop head and tail and slide into the
copse. Rabbits also would scamper back from the borders of the fields
into the thickets or peep slyly out, making my sportsman's fingers
tingle.

I have no doubt I should be a notorious poacher in England.  How could
an American see so much game and not wish to exterminate it entirely as
he does at home? But sporting is an expensive luxury here. In the first
place a man pays a heavy tax on his gun, nearly or quite half its
value; then he has to have a license to hunt, for which he pays
smartly; then permission from the owner of the land upon which he
wishes to hunt; so that the game is hedged about by a triple safeguard.

An American, also, will be at once struck with the look of greater
substantiality and completeness in everything he sees here. No
temporizing, no makeshifts, no evidence of hurry, or failure, or
contract work; no wood and little paint, but plenty of iron and brick
and stone. This people have taken plenty of time, and have built broad
and deep, and placed the cap-stone on. All this I had been told, but it
pleased me so in the seeing that I must tell it again. It is worth a
voyage across the Atlantic to see the bridges alone. I believe I had
seen little other than wooden bridges before, and in England I saw not
one such, but everywhere solid arches of masonry, that were refreshing
and reassuring to behold. Even the lanes and byways about the farm, I
noticed, crossed the little creeks with a span upon which an elephant
would not hesitate to tread, or artillery trains to pass. There is no
form so pleasing to look upon as the arch, or that affords so much food
and suggestion to the mind. It seems to stimulate the volition, the
will-power, and for my part I cannot look upon a noble span without a
feeling of envy, for I know the hearts of heroes are thus keyed and
fortified. The arch is the symbol of strength and activity, and of
rectitude.

In Europe I took a new lease of this feeling, this partiality for the
span, and had daily opportunities to indulge and confirm it. In London
I had immense satisfaction in observing the bridges there, and in
walking over them, firm as the geological strata and as enduring.
London Bridge, Waterloo Bridge, Blackfriars, clearing the river in a
few gigantic leaps, like things of life and motion,--to pass over one
of these bridges, or to sail under it, awakens the emotion of the
sublime. I think the moral value of such a bridge as the Waterloo must
be inestimable. It seems to me the British Empire itself is stronger
for such a bridge, and that all public and private virtues are
stronger. In Paris, too, those superb monuments over the Seine,--I
think they alone ought to inspire the citizens with a love of
permanence, and help hold them to stricter notions of law and
dependence. No doubt kings and tyrants know the value of these things,
and as yet they certainly have the monopoly of them.


LONDON

I am too good a countryman to feel much at home in cities, and usually
value them only as conveniences, but for London I conceived quite an
affection; perhaps because it is so much like a natural formation
itself, and strikes less loudly, or perhaps sharply, upon the senses
than our great cities do. It is a forest of brick and stone of the most
stupendous dimensions, and one traverses it in the same adventurous
kind of way that he does woods and mountains. The maze and tangle of
streets is something fearful, and any generalization of them a step not
to be hastily taken. My experience heretofore had been that cities
generally were fractions that could be greatly reduced, but London I
found I could not simplify, and every morning for weeks, when I came
out of my hotel, it was a question whether my course lay in this, or in
exactly the opposite direction. It has no unit of structure, but is a
vast aggregation of streets and houses, or in fact of towns and cities,
which have to be mastered in detail. I tried the third or fourth day to
get a bird's-eye view from the top of St. Paul's, but saw through the
rifts in the smoke only a waste,--literally a waste of red tiles and
chimney pots. The confusion and desolation were complete.

But I finally mastered the city, in a measure, by the aid of a shilling
map, which I carried with me wherever I went, and upon which, when I
was lost, I would hunt myself up, thus making in the end a very
suggestive and entertaining map. Indeed, every inch of this piece of
colored paper is alive to me. If I did not make the map itself, I at
least verified it, which is nearly as good, and the verification, on
street corner by day and under lamp or by shop window at night, was
often a matter of so much concern that I doubt if the original surveyor
himself put more heart into certain parts of his work than I did in the
proof of them.

London has less metropolitan splendor than New York, and less of the
full-blown pride of the shopman. Its stores are not nearly so big, and
it has no signboards that contain over one thousand feet of lumber;
neither did I see any names painted on the gable ends of the buildings
that the man in the moon could read without his opera-glass. I went out
one day to look up one of the great, publishing houses, and passed it
and repassed it several times trying to find the sign. Finally, having
made sure of the building, I found the name of the firm cut into the
door jamb.

London seems to have been built and peopled by countrymen, who have
preserved all the rural reminiscences possible. All its great streets
or avenues are called roads, as King's Road, City Road, Edgware Road,
Tottenham Court Road, with innumerable lesser roads. Then there are
lanes and walks, and such rural names among the streets as Long Acre,
Snowhill, Poultry, Bush-lane, Hill-road, Houndsditch, and not one grand
street or imperial avenue.

My visit fell at a most favorable juncture as to weather, there being
but few rainy days and but little fog. I had imagined that they had
barely enough fair weather in London, at any season, to keep alive the
tradition of sunshine and of blue sky, but the October days I spent
there were not so very far behind what we have at home at this season.
London often puts on a nightcap of smoke and fog, which it pulls down
over its ears pretty close at times; and the sun has a habit of lying
abed very late in the morning, which all the people imitate; but I
remember some very pleasant weather there, and some bright moonlight
nights.

I saw but one full-blown characteristic London fog.  I was in the
National Gallery one day, trying to make up my mind about Turner, when
this chimney-pot meteor came down. It was like a great yellow dog
taking possession of the world. The light faded from the room, the
pictures ran together in confused masses of shadow on the walls, and in
the street only a dim yellowish twilight prevailed, through which
faintly twinkled the lights in the shop windows. Vehicles came slowly
out of the dirty obscurity on one side and plunged into it on the
other. Waterloo Bridge gave one or two leaps and disappeared, and the
Nelson Column in Trafalgar Square was obliterated for half its length.
Travel was impeded, boats stopped on the river, trains stood still on
the track, and for an hour and a half London lay buried beneath this
sickening eruption. I say eruption, because a London fog is only a
London smoke tempered by a moist atmosphere. It is called "fog" by
courtesy, but lampblack is its chief ingredient. It is not wet like our
fogs, but quite dry, and makes the eyes smart and the nose tingle.
Whenever the sun can be seen through it, his face is red and dirty;
seen through a bona fide fog, his face is clean and white. English
coal--or "coals," as they say here--in burning gives out an enormous
quantity of thick, yellowish smoke, which is at no time absorbed or
dissipated as it would be in our hard, dry atmosphere, and which at
certain times is not absorbed at all, but falls down swollen and
augmented by the prevailing moisture. The atmosphere of the whole
island is more or less impregnated with smoke, even on the fairest
days, and it becomes more and more dense as you approach the great
towns. Yet this compound of smut, fog, and common air is an elixir of
youth; and this is one of the surprises of London, to see amid so much
soot and dinginess such fresh, blooming complexions, and in general
such a fine physical tone and full-bloodedness among the people,--such
as one has come to associate only with the best air and the purest,
wholesomest country influences. What the secret of it may be, I am at a
loss to know, unless it is that the moist atmosphere does not dry up
the blood as our air does, and that the carbon and creosote have some
rare antiseptic and preservative qualities, as doubtless they have,
that are efficacious in the human physiology. It is no doubt true,
also, that the people do not tan in this climate, as in ours, and that
the delicate flesh tints show more on that account.

I speak thus of these things with reference to our standards at home,
because I found that these standards were ever present in my mind, and
that I was unconsciously applying them to whatever I saw and wherever I
went, and often, as I shall have occasion to show, to their discredit.

Climate is a great matter, and no doubt many of the differences between
the English stock at home and its offshoot in our country are traceable
to this source. Our climate is more heady and less stomachic than the
English; sharpens the wit, but dries up the fluids and viscera; favors
an irregular, nervous energy, but exhausts the animal spirits. It is,
perhaps, on this account that I have felt since my return how much
easier it is to be a dyspeptic here than in Great Britain. One's
appetite is keener and more ravenous, and the temptation to bolt one's
food greater. The American is not so hearty an eater as the Englishman,
but the forces of his body are constantly leaving his stomach in the
lurch, and running off into his hands and feet and head. His eyes are
bigger than his belly, but an Englishman's belly is a deal bigger than
his eyes, and the number of plum puddings and the amount of Welsh
rarebit he devours annually would send the best of us to his grave in
half that time. We have not enough constitutional inertia and
stolidity; our climate gives us no rest, but goads us day and night;
and the consequent wear and tear of life is no doubt greater in this
country than in any other on the globe. We are playing the game more
rapidly, and I fear less thoroughly and sincerely, than the mother
country.

The more uniform good health of English women is thought to be a matter
of exercise in the open air, as walking, riding, driving, but the prime
reason is mainly a climatic one, uniform habits of exercise being more
easily kept up in that climate than in this, and being less exhaustive,
one day with another. You can walk there every day in the year without
much discomfort, and the stimulus is about the same. Here it is too hot
in summer and too cold in winter, or else it keys you up too tight one
day and unstrings you the next; all fire and motion in the morning, and
all listlessness and ennui in the afternoon; a spur one hour and a
sedative the next.

A watch will not keep as steady time here as in Britain, and the human
clock-work is more liable to get out of repair for the same reason. Our
women, especially, break down prematurely, and the decay of maternity
in this country is no doubt greater than in any of the oldest civilized
communities. One reason, doubtless, is that our women are the greatest
slaves of fashion in the whole world, and, in following the whims of
that famous courtesan, have the most fickle and destructive climate to
contend with.

English women all have good-sized feet, and Englishmen, too, and wear
large, comfortable shoes. This was a noticeable feature at once:
coarse, loosefitting clothes of both sexes, and large boots and shoes
with low heels. They evidently knew the use of their feet, and had none
of the French, or American, or Chinese fastidiousness about this part
of their anatomy. I notice that, when a family begins to run out, it
turns out its toes, drops off at the heel, shortens its jaw, and dotes
on small feet and hands.

Another promoter of health in England is woolen clothes, which are worn
the year round, the summer driving people into no such extremities as
here. And the good, honest woolen stuffs of one kind and another that
fill the shops attest the need and the taste that prevail. They had a
garment when I was in London called the Ulster overcoat,--a coarse,
shaggy, bungling coat, with a skirt reaching nearly to the feet, very
ugly, tried by the fashion plates, but very comfortable, and quite the
fashion. This very sensible garment has since become well known in
America.

The Americans in London were put out with the tailors, and could rarely
get suited, on account of the loose cutting and the want of "style."
But "style" is the hiatus that threatens to swallow us all one of these
days. About the only monstrosity I saw in the British man's dress was
the stove-pipe hat, which everybody wears. At first I feared it might
be a police regulation, or a requirement of the British Constitution,
for I seemed to be about the only man in the kingdom with a soft hat
on, and I had noticed that before leaving the steamer every man brought
out from its hiding-place one of these polished brain-squeezers. Even
the boys wear them,--youths of nine and ten years with little stovepipe
hats on; and at Eton School I saw black swarms of them: even the boys
in the field were playing football in stove-pipe bats.

What we call beauty in woman is so much a matter of youth and health
that the average of female beauty in London is, I believe, higher than
in this country. English women are comely and good-looking. It is an
extremely fresh and pleasant face that you see everywhere,--softer,
less clearly and sharply cut than the typical female face in this
country,--less spirituelle, less perfect in form, but stronger and
sweeter. There is more blood, and heart, and substance back of it. The
American race of the present generation is doubtless the most shapely,
both in face and figure, that has yet appeared. American children are
far less crude, and lumpy, and awkward-looking than the European
children. One generation in this country suffices vastly to improve the
looks of the offspring of the Irish or German or Norwegian emigrant.
There is surely something in our climate or conditions that speedily
refines and sharpens--and, shall I add, hardens?--the human features.
The face loses something, but it comes into shape; and of such beauty
as is the product of this tendency we can undoubtedly show more,
especially in our women, than the parent stock in Europe; while
American schoolgirls, I believe, have the most bewitching beauty in the
world.

The English plainness of speech is observable even in the signs or
notices along the streets. Instead of "Lodging," "Lodging," as with us,
one sees "Beds," "Beds," which has a very homely sound; and in place of
"gentlemen's" this, that, or the other, about public places, the word
"men's" is used.

I suppose, if it were not for the bond of a written language and
perpetual intercourse, the two nations would not be able to understand
each other in the course of a hundred years, the inflection and
accentuation are so different. I recently heard an English lady say,
referring to the American speech, that she could hardly believe her own
language could be spoken so strangely.


ARCHITECTURE

One sees right away that the English are a home people, a domestic
people; and he does not need to go into their houses or homes to find
this out. It is in the air and in the general aspect of things.
Everywhere you see the virtue and quality that we ascribe to home-made
articles. It seems as if things had been made by hand, and with care
and affection, as they have been. The land of caste and kings, there is
yet less glitter and display than in this country, less publicity, and,
of course, less rivalry and emulation also, for which we pay very
dearly. You have got to where the word homely preserves its true
signification, and is no longer a term of disparagement, but expressive
of a cardinal virtue.

I liked the English habit of naming their houses; it shows the
importance they attach to their homes. All about the suburbs of London
and in the outlying villages I noticed nearly every house and cottage
had some appropriate designation, as Terrace House, Oaktree House, Ivy
Cottage, or some Villa, usually cut into the stone gate-post, and this
name is put on the address of the letters. How much better to be known
by your name than by your number! I believe the same custom prevails in
the country, and is common to the middle classes as well as to the
aristocracy. It is a good feature. A house or a farm with an
appropriate name, which everybody recognizes, must have an added value
and importance.

Modern English houses are less showy than ours, and have more weight
and permanence,--no flat roofs and no painted outside shutters. Indeed,
that pride of American country people, and that abomination in the
landscape, a white house with green blinds, I did not see a specimen of
in England. They do not aim to make their houses conspicuous, but the
contrary. They make a large, yellowish brick that has a pleasing effect
in the wall. Then a very short space of time in that climate suffices
to take off the effect of newness, and give a mellow, sober hue to the
building. Another advantage of the climate is that it permits outside
plastering. Thus almost any stone may be imitated, and the work endure
for ages; while our sudden changes, and extremes of heat and cold, of
dampness and dryness, will cause the best work of this kind to peel off
in a few years.

Then this people have better taste in building than we have, perhaps
because they have the noblest samples and specimens of architecture
constantly before them,--those old feudal castles and royal residences,
for instance. I was astonished to see how homely and good they looked,
how little they challenged admiration, and how much they emulated rocks
and trees. They were surely built in a simpler and more poetic age than
this. It was like meeting some plain, natural nobleman after contact
with one of the bedizened, artificial sort. The Tower of London, for
instance, is as pleasing to the eye, has the same fitness and harmony,
as a hut in the woods; and I should think an artist might have the same
pleasure in copying it into his picture as he would in copying a
pioneer's log cabin. So with Windsor Castle, which has the beauty of a
ledge of rocks, and crowns the hill like a vast natural formation. The
warm, simple interior, too, of these castles and palaces, the honest
oak without paint or varnish, the rich wood carvings, the ripe human
tone and atmosphere,--how it all contrasts, for instance, with the
showy, gilded, cast-iron interior of our commercial or political
palaces, where everything that smacks of life or nature is studiously
excluded under the necessity of making the building fire-proof.

I was not less pleased with the higher ornamental architecture,--the
old churches and cathedrals,--which appealed to me in a way
architecture had never before done. In fact, I found that I had never
seen architecture before,--a building with genius and power in it, and
that one could look at with the eye of the imagination. Not mechanics
merely, but poets, had wrought and planned here, and the granite was
tender with human qualities. The plants and weeds growing in the niches
and hollows of the walls, the rooks and martins and jackdaws inhabiting
the towers and breeding about the eaves, are but types of the feelings
and emotions of the human heart that flit and hover over these old
piles, and find affectionate lodgment in them.

Time, of course, has done a great deal for this old architecture.
Nature has taken it lovingly to herself, has set her seal upon it, and
adopted it into her system. Just the foil which beauty--especially the
crystallic beauty of architecture--needs has been given by this hazy,
mellowing atmosphere. As the grace and suggestiveness of all objects
are enhanced by a fall of snow,--forest, fence, hive, shed, knoll,
rock, tree, all being laid under the same white enchantment,--so time
has wrought in softening and toning down this old religious
architecture, and bringing it into harmony with nature.

Our climate has a much keener edge, both of frost and fire, and touches
nothing so gently or creatively; yet time would, no doubt, do much for
our architecture, if we would give it a chance,--for that apotheosis of
prose, the National Capitol at Washington, upon which, I notice, a
returned traveler bases our claim to be considered "ahead" of the Old
World, even in architecture; but the reigning gods interfere, and each
spring or fall give the building a clean shirt in the shape of a coat
of white paint. In like manner, other public buildings never become
acclimated, but are. annually scoured with soap and sand, the national
passion for the brightness of newness interfering to defeat any benison
which the gods might be disposed to pronounce upon them. Spotlessness,
I know, is not a characteristic of our politics, though it is said that
whitewashing is, which may account for this ceaseless paint-pot
renovation of our public buildings. In a world lit only by the moon,
our Capitol would be a paragon of beauty, and the spring whitewashing
could also be endured; but under our blazing sun and merciless sky it
parches the vision, and makes it turn with a feeling of relief to rocks
and trees, or to some weather-stained, dilapidated shed or hovel.

How winningly and picturesquely in comparison the old architecture of
London addresses itself to the eye,--St. Paul's Cathedral, for
instance, with its vast blotches and stains, as if it had been dipped
in some black Lethe of oblivion, and then left to be restored by the
rains and the elements! This black Lethe is the London smoke and fog,
which has left a dark deposit over all the building, except the upper
and more exposed parts, where the original silvery whiteness of the
stone shows through, the effect of the whole thus being like one of
those graphic Rembrandt photographs or carbons, the prominences in a
strong light, and the rest in deepest shadow. I was never tired of
looking at this noble building, and of going out of my way to walk
around it; but I am at a loss to know whether the pleasure I had in it
arose from my love of nature, or from a susceptibility to art for which
I had never given myself credit. Perhaps from both, for I seemed to
behold Art turning toward and reverently acknowledging Nature,-indeed,
in a manner already become Nature.

I believe the critics of such things find plenty of fault with St.
Paul's; and even I could see that its bigness was a little prosy, that
it suggested the historic rather than the poetic muse; yet, for all
that, I could never look at it without a profound emotion. Viewed
coolly and critically, it might seem like a vast specimen of
Episcopalianism in architecture. Miltonic in its grandeur and
proportions, and Miltonic in its prosiness and mongrel classicism also,
yet its power and effectiveness are unmistakable. The beholder has no
vantage-ground from which to view it, or to take in its total effect,
on account of its being so closely beset by such a mob of shops and
buildings; yet the glimpses he does get here and there through the
opening made by some street, when passing in its vicinity, are very
striking and suggestive; the thin veil of smoke, which is here as
constant and uniform as the atmosphere itself, wrapping it about with
the enchantment of time and distance.

The interior I found even more impressive than the exterior, perhaps
because I was unprepared for it. I had become used to imposing
exteriors at home, and did not reflect that in a structure like this I
should see an interior also, and that here alone the soul of the
building would be fully revealed. It was Miltonic in the best sense; it
was like the mightiest organ music put into form. Such depths, such
solemn vastness, such gulfs and abysses of architectural space, the
rich, mellow light, the haze outside becoming a mysterious, hallowing
presence within, quite mastered me, and I sat down upon a seat, feeling
my first genuine cathedral intoxication. As it was really an
intoxication, a sense of majesty and power quite overwhelming in my
then uncloyed condition, I speak of it the more freely. My companions
rushed about as if each one had had a searchwarrant in his pocket; but
I was content to uncover my head and drop into a seat, and busy my mind
with some simple object near at hand, while the sublimity that soared
about me stole into my soul and possessed it. My sensation was like
that imparted by suddenly reaching a great altitude: there was a sort
of relaxation of the muscles, followed by a sense of physical weakness;
and after half an hour or so I felt compelled to go out into the open
air, and leave till another day the final survey of the building. Next
day I came back, but there can be only one first time, and I could not
again surprise myself with the same feeling of wonder and intoxication.
But St. Paul's will bear many visits. I came again and again, and never
grew tired of it. Crossing its threshold was entering another world,
where the silence and solitude were so profound and overpowering that
the noise of the streets outside, or of the stream of visitors, or of
the workmen engaged on the statuary, made no impression. They were all
belittled, lost, like the humming of flies. Even the afternoon
services, the chanting, and the tremendous organ, were no interruption,
and left me just as much alone as ever. They only served to set off the
silence, to fathom its depth.

The dome of St. Paul's is the original of our dome at Washington; but
externally I think ours is the more graceful, though the effect inside
is tame and flat in comparison. This is owing partly to its lesser size
and height, and partly to our hard, transparent atmosphere, which lends
no charm or illusion, but mainly to the stupid, unimaginative plan of
it. Our dome shuts down like an inverted iron pot; there is no vista,
no outlook, no relation, and hence no proportion. You open a door and
are in a circular pen, and can look in only one direction,--up. If the
iron pot were slashed through here and there, or if it rested on a row
of tall columns or piers, and were shown to be a legitimate part of the
building, it would not appear the exhausted receiver it does now.

The dome of St. Paul's is the culmination of the whole interior of the
building. Rising over the central area, it seems to gather up the power
and majesty of the nave, the aisles, the transepts, the choir, and give
them expression and expansion in its lofty firmament.

Then those colossal piers, forty feet broad some of them, and nearly
one hundred feet high,--they easily eclipsed what I had recently seen
in a mine, and which I at the time imagined shamed all the architecture
of the world,--where the mountain was upheld over a vast space by
massive piers left by the miners, with a ceiling unrolled over your
head, and apparently descending upon you, that looked like a petrified
thunder-cloud.

The view from the upper gallery, or top of the dome, looking down
inside, is most impressive. The public are not admitted to this
gallery, for fear, the keeper told me, it would become the scene of
suicides; people unable to withstand the terrible fascination would
leap into the yawning gulf. But, with the privilege usually accorded to
Americans, I stepped down into the narrow circle, and, leaning over the
balustrade, coolly looked the horrible temptation in the face.

On the whole, St. Paul's is so vast and imposing that one wonders what
occasion or what ceremony can rise to the importance of not being
utterly dwarfed within its walls. The annual gathering of the charity
children, ten or twelve thousand in number, must make a ripple or two
upon its solitude, or an exhibition like the thanksgiving of the Queen,
when sixteen or eighteen thousand persons were assembled beneath its
roof. But one cannot forget that it is, for the most part, a great
toy,--a mammoth shell, whose bigness bears no proportion to the living
(if, indeed, it is living), indwelling necessity. It is a tenement so
large that the tenant looks cold and forlorn, and in danger of being
lost within it.

No such objection can be made to Westminster Abbey, which is a mellow,
picturesque old place, the interior arrangement and architecture of
which affects one like some ancient, dilapidated forest. Even the
sunlight streaming through the dim windows, and falling athwart the
misty air, was like the sunlight of a long-gone age. The very
atmosphere was pensive, and filled the tall spaces like a memory and a
dream. I sat down and listened to the choral service and to the organ,
which blended perfectly with the spirit and sentiment of the place.


ON THE SOUTH DOWNS

One of my best days in England was spent amid the singing of skylarks
on the South Down Hills, near an old town at the mouth of the Little
Ouse, where I paused on my way to France. The prospect of hearing one
or two of the classical birds of the Old World had not been the least
of the attractions of my visit, though I knew the chances were against
me so late in the season, and I have to thank my good genius for
guiding me to the right place at the right time. To get out of London
was delight enough, and then to find myself quite unexpectedly on these
soft rolling hills, of a mild October day, in full sight of the sea,
with the larks pouring out their gladness overhead, was to me good
fortune indeed.

The South Downs form a very remarkable feature of this part of England,
and are totally unlike any other landscape I ever saw. I believe it is
Huxley who applies to them the epithet of muttony, which they certainly
deserve, for they are like the backs of immense sheep, smooth, and
round, and fat,--so smooth, indeed, that the eye can hardly find a
place to take hold of, not a tree, or bush, or fence, or house, or
rock, or stone, or other object, for miles and miles, save here and
there a group of strawcapped stacks, or a flock of sheep crawling
slowly over them, attended by a shepherd and dog, and the only lines
visible those which bound the squares where different crops had been
gathered. The soil was rich and mellow, like a garden,--hills of chalk
with a pellicle of black loam.

These hills stretch a great distance along the coast, and are cut
squarely off by the sea, presenting on this side a chain of white chalk
cliffs suggesting the old Latin name of this land, Albion.

Before I had got fifty yards from the station I began to hear the
larks, and being unprepared for them I was a little puzzled at first,
but was not long discovering what luck I was in. The song disappointed
me at first, being less sweet and melodious than I had expected to
hear; indeed, I thought it a little sharp and harsh,--a little
stubbly,--but in other respects, in strength and gladness and
continuity, it was wonderful. And the more I heard it the better I
liked it, until I would gladly have given any of my songsters at home
for a bird that could shower down such notes, even in autumn. Up, up,
went the bird, describing a large easy spiral till he attained an
altitude of three or four hundred feet, when, spread out against the
sky for a space of ten or fifteen minutes or more, he poured out his
delight, filling all the vault with sound. The song is of the sparrow
kind, and, in its best parts, perpetually suggested the notes of our
vesper sparrow; but the wonder of it is its copiousness and sustained
strength. There is no theme, no beginning, middle, or end, like most of
our best birdsongs, but a perfect swarm of notes pouring out like bees
from a hive, and resembling each other nearly as closely, and only
ceasing as the bird nears the earth again. We have many more melodious
songsters; the bobolink in the meadows for instance, the vesper sparrow
in the pastures, the purple finch in the groves, the winter wren, or
any of the thrushes in the woods, or the wood-wagtail, whose air song
is of a similar character to that of the skylark, and is even more
rapid and ringing, and is delivered in nearly the same manner; but our
birds all stop when the skylark has only just begun. Away he goes on
quivering wing, inflating his throat fuller and fuller, mounting and
mounting, and turning to all points of the compass as if to embrace the
whole landscape in his song, the notes still raining upon you, as
distinct as ever, after you have left him far behind. You feel that you
need be in no hurry to observe the song lest the bird finish; you walk
along, your mind reverts to other things, you examine the grass and
weeds, or search for a curious stone, still there goes the bird; you
sit down and study the landscape, or send your thoughts out toward
France or Spain, or across the sea to your own land, and yet, when you
get them back, there is that song above you, almost as unceasing as the
light of a star. This strain indeed suggests some rare pyrotechnic
display, musical sounds being substituted for the many-colored sparks
and lights. And yet I will add, what perhaps the best readers do not
need to be told, that neither the lark-song, nor any other bird-song in
the open air and under the sky, is as noticeable a feature as my
description of it might imply, or as the poets would have us believe;
and that most persons, not especially interested in birds or their
notes, and intent upon the general beauty of the landscape, would
probably pass it by unremarked.

I suspect that it is a little higher flight than the facts will bear
out when the writers make the birds go out of sight into the sky. I
could easily follow them on this occasion, though, if I took my eye
away for a moment, it was very difficult to get it back again. I had to
search for them as the astronomer searches for a star. It may be that
in the spring, when the atmosphere is less clear and the heart of the
bird full of a more mad and reckless love, that the climax is not
reached until the eye loses sight of the singer.

Several attempts have been made to introduce the lark into this
country, but for some reason or other the experiment has never
succeeded. The birds have been liberated in Virginia and on Long
Island, but do not seem ever to have been heard of afterwards. I see no
reason why they should not thrive anywhere along our Atlantic seaboard,
and I think the question of introducing them worthy of more thorough
and serious attention than has yet been given it, for the lark is
really an institution; and as he sings long after the other birds are
silent,--as if he had perpetual spring in his heart,--he would be a
great acquisition to our fields and meadows. It may be that he cannot
stand the extremes of our climate, though the English sparrow thrives
well enough. The Smithsonian Institution has received specimens of the
skylark from Alaska, where, no doubt, they find a climate more like the
English.

They have another prominent singer in England, namely, the robin,--the
original robin redbreast,--a slight, quick, active bird with an orange
front and an olive back, and a bright, musical warble that I caught by
every garden, lane, and hedge-row. It suggests our bluebird, and has
similar habits and manners, though it is a much better musician.

The European bird that corresponds to our robin is the blackbird, of
which Tennyson sings:--

       "O Blackbird, sing me something well;
       While all the neighbors shoot thee round
       I keep smooth plats of fruitful ground
       Where thou may'st warble, eat, and dwell."

It quite startled me to see such a resemblance,--to see, indeed, a
black robin. In size, form, flight, manners, note, call, there is
hardly an appreciable difference. The bird starts up with the same
flirt of the wings, and calls out in the same jocund, salutatory way,
as he hastens off. The nest, of coarse mortar in the fork of a tree, or
in an outbuilding, or in the side of a wall, is also the same.

The bird I wished most to hear, namely, the nightingale, had already
departed on its southern journey. I saw one in the Zoological Gardens
in London, and took a good look at him. He struck me as bearing a close
resemblance to our hermit thrush, with something in his manners that
suggested the water-thrush also. Carlyle said he first recognized its
song from the description of it in "Wilhelm Meister," and that it was a
"sudden burst," which is like the song of our water-thrush.

I have little doubt our songsters excel in melody, while the European
birds excel in profuseness and volubility. I heard many bright,
animated notes and many harsh ones, but few that were melodious. This
fact did not harmonize with the general drift of the rest of my
observations, for one of the first things that strikes an American in
Europe is the mellowness and rich tone of things. The European is
softer-voiced than the American and milder-mannered, but the bird
voices seem an exception to this rule.


PARKS

While in London I had much pleasure in strolling through the great
parks, Hyde Park, Regent's Park, St. James Park, Victoria Park, and in
making Sunday excursions to Richmond Park, Hampden Court Parks, and the
great parks at Windsor Castle. The magnitude of all these parks was
something I was entirely unprepared for, and their freedom also; one
could roam where he pleased. Not once did I see a signboard, "Keep off
the grass," or go here or go there. There was grass enough, and one
could launch out in every direction without fear of trespassing on
forbidden ground. One gets used, at least I do, to such petty parks at
home, and walks amid them so cautiously and circumspectly, every shrub
and tree and grass plat saying "Hands off," that it is a new sensation
to enter a city pleasure ground like Hyde Park,--a vast natural
landscape, nearly two miles long and a mile wide, with broad, rolling
plains, with herds of sheep grazing, and forests and lakes, and all as
free as the air. He have some quite sizable parks and reservations in
Washington, and the citizen has the right of way over their tortuous
gravel walks, but he puts his foot upon the grass at the risk of being
insolently hailed by the local police. I have even been called to order
for reclining upon a seat under a tree in the Smithsonian grounds. I
must sit upright as in church. But in Hyde Park or Regent's Park I
could not only walk upon the grass, but lie upon it, or roll upon it,
or play "one catch all" with children, boys, dogs, or sheep upon it;
and I took my revenge for once for being so long confined to gravel
walks, and gave the grass an opportunity to grow under my foot whenever
I entered one of these parks.

This free-and-easy rural character of the London parks is quite in
keeping with the tone and atmosphere of the great metropolis itself,
which in so many respects has a country homeliness and sincerity, and
shows the essentially bucolic taste of the people; contrasting in this
respect with the parks and gardens of Paris, which show as unmistakably
the citizen and the taste for art and the beauty of design and
ornamentation. Hyde Park seems to me the perfection of a city pleasure
ground of this kind, because it is so free and so thoroughly a piece of
the country, and so exempt from any petty artistic displays.

In walking over Richmond Park I found I had quite a day's work before
me, as it was like traversing a township; while the great park at
Windsor Castle, being upwards of fifty miles around, might well make
the boldest pedestrian hesitate. My first excursion was to Hampton
Court, an old royal residence, where I spent a delicious October day
wandering through Bushy Park, and looking with covetous, though
admiring eyes upon the vast herds of deer that dotted the plains, or
gave way before me as I entered the woods. There seemed literally to be
many thousands of these beautiful animals in this park, and the loud,
hankering sounds of the bucks, as they pursued or circled around the
does, was a new sound to my ears. The rabbits and pheasants also were
objects of the liveliest interest to me, and I found that after all a
good shot at them with the eye, especially when I could credit myself
with alertness or stealthiness, was satisfaction enough.

I thought it worthy of note that, though these great parks in and about
London were so free, and apparently without any police regulations
whatever, yet I never saw prowling about them any of those vicious,
ruffianly looking characters that generally infest the neighborhood of
our great cities, especially of a Sunday. There were troops of boys,
but they were astonishingly quiet and innoxious, very unlike American
boys, white or black, a band of whom making excursions into the country
are always a band of outlaws. Ruffianism with us is no doubt much more
brazen and pronounced, not merely because the law is lax, but because
such is the genius of the people.


       II. ENGLISH CHARACTERISTICS

England is a mellow country, and the English people are a mellow
people. They have hung on the tree of nations a long time, and will, no
doubt, hang as much longer; for windfalls, I reckon, are not the order
in this island. We are pitched several degrees higher in this country.
By contrast, things here are loud, sharp, and garish. Our geography is
loud; the manners of the people are loud; our climate is loud, very
loud, so dry and sharp, and full of violent changes and contrasts; and
our goings-out and comings-in as a nation are anything but silent. Do
we not occasionally give the door an extra slam just for effect?

In England everything is on a lower key, slower, steadier, gentler.
Life is, no doubt, as full, or fuller, in its material forms and
measures, but less violent and aggressive. The buffers the English have
between their cars to break the shock are typical of much one sees
there.

All sounds are softer in England; the surface of things is less hard.
The eye of day and the face of Nature are less bright. Everything has a
mellow, subdued cast. There is no abruptness in the landscape, no sharp
and violent contrasts, no brilliant and striking tints in the foliage.
A soft, pale yellow is all one sees in the way of tints along the
borders of the autumn woods. English apples (very small and inferior,
by the way) are not so highly colored as ours. The blackberries, just
ripening in October, are less pungent and acid; and the garden
vegetables, such as cabbage, celery, cauliflower, beet, and other root
crops, are less rank and fibrous; and I am very sure that the meats
also are tenderer and sweeter. There can be no doubt about the
superiority of English mutton; and the tender and succulent grass, and
the moist and agreeable climate, must tell upon the beef also.

English coal is all soft coal, and the stone is soft stone.  The
foundations of the hills are chalk instead of granite. The stone with
which most of the old churches and cathedrals are built would not
endure in our climate half a century; but in Britain the tooth of Time
is much blunter, and the hunger of the old man less ravenous, and the
ancient architecture stands half a millennium, or until it is slowly
worn away by the gentle attrition of the wind and rain.

At Chester, the old Roman wall that surrounds the town, built in the
first century and repaired in the ninth, is still standing without a
break or a swerve, though in some places the outer face of the wall is
worn through. The Cathedral, and St. John's Church, in the same town,
present to the beholder outlines as jagged and broken as rocks and
cliffs; and yet it is only chip by chip, or grain by grain, that ruin
approaches. The timber also lasts an incredibly long time. Beneath one
of the arched ways, in the Chester wall above referred to, I saw
timbers that must have been in place five or six hundred years. The
beams in the old houses, also fully exposed to the weather, seem
incapable of decay; those dating from Shakespeare's time being
apparently as firm as ever.

I noticed that the characteristic aspect of the clouds in England was
different from ours,--soft, fleecy, vapory, indistinguishable,--never
the firm, compact, sharply, defined, deeply dyed masses and fragments
so common in our own sky. It rains easily but slowly. The average
rainfall of London is less than that of New York, and yet it doubtless
rains ten days in the former to one in the latter. Storms accompanied
with thunder are rare; while the crashing, wrenching, explosive
thunder-gusts so common with us, deluging the earth and convulsing the
heavens, are seldom known.

In keeping with this elemental control and moderation, I found the
character and manners of the people gentler and sweeter than I had been
led to believe they were. No loudness, brazenness, impertinence; no
oaths, no swaggering, no leering at women, no irreverence, no
flippancy, no bullying, no insolence of porters or clerks or
conductors, no importunity of bootblacks or newsboys, no
omnivorousness, of hackmen,--at least, comparatively none,--all of
which an American is apt to notice, and, I hope, appreciate. In London
the bootblack salutes you with a respectful bow and touches his cap,
and would no more think of pursuing you or answering your refusal than
he would of jumping into the Thames. The same is true of the newsboys.
If they were to scream and bellow in London as they do in New York or
Washington, they would be suppressed by the police, as they ought to
be. The vender of papers stands at the comer of the street, with his
goods in his arms, and a large placard spread out at his feet, giving
in big letters the principal news-headings.

Street-cries of all kinds are less noticeable, less aggressive, than in
this country, and the manners of the shopmen make you feel you are
conferring a benefit instead of receiving one. Even their locomotives
are less noisy than ours, having a shrill, infantile whistle that
contrasts strongly with the loud, demoniac yell that makes a residence
near a railway or a depot, in this country, so unbearable. The trains
themselves move with wonderful smoothness and celerity, making a mere
fraction of the racket made by our flying palaces as they go swaying
and jolting over our hasty, ill-ballasted roads.

It is characteristic of the English prudence and plain dealing, that
they put so little on the cars and so much on the road, while the
reverse process is equally characteristic of American enterprise. Our
railway system no doubt has certain advantages, or rather conveniences,
over the English, but, for my part, I had rather ride smoothly,
swiftly, and safely in a luggage van than be jerked and jolted to
destruction in the velvet and veneering of our palace cars. Upholster
the road first, and let us ride on bare boards until a cushion can be
afforded; not till after the bridges are of granite and iron, and the
rails of steel, do we want this more than aristocratic splendor and
luxury of palace and drawingroom cars. To me there is no more marked
sign of essential vulgarity of the national manners than these princely
cars and beggarly, clap-trap roads. It is like a man wearing a ruffled
and jeweled shirtfront, but too poor to afford a shirt itself.

I have said the English are a sweet and mellow people.  There is,
indeed, a charm about these ancestral races that goes to the heart. And
herein was one of the profoundest surprises of my visit, namely, that,
in coming from the New World to the Old, from a people the most
recently out of the woods of any, to one of the ripest and venerablest
of the European nationalities, I should find a race more simple,
youthful, and less sophisticated than the one I had left behind me. Yet
this was my impression. We have lost immensely in some things, and what
we have gained is not yet so obvious or so definable. We have lost in
reverence, in homeliness, in heart and conscience,--in virtue, using
the word in its proper sense. To some, the difference which I note may
appear a difference in favor of the great cuteness, wideawakeness, and
enterprise of the American, but it is simply a difference expressive of
our greater forwardness. We are a forward people, and the god we
worship is Smartness. In one of the worst tendencies of the age,
namely, an impudent, superficial, journalistic intellectuality and
glibness, America, in her polite and literary circles, no doubt leads
all other nations. English books and newspapers show more homely
veracity, more singleness of purpose, in short more character, than
ours. The great charm of such a man as Darwin, for instance, is his
simple manliness and transparent good faith, and the absence in him of
that finical, self-complacent smartness which is the bane of our
literature.

The poet Clough thought the New England man more simple than the man of
Old England. Hawthorne, on the other hand, seemed reluctant to admit
that the English were a "franker and simpler people, from peer to
peasant," than we are; and that they had not yet wandered so far from
that "healthful and primitive simplicity in which man was created" as
have their descendants in America. My own impression accords with
Hawthorne's. We are a more alert and curious people, but not so
simple,--not so easily angered, nor so easily amused. We have partaken
more largely of the fruit of the forbidden tree. The English have more
of the stay-at-home virtues, which, on the other hand, they no doubt
pay pretty well for by their more insular tendencies.

The youths and maidens seemed more simple, with their softer and less
intellectual faces. When I returned from Paris, the only person in the
second-class compartment of the car with me, for a long distance, was
an English youth eighteen or twenty years old, returning home to London
after an absence of nearly a year, which he had spent as waiter in a
Parisian hotel. He was born in London and had spent nearly his whole
life there, where his mother, a widow, then lived. He talked very
freely with me, and told me his troubles, and plans, and hopes, as if
we had long known each other. What especially struck me in the youth
was a kind of sweetness and innocence--perhaps what some would call
"greenness"--that at home I had associated only with country boys, and
not even with them latterly. The smartness and knowingness and a
certain hardness or keenness of our city youths,--there was no trace of
it at all in this young Cockney. But he liked American travelers better
than those from his own country. They were more friendly and
communicative,--were not so afraid to speak to "a fellow," and at the
hotel were more easily pleased.

The American is certainly not the grumbler the Englishman is; he is
more cosmopolitan and conciliatory. The Englishman will not adapt
himself to his surroundings; he is not the least bit an imitative
animal; he will be nothing but an Englishman, and is out of place--an
anomaly--in any country but his own. To understand him, you must see
him at home in the British island where he grew, where he belongs,
where he has expressed himself and justified himself, and where his
interior, unconscious characteristics are revealed. There he is quite a
different creature from what he is abroad. There he is "sweet," but he
sours the moment he steps off the island. In this country he is too
generally arrogant, fault-finding, and supercilious. The very traits of
loudness, sharpness, and unleavenedness, which I complain of in our
national manners, he very frequently exemplifies in an exaggerated
form.

The Scotch or German element no doubt fuses and mixes with ours much
more readily than the purely British.

The traveler feels the past in England as of course he cannot feel it
here; and, along with impressions of the present, one gets the flavor
and influence of earlier, simpler times, which, no doubt, is a potent
charm, and one source of the "rose-color" which some readers have found
in my sketches, as the absence of it is one cause of the raw, acrid,
unlovely character of much that there is in this country. If the
English are the old wine, we are the new. We are not yet thoroughly
leavened as a people, nor have we more than begun to transmute and
humanize our surroundings; and as the digestive and assimilative powers
of the American are clearly less than those of the Englishman, to say
nothing of our harsher, more violent climate, I have no idea that ours
can ever become the mellow land that Britain is.

As for the charge of brutality that is often brought against the
English, and which is so successfully depicted by Dickens and
Thackeray, there is doubtless good ground for it, though I actually saw
very little of it during five weeks' residence in London, and I poked
about into all the dens and comers I could find, and perambulated the
streets at nearly all hours of the night and day. Yet I am persuaded
there is a kind of brutality among the lower orders in England that
does not exist in the same measure in this country,--an ignorant animal
coarseness, an insensibility, which gives rise to wife-beating and
kindred offenses. But the brutality of ignorance and stolidity is not
the worst form of the evil. It is good material to make something
better of. It is an excess and not a perversion. It is not man fallen,
but man undeveloped. Beware, rather, that refined, subsidized
brutality; that thin, depleted, moral consciousness; or that
contemptuous, cankerous, euphemistic brutality, of which, I believe, we
can show vastly more samples than Great Britain. Indeed, I believe, for
the most part, that the brutality of the English people is only the
excess and plethora of that healthful, muscular robustness and
full-bloodedness for which the nation has always been famous, and which
it should prize beyond almost anything else. But for our brutality, our
recklessness of life and property, the brazen ruffianism in our great
cities, the hellish greed and robbery and plunder in high places, I
should have to look a long time to find so plausible an excuse.

[But I notice with pleasure that English travelers are beginning to
find more to admire than to condemn in this country, and that they
accredit us with some virtues they do not find at home in the same
measure. They are charmed with the independence, the self-respect, the
good-nature, and the obliging dispositions shown by the mass of our
people; while American travelers seem to be more and more ready to
acknowledge the charm and the substantial qualities of the mother
country. It is a good omen. One principal source of the pleasure which
each takes in the other is no doubt to be found in the novelty of the
impressions. It is like a change of cookery. The flavor of the dish is
fresh and uncloying to each. The English probably tire of their own
snobbishness and flunkeyism, and we of our own smartness and puppyism.
After the American has got done bragging about his independence, and
his "free and equal" prerogatives, he begins to see how these things
run into impertinence and forwardness; and the Englishman, in visiting
us, escapes from his social bonds and prejudices, to see for a moment
how absurd they all are.]

A London crowd I thought the most normal and unsophisticated I had ever
seen, with the least admixture of rowdyism and ruffianism. No doubt it
is there, but this scum is not upon the surface, as with us. I went
about very freely in the hundred and one places of amusement where the
average working classes assemble, with their wives and daughters and
sweethearts, and smoke villainous cigars and drink ale and stout. There
was to me something notably fresh and canny about them, as if they had
only yesterday ceased to be shepherds and shepherdesses. They certainly
were less developed in certain directions, or shall I say less
depraved, than similar crowds in our great cities. They are easily
pleased, and laugh at the simple and childlike, but there is little
that hints of an impure taste, or of abnormal appetites. I often smiled
at the tameness and simplicity of the amusements, but my sense of
fitness, or proportion, or decency was never once outraged. They always
stop short of a certain point,--the point where wit degenerates into
mockery, and liberty into license: nature is never put to shame, and
will commonly bear much more. Especially to the American sense did
their humorous and comic strokes, their negro-minstrelsy and attempts
at Yankee comedy, seem in a minor key. There was not enough irreverence
and slang and coarse ribaldry, in the whole evening's entertainment, to
have seasoned one line of some of our most popular comic poetry. But
the music, and the gymnastic, acrobatic, and other feats, were of a
very high order. And I will say here that the characteristic flavor of
the humor and fun-making of the average English people, as it impressed
my sense, is what one gets in Sterne,--very human and stomachic, and
entirely free from the contempt and superciliousness of most current
writers. I did not get one whiff of Dickens anywhere. No doubt it is
there in some form or other, but it is not patent, or even appreciable,
to the sense of such an observer as I am.

I was not less pleased by the simple good-will and bonhomie that
pervaded the crowd. There is in all these gatherings an indiscriminate
mingling of the sexes, a mingling without jar or noise or rudeness of
any kind, and marked by a mutual respect on all sides that is novel and
refreshing. Indeed, so uniform is the courtesy, and so human and
considerate the interest, that I was often at a loss to discriminate
the wife or the sister from the mistress or the acquaintance of the
hour, and had many times to check my American curiosity and cold,
criticising stare. For it was curious to see young men and women from
the lowest social strata meet and mingle in a public hall without
lewdness or badinage, but even with gentleness and consideration. The
truth is, however, that the class of women known as victims of the
social evil do not sink within many degrees as low in Europe as they do
in this country, either in their own opinion or in that of the public;
and there can be but little doubt that gatherings of the kind referred
to, if permitted in our great cities, would be tenfold more scandalous
and disgraceful than they are in London or Paris. There is something so
reckless and desperate in the career of man or woman in this country,
when they begin to go down, that the only feeling they too often excite
is one of loathsomeness and disgust. The lowest depth must be reached,
and it is reached quickly. But in London the same characters seem to
keep a sweet side from corruption to the last, and you will see good
manners everywhere.

We boast of our deference to woman, but if the Old World made her a
tool, we are fast making her a toy; and the latter is the more hopeless
condition. But among the better classes in England I am convinced that
woman is regarded more as a sister and an equal than in this country,
and is less subject to insult, and to leering, brutal comment, there
than here. We are her slave or her tyrant; so seldom her brother and
friend. I thought it a significant fact that I found no place of
amusement set apart for the men; where one sex went the other went;
what was sauce for the gander was sauce for the goose; and the spirit
that prevailed was soft and human accordingly. The hotels had no
"ladies' entrance," but all passed in and out the same door, and met
and mingled commonly in the same room, and the place was as much for
one as for the other. It was no more a masculine monopoly than it was a
feminine. Indeed, in the country towns and villages the character of
the inns is unmistakably given by woman; hence the sweet, domestic
atmosphere that pervades and fills them is balm to the spirit. Even the
larger hotels of Liverpool and London have a private, cozy, home
character that is most delightful. On entering them, instead of finding
yourself in a sort of public thoroughfare or political caucus, amid
crowds of men talking and smoking and spitting, with stalls on either
side where cigars and tobacco and books and papers are sold, you
perceive you are in something like a larger hall of a private house,
with perhaps a parlor and coffee-room on one side, and the office, and
smoking-room, and stairway on the other. You may leave your coat and
hat on the rack in the hall, and stand your umbrella there also, with
full assurance that you will find them there when you want them, if it
be the next morning or the next week. Instead of that petty tyrant the
hotel clerk, a young woman sits in the office with her sewing or other
needlework, and quietly receives you. She gives you your number on a
card, rings for a chambermaid to show you to your room, and directs
your luggage to be sent up; and there is something in the look of
things, and the way they are done, that goes to the right spot at once.

At the hotel in London where I stayed, the daughters of the landlord,
three fresh, comely young women, did the duties of the office; and
their presence, so quiet and domestic, gave the prevailing hue and tone
to the whole house. I wonder how long a young woman could preserve her
self-respect and sensibility in such a position in New York or
Washington?

The English regard us as a wonderfully patient people, and there can be
no doubt that we put up with abuses unknown elsewhere. If we have no
big tyrant, we have ten thousand little ones, who tread upon our toes
at every turn. The tyranny of corporations, and of public servants of
one kind and another, as the ticket-man, the railroad conductor, or
even of the country stage-driver, seem to be features peculiar to
American democracy. In England the traveler is never snubbed, or made
to feel that it is by somebody's sufferance that he is allowed aboard
or to pass on his way.

If you get into an omnibus or a railroad or tramway carriage in London,
you are sure of a seat. Not another person can get aboard after the
seats are all full. Or, if you enter a public hall, you know you will
not be required to stand up unless you pay the standing-up price. There
is everywhere that system, and order, and fair dealing, which all men
love. The science of living has been reduced to a fine point. You pay a
sixpence and get a sixpence worth of whatever you buy. There are all
grades and prices, and the robbery and extortion so current at home
appear to be unknown.

I am not contending for the superiority of everything English, but
would not disguise from myself or my readers the fact of the greater
humanity and consideration that prevail in the mother country. Things
here are yet in the green, but I trust there is no good reason to doubt
that our fruit will mellow and ripen in time like the rest.


       III. A GLIMPSE OF FRANCE

In coming over to France, I noticed that the chalk-hills, which were
stopped so abruptly by the sea on the British side of the Channel,
began again on the French side, only they had lost their smooth,
pastoral character, and were more broken and rocky, and that they
continued all the way to Paris, walling in the Seine, and giving the
prevailing tone and hue to the country,--scrape away the green and
brown epidermis of the hills anywhere, and out shines their white
framework,--and that Paris itself was built of stone evidently quarried
from this formation,--a light, cream-colored stone, so soft that
rifle-bullets bury themselves in it nearly their own depth, thus
pitting some of the more exposed fronts during the recent strife in a
very noticeable manner, and which, in building, is put up in the rough,
all the carving, sculpturing, and finishing being done after the blocks
are in position in the wall.

Disregarding the counsel of friends, I braved the Channel at one of its
wider points, taking the vixen by the waist instead of by the neck, and
found her as placid as a lake, as I did also on my return a week later.

It was a bright October morning as we steamed into the little harbor at
Dieppe, and the first scene that met my eye was, I suppose, a
characteristic one,--four or five old men and women towing a vessel
into a dock. They bent beneath the rope that passed from shoulder to
shoulder, and tugged away doggedly at it, the women apparently more
than able to do their part. There is no equalizer of the sexes like
poverty and misery, and then it very often happens that the gray mare
proves the better horse. Throughout the agricultural regions, as we
passed along, the men apparently all wore petticoats; at least, the
petticoats were the most active and prominent in the field occupations.
Then wearers were digging potatoes, pulling beets, following the harrow
(in one instance a thorn-bush drawn by a cow), and stirring the wet,
new-mown grass. I believe the pantaloons were doing the mowing. But I
looked in vain for any Maud Mullers in the meadows, and have concluded
that these can be found only in New England hay-fields! And herein is
one of the first surprises that await one on visiting the Old World
countries,--the absence of graceful, girlish figures, and bright
girlish faces, among the peasantry or rural population. In France I
certainly expected to see female beauty everywhere, but did not get one
gleam all that sunny day till I got to Paris. Is it a plant that
flourishes only in cities on this side of the Atlantic, or do all the
pretty girls, as soon as they are grown, pack their trunks, and leave
for the gay metropolis?

At Dieppe I first saw the wooden shoe, and heard its dry, senseless
clatter upon the pavement. How suggestive of the cramped and inflexible
conditions with which human nature has borne so long in these lands!

A small paved square near the wharf was the scene of an early market,
and afforded my first glimpse of the neatness and good taste that
characterize nearly everything in France. Twenty or thirty peasant
women, coarse and masculine, but very tidy, with their snow-white caps
and short petticoats, and perhaps half as many men, were chattering and
chaffering over little heaps of fresh country produce. The onions and
potatoes and cauliflowers were prettily arranged on the clean pavement,
or on white linen cloths, and the scene was altogether animated and
agreeable.

La belle France is the woman's country clearly, and it seems a mistake
or an anomaly that woman is not at the top and leading in all
departments, compelling the other sex to play second fiddle, as she so
frequently has done for a brief time in isolated cases in the past; not
that the man is effeminate, but that the woman seems so nearly his
match and equal, and so often proves even his superior. In no other
nation, during times of popular excitement and insurrection or
revolution, do women emerge so conspicuously, often in the front ranks,
the most furious and ungovernable of any. I think even a female
conscription might be advisable in the present condition of France, if
I may judge of her soldiers from the specimens I saw. Small,
spiritless, inferior-looking men, all of them. They were like Number
Three mackerel or the last run of shad, as doubtless they were,--the
last pickings and resiftings of the population.

I don't know how far it may be a national custom, but I observed that
the women of the humbler classes, in meeting or parting with friends at
the stations, saluted each other on both cheeks, never upon the mouth,
as our dear creatures do, and I commended their good taste, though I
certainly approve the American custom, too.

Among the male population I was struck with the frequent recurrence of
the Louis Napoleon type of face. "Has this man," I said, "succeeded in
impressing himself even upon the physiognomy of the people? Has he
taken such a hold of their imaginations that they have grown to look
like him?" The guard that took our train down to Paris might easily
play the double to the ex-emperor; and many times in Paris and among
different classes I saw the same countenance.

Coming from England, the traveling seems very slow in this part of
France, taking eight or nine hours to go from Dieppe to Paris, with an
hour's delay at Rouen. The valley of the Seine, which the road follows
or skirts more than half the way, is very winding, with immense flats
or plains shut in by a wall of steep, uniform hills, and, in the
progress of the journey, is from time to time laid open to the traveler
in a way that is full of novelty and surprise. The day was bright and
lovely, and I found my eyes running riot the same as they had done
during my first ride on British soil. The contrast between the two
countries is quite marked, France in this region being much more broken
and picturesque, with some waste or sterile land,--a thing I did not
see at all in England. Had I awaked from a long sleep just before
reaching Paris, I should have guessed I was riding through Maryland,
and should soon see the dome of the Capitol at Washington rising above
the trees. So much wild and bushy or barren and half-cultivated land,
almost under the walls of the French capital, was a surprise.

Then there are few or none of those immense home-parks which one sees
in England, the land being mostly held by a great number of small
proprietors, and cultivated in strips, or long, narrow parallelograms,
making the landscape look like many-colored patchwork. Everywhere along
the Seine, stretching over the flats, or tilted up against the sides of
the hills, in some places seeming almost to stand on end, were these
acre or half-acre rectangular farms, without any dividing lines or
fences, and of a great variety of shades and colors, according to the
crop and the tillage.

I was glad to see my old friend, the beech-tree, all along the route.
His bole wore the same gray and patched appearance it does at home, and
no doubt Thoreau would have found his instep even fairer; for the beech
on this side of the Atlantic is a more fluent and graceful tree than
the American species, resembling, in its branchings and general form,
our elm, though never developing such an immense green dome as our elm
when standing alone, and I saw no European tree that does. The European
elm is not unlike our beech in form and outline.

Going from London to Paris is, in some respects, like getting out of
the chimney on to the housetop,--the latter city is, by contrast, so
light and airy, and so American in its roominess. I had come to Paris
for my dessert after my feast of London joints, and I suspect I was a
little dainty in that most dainty of cities. In fact, I had become
quite sated with sight-seeing, and the prospect of having to go on and
"do" the rest of Europe after the usual manner of tourists, and as my
companions did, would have been quite appalling. Said companions
steered off like a pack of foxhounds in full blast. The game they were
in quest of led them a wild chase up the Rhine, off through Germany and
Italy, taking a turn back through Switzerland, giving them no rest, and
apparently eluding them at last. I had felt obliged to cut loose from
them at the outset, my capacity to digest kingdoms and empires at short
notice being far below that of the average of my countrymen. My
interest and delight had been too intense at the outset; I had partaken
too heartily of the first courses; and now, where other travelers begin
to warm to the subject, and to have the keenest relish, I began to wish
the whole thing well through with. So that Paris was no paradise to one
American at least. Yet the mere change of air and sky, and the escape
from that sooty, all-pervasive, chimney-flue smell of London, was so
sudden and complete, that the first hour of Paris was like a refreshing
bath, and gave rise to satisfaction in which every pore of the skin
participated. My room at the hotel was a gem of neatness and order, and
the bed a marvel of art, comfort, and ease, three feet deep at least.

Then the uniform imperial grace and eclat of the city was a new
experience. Here was the city of cities, the capital of taste and
fashion, the pride and flower of a great race and a great history, the
city of kings and emperors, and of a people which, after all, loves
kings and emperors, and will not long, I fear, be happy without
them,--a gregarious, urbane people, a people of genius and destiny,
whose God is Art and whose devil is Communism. London has long ago
outgrown itself, has spread, and multiplied, and accumulated, without a
corresponding inward expansion and unification; but in Paris they have
pulled down and built larger, and the spirit of centralization has had
full play. Hence the French capital is superb, but soon grows
monotonous. See one street and boulevard, and you have seen it all. It
has the unity and consecutiveness of a thing deliberately planned and
built to order, from beginning to end. Its stone is all from one
quarry, and its designs are all the work of one architect. London has
infinite variety, and quaintness, and picturesqueness, and is of all
possible shades of dinginess and weather-stains. It shows its age,
shows the work of innumerable generations, and is more an aggregation,
a conglomeration, than is Paris. Paris shows the citizen, and is modern
and democratic in its uniformity. On the whole, I liked London best,
because I am so much of a countryman, I suppose, and affect so little
the metropolitan spirit. In London there are a few grand things to be
seen, and the pulse of the great city itself is like the throb of the
ocean; but in Paris, owing either to my jaded senses or to some other
cause, I saw nothing that was grand, but enough that was beautiful and
pleasing. The more pretentious and elaborate specimens of architecture,
like the Palace of the Tuileries or the Palais Royal, are truly superb,
but they as truly do not touch that deeper chord whose awakening we
call the emotion of the sublime.

But the fitness and good taste everywhere displayed in the French
capital may well offset any considerations of this kind, and cannot
fail to be refreshing to a traveler of any other land,--in the dress
and manners of the people, in the shops and bazaars and show-windows,
in the markets, the equipages, the furniture, the hotels. It is
entirely a new sensation to an American to look into a Parisian
theatre, and see the acting and hear the music. The chances are that,
for the first time, he sees the interior of a theatre that does not
have a hard, businesslike, matter-of-fact air. The auditors look
comfortable and cozy, and quite at home, and do not, shoulder to
shoulder and in solid lines, make a dead set at the play and the music.
The theatre has warm hangings, warm colors, cozy boxes and stalls, and
is in no sense the public, away-from-home place we are so familiar with
in this country. Again, one might know it was Paris by the character of
the prints and pictures in the shop windows; they are so clever as art
that one becomes reprehensibly indifferent to their license. Whatever
sins the French may be guilty of, they never sin against art and good
taste (except when in the frenzy of revolution), and, if Propriety is
sometimes obliged to cry out "For shame!" in the French capital, she
must do so with ill-concealed admiration, like a fond mother chiding
with word and gesture while she approves with tone and look. It is a
foolish charge, often made, that the French make vice attractive: they
make it provocative of laughter; the spark of wit is always evolved,
and what is a better antidote to this kind of poison than mirth?

They carry their wit even into their cuisine.  Every dish set before
you at the table is a picture, and tickles your eye before it does your
palate. When I ordered fried eggs, they were brought on a snow-white
napkin, which was artistically folded upon a piece of ornamented
tissue-paper that covered a china plate; if I asked for cold ham, it
came in flakes, arrayed like great rose-leaves, with a green sprig or
two of parsley dropped upon it, and surrounded by a border of
calfs'-foot jelly, like a setting of crystals. The bread revealed new
qualities in the wheat, it was so sweet and nutty; and the fried
potatoes, with which your beefsteak comes snowed under, are the very
flower of the culinary art, and I believe impossible in any other
country.

Even the ruins are in excellent taste, and are by far the best-behaved
ruins I ever saw for so recent ones. I came near passing some of the
most noted, during my first walk, without observing them. The main
walls were all standing, and the fronts were as imposing as ever. No
litter or rubbish, no charred timbers or blackened walls; only vacant
windows and wrecked interiors, which do not very much mar the general
outside effect.

My first genuine surprise was the morning after my arrival, which,
according to my reckoning, was Sunday; and when I heard the usual
week-day sounds, and, sallying forth, saw the usual weekday occupations
going on,--painters painting, glaziers glazing, masons on their
scaffolds, and heavy drays and market-wagons going through the streets,
and many shops and bazaars open,--I must have presented to a
scrutinizing beholder the air and manner of a man in a dream, so
absorbed was I in running over the events of the week to find where the
mistake had occurred, where I had failed to turn a leaf, or else had
turned over two leaves for one. But each day had a distinct record, and
every count resulted the same. It must be Sunday. Then it all dawned
upon me that this was Paris, and that the Parisians did not have the
reputation of being very strict Sabbatarians.

The French give a touch of art to whatever they do.  Even the drivers
of drays and carts and trucks about the streets are not content with a
plain, matter-of-fact whip, as an English or American laborer would be,
but it must be a finely modeled stalk, with a long, tapering lash
tipped with the best silk snapper. Always the inevitable snapper. I
doubt if there is a whip in Paris without a snapper. Here is where the
fine art, the rhetoric of driving, comes in. This converts a vulgar,
prosy "gad" into a delicate instrument, to be wielded with pride and
skill, and never literally to be applied to the backs of the animals,
but to be launched to right and left into the air with a professional
flourish, and a sharp, ringing report. Crack! crack! crack! all day
long go these ten thousand whips, like the boys' Fourth of July
fusillade. It was invariably the first sound I heard when I opened my
eyes in the morning, and generally the last one at night. Occasionally
some belated drayman would come hurrying along just as I was going to
sleep, or some early bird before I was fully awake in the morning, and
let off in rapid succession, in front of my hotel, a volley from the
tip of his lash that would make the street echo again, and that might
well have been the envy of any ring-master that ever trod the tanbark.
Now and then, during my ramblings, I would suddenly hear some
master-whip, perhaps that of an old omnibus-driver, that would crack
like a rifle, and, as it passed along, all the lesser whips, all the
amateur snappers, would strike up with a jealous and envious emulation,
making every foot-passenger wink, and one (myself) at least almost to
shade his eyes from the imaginary missiles.

I record this fact because it "points a moral and adorns a 'tail.'" The
French always give this extra touch. Everything has its silk snapper.
Are not the literary whips of Paris famous for their rhetorical tips
and the sting there is in them? What French writer ever goaded his
adversary with the belly of his lash, like the Germans and the English,
when he could blister him with its silken end, and the percussion of
wit be heard at every stroke?

In the shops, and windows, and public halls, this passion takes the
form of mirrors,--mirrors, mirrors everywhere, on the walls, in the
panels, in the cases, on the pillars, extending, multiplying, opening
up vistas this way and that, and converting the smallest shop, with a
solitary girl and a solitary customer, into an immense enchanted
bazaar, across whose endless counters customers lean and pretty girls
display goods. The French are always before the looking-glass, even
when they eat and drink. I never went into a restaurant without seeing
four or five facsimiles of myself approaching from as many
different`directions, giving the order to the waiter and sitting down
at the table. Hence I always had plenty of company at dinner, though we
were none of us very social, and I was the only one who entered or
passed out at the door. The show windows are the greatest cheat. What
an expanse, how crowded, and how brilliant! You see, for instance, an
immense array of jewelry, and pause to have a look. You begin at the
end nearest you, and, after gazing a moment, take a step to run your
eye along the dazzling display, when, presto! the trays of watches and
diamonds vanish in a twinkling, and you find yourself looking into the
door, or your delighted eyes suddenly bring up against a brick wall,
disenchanted so quickly that you almost stagger.

I went into a popular music and dancing hall one night, and found
myself in a perfect enchantment of mirrors. Not an inch of wall was
anywhere visible. I was suddenly caught up into the seventh heaven of
looking-glasses, from which I came down with a shock the moment I
emerged into the street again. I observed that this mirror contagion
had broken out in spots in London, and, in the narrow and crowded
condition of the shops there, even this illusory enlargement would be a
relief. It might not improve the air, or add to the available storage
capacity of the establishment, but it would certainly give a wider
range to the eye.

The American no sooner sets foot on the soil of France than he
perceives he has entered a nation of drinkers as he has left a nation
of eaters. Men do not live by bread here, but by wine. Drink, drink,
drink everywhere,--along all the boulevards, and streets, and quays,
and byways; in the restaurants and under awnings, and seated on the
open sidewalk; social and convivial wine-bibbing,--not hastily and in
large quantities, but leisurely and reposingly, and with much
conversation and enjoyment.

Drink, drink, drink, and, with equal frequency and nearly as much
openness, the reverse or diuretic side of the fact. (How our
self-consciousness would writhe! We should all turn to stone!) Indeed,
the ceaseless deglutition of mankind in this part of the world is
equaled only by the answering and enormous activity of the human male
kidneys. This latter was too astonishing and too public a fact to go
unmentioned. At Dieppe, by the reeking tubs standing about, I suspected
some local distemper; but when I got to Paris, and saw how fully and
openly the wants of the male citizen in this respect were recognized by
the sanitary and municipal regulations, and that the urinals were
thicker than the lamp-posts, I concluded it must be a national trait;
and at once abandoned the theory that had begun to take possession of
my mind, namely, that diabetes was no doubt the cause of the decadence
of France. Yet I suspect it is no more a peculiarity of French manners
than of European manners generally, and in its light I relished
immensely the history of a well-known statue which stands in a public
square in one of the German cities. The statue commemorates the
unblushing audacity of a peasant going to market with a goose under
each arm, who ignored even the presence of the king, and it is at
certain times dressed up and made the centre of holiday festivities. It
is a public fountain, and its living streams of water make it one of
the most appropriate and suggestive monuments in Europe. I would only
suggest that they canonize the Little Man, and that the Parisians
recognize a tutelar deity in the goddess Urea, who should have an
appropriate monument somewhere in the Place de la Concorde!

One of the loveliest features of Paris is the Seine.  I was never tired
of walking along its course. Its granite embankments; its numberless
superb bridges, throwing their graceful spans across it; its clear,
limpid water; its paved bed; the women washing; the lively little
boats; and the many noble buildings that look down upon it,--make it
the most charming citizen-river I ever beheld. Rivers generally get
badly soiled when they come to the city, like some other rural
travelers; but the Seine is as pure as a meadow brook wherever I saw
it, though I dare say it does not escape without some contamination. I
believe it receives the sewerage discharges farther down, and is no
doubt turbid and pitchy enough there, like its brother, the Thames,
which comes into London with the sky and the clouds in its bosom, and
leaves it reeking with filth and slime.

After I had tired of the city, I took a day to visit St. Cloud, and
refresh myself by a glimpse of the imperial park there, and a little of
Nature's privacy, if such could be had, which proved to be the case,
for a more agreeable day I have rarely passed. The park, toward which I
at once made my way, is an immense natural forest, sweeping up over
gentle hills from the banks of the Seine, and brought into order and
perspective by a system of carriage-ways and avenues, which radiate
from numerous centres like the boulevards of Paris. At these centres
were fountains and statues, with sunlight falling upon them; and,
looking along the cool, dusky avenues, as they opened, this way and
that, upon these marble tableaux, the effect was very striking, and was
not at all marred to my eye by the neglect into which the place had
evidently fallen. The woods were just mellowing into October; the
large, shining horse-chestnuts dropped at my feet as I walked along;
the jay screamed over the trees; and occasionally a red
squirrel--larger and softer-looking than ours, not so sleek, nor so
noisy and vivacious--skipped among the branches. Soldiers passed, here
and there, to and from some encampment on the farther side of the park;
and, hidden from view somewhere in the forest-glades, a band of buglers
filled the woods with wild musical strains.

English royal parks and pleasure grounds are quite different.  There
the prevailing character is pastoral,--immense stretches of lawn,
dotted with the royal oak, and alive with deer. But the Frenchman loves
forests evidently, and nearly all his pleasure grounds about Paris are
immense woods. The Bois de Boulogne, the forests of Vincennes, of St.
Germain, of Bondy, and I don't know how many others, are near at hand,
and are much prized. What the animus of this love may be is not so
clear. It cannot be a love of solitude, for the French are
characteristically a social and gregarious people. It cannot be the
English poetical or Wordsworthian feeling for Nature, because French
literature does not show this sense or this kind of perception. I am
inclined to think the forest is congenial to their love of form and
their sharp perceptions, but more especially to that kind of fear and
wildness which they at times exhibit; for civilization has not quenched
the primitive ardor and fierceness of the Frenchman yet, and it is to
be hoped it never will. He is still more than half a wild man, and, if
turned loose in the woods, I think would develop, in tooth and nail,
and in all the savage, brute instincts, more rapidly than the men of
any other race, except possibly the Slavic. Have not his descendants in
this country--the Canadian French--turned and lived with the Indians,
and taken to wild, savage customs with more relish and genius than have
any other people? How hairy and vehement and pantomimic he is! How his
eyes glance from under his heavy brows! His type among the animals is
the wolf, and one readily recalls how largely the wolf figures in the
traditions and legends and folklore of Continental Europe, and how
closely his remains are associated with those of man in the bone-caves
of the geologists. He has not stalked through their forests and
fascinated their imaginations so long for nothing. The she-wolf suckled
other founders beside those of Rome. Especially when I read of the
adventures of Russian and Polish exiles in Siberia--men of aristocratic
lineage wandering amid snow and arctic cold, sleeping on rocks or in
hollow trees, and holding their own, empty-handed, against hunger and
frost and their fiercer brute embodiments do I recognize a hardihood
and a ferity whose wet-nurse, ages back, may well have been this gray
slut of the woods.

It is this fierce, untamable core that gives the point and the splendid
audacity to French literature and art,--its vehemence and impatience of
restraint. It is the salt of their speech, the nitre of their wit. When
morbid, it gives that rabid and epileptic tendency which sometimes
shows itself in Victor Hugo. In this great writer, however, it more
frequently takes the form of an aboriginal fierceness and hunger that
glares and bristles, and is insatiable and omnivorous.

And how many times has Paris, that boudoir of beauty and fashion,
proved to be a wolf's lair, swarming with jaws athirst for human
throats!--the lust for blood and the greed for plunder, sleeping,
biding their time, never extinguished.

I do not contemn it.  To the natural historian it is good.  It is a
return to first principles again after so much art, and culture, and
lying, and chauvinisme, and shows these old civilizations in no danger
of, becoming effete yet. It is like the hell of fire beneath our feet,
which the geologists tell us is the life of the globe. Were it not for
it, who would not at times despair of the French character? As long as
this fiery core remains, I shall believe France capable of recovering
from any disaster to her arms. The "mortal ripening" of the nation is
stayed.

The English and Germans, on the other hand, are saved by great breadth
and heartiness, and a constitutional tendency to coarseness of fibre
which art and civilization abate very little. What is to save us in
this country, I wonder, who have not the French regency and fire, nor
the Teutonic heartiness and vis inertiae, and who are already in danger
of refining or attenuating into a high-heeled, shortjawed, genteel
race, with more brains than stomach, and more address than character?


       IV. FROM LONDON TO NEW YORK

I had imagined that the next best thing to seeing England would be to
see Scotland; but, as this latter pleasure was denied me, certainly the
next best thing was seeing Scotland's greatest son. Carlyle has been so
constantly and perhaps justly represented as a stormy and wrathful
person, brewing bitter denunciation for America and Americans, that I
cannot forbear to mention the sweet and genial mood in which we found
him,--a gentle and affectionate grandfather, with his delicious Scotch
brogue and rich, melodious talk, overflowing with reminiscences of his
earlier life, of Scott and Goethe and Edinburgh, and other men and
places he had known. Learning that I was especially interested in
birds, he discoursed of the lark and the nightingale and the mavis,
framing his remarks about them in some episode of his personal
experience, and investing their songs with the double charm of his
description and his adventure.

"It is only geese who get plucked there," said my companion after we
had left,--a man who had known Carlyle intimately for many years;
"silly persons who have no veneration for the great man, and come to
convert him or to change his convictions upon subjects to which he has
devoted a lifetime of profound thought and meditation. With such
persons he has no patience."

Carlyle had just returned from Scotland, where he had spent the summer.
The Scotch hills and mountains, he said, had an ancient, mournful look,
as if the weight of immeasurable time had settled down upon them. Their
look was in Ossian,--his spirit reflected theirs; and as I gazed upon
the venerable man before me, and noted his homely and rugged yet
profound and melancholy expression, I knew that their look was upon him
also, and that a greater than Ossian had been nursed amid those lonely
hills. Few men in literature have felt the burden of the world, the
weight of the inexorable conscience, as has Carlyle, or drawn such
fresh inspiration from that source. However we may differ from him (and
almost in self-defense one must differ from a man of such intense and
overweening personality), it must yet be admitted that he habitually
speaks out of that primitive silence and solitude in which only the
heroic soul dwells. Certainly not in contemporary British literature is
there another writer whose bowstring has such a twang.

I left London in the early part of November, and turned my face
westward, going leisurely through England and Wales, and stringing upon
my thread a few of the famous places, as Oxford, Stratford, Warwick,
Birmingham, Chester, and taking a last look at the benign land. The
weather was fair; I was yoked to no companion, and was apparently the
only tourist on that route. The field occupations drew my eye as usual.
They were very simple, and consisted mainly of the gathering of root
crops. I saw no building of fences, or of houses or barns, and no
draining or improving of any kind worth mentioning, these things having
all been done long ago. Speaking of barns reminds me that I do not
remember to have seen a building of this kind while in England, much
less a group or cluster of them as at home; hay and grain being always
stacked, and the mildness of the climate rendering a protection of this
kind unnecessary for the cattle and sheep. In contrast, America may be
called the country of barns and outbuildings:--

       "Thou lucky Mistress of the tranquil barns,"

as Walt Whitman apostrophizes the Union.

I missed also many familiar features in the autumn fields,--those given
to our landscape by Indian corn, for instance, the tent-like stouts,
the shucks, the rustling blades, the ripe pumpkins strewing the field;
for, notwithstanding England is such a garden, our corn does not
flourish there. I saw no buckwheat either, the red stubble and little
squat figures of the upright sheaves of which are so noticeable in our
farming districts at this season. Neither did I see, any gathering of
apples, or orchards from which to gather them. "As sure as there are
apples in Herefordshire" seems to be a proverb in England; yet it is
very certain that the orchard is not the institution anywhere in
Britain that it is in this country, or so prominent a feature in the
landscape. The native apples are inferior in size and quality, and are
sold by the pound. Pears were more abundant at the fruit stands, and
were of superior excellence and very cheap.

I hope it will not be set down to any egotism of mine, but rather to
the effect upon an ardent pilgrim of the associations of the place and
its renown in literature, that all my experience at Stratford seems
worthy of recording, and to be invested with a sort of poetical
interest,--even the fact that I walked up from the station with a
handsome young countrywoman who had chanced to occupy a seat in the
same compartment of the car with me from Warwick, and who, learning the
nature of my visit, volunteered to show me the Red Horse Inn, as her
course led her that way. We walked mostly in the middle of the street,
with our umbrellas hoisted, for it was raining slightly, while a boy
whom we found lying in wait for such a chance trudged along in advance
of us with my luggage.

At the Red Horse the pilgrim is in no danger of having the charm and
the poetical atmosphere with which he has surrounded himself dispelled,
but rather enhanced and deepened, especially if he has the luck I had,
to find few other guests, and to fall into the hands of one of those
simple, strawberry-like English housemaids, who gives him a cozy, snug
little parlor all to himself, as was the luck of Irving also; who
answers his every summons, and looks into his eyes with the simplicity
and directness of a child; who could step from no page but that of
Scott or the divine William himself; who puts the "coals" on your grate
with her own hands, and, when you ask for a lunch, spreads the cloth on
one end of the table while you sit reading or writing at the other, and
places before you a whole haunch of delicious cold mutton, with bread
and homebrewed ale, and requests you to help yourself; who, when
bedtime arrives, lights you up to a clean, sweet chamber, with a
high-canopied bed hung with snow-white curtains; who calls you in the
morning, and makes ready your breakfast while you sit with your feet on
the fender before the blazing grate; and to whom you pay your reckoning
on leaving, having escaped entirely all the barrenness and publicity of
hotel life, and had all the privacy and quiet of home without any of
its cares or interruptions. And this, let me say here, is the great
charm of the characteristic English inn; it has a domestic, homelike
air. "Taking mine ease at mine inn" has a real significance in England.
You can take your ease and more; you can take real solid comfort. In
the first place, there is no bar-room, and consequently no loafers or
pimps, or fumes of tobacco or whiskey; then there is no landlord or
proprietor or hotel clerk to lord it over you. The host, if there is
such a person, has a way of keeping himself in the background, or
absolutely out of sight, that is entirely admirable. You are monarch of
all you survey. You are not made to feel that it is in some one else's
house you are staying, and that you must court the master for his
favor. It is your house, you are the master, and you have only to enjoy
your own.

In the gray, misty afternoon, I walked out over the Avon, like all
English streams full to its grassy brim, and its current betrayed only
by a floating leaf or feather, and along English fields and roads, and
noted the familiar sights and sounds and smells of autumn. The spire of
the church where Shakespeare lies buried shot up stately and tall from
the banks of the Avon, a little removed from the village; and the
church itself, more like a cathedral in size and beauty, was also
visible above the trees. Thitherward I soon bent my steps, and while I
was lingering among the graves*, reading the names and dates so many
centuries old, and surveying the gray and weather-worn exterior of the
church, the slow tolling of the bell announced a funeral. Upon such a
stage, and amid such surroundings, with all this past for a background,
the shadowy figure of the peerless bard towering over all, the incident
of the moment had a strange interest to me, and I looked about for the
funeral cortege. Presently a group of three or four figures appeared at
the head of the avenue of limes, the foremost of them a woman, bearing
an infant's coffin under her arm, wrapped in a white sheet. The clerk
and sexton, with their robes on, went out to meet them, and conducted
them into the church, where the service proper to such occasions was
read, after which the coffin was taken out as it was brought in, and
lowered into the grave. It was the smallest funeral I ever saw, and my
effort to play the part of a sympathizing public by hovering in the
background, I fear, was only an intrusion after all.

[* Footnote: In England the church always stands in the midst of the
graveyard, and hence can be approached only on foot. People it seems,
never go to church in carriages or wagons, but on foot, along paths and
lanes.]

Having loitered to my heart's content amid the stillness of the old
church, and paced to and fro above the illustrious dead, I set out,
with the sun about an hour high, to see the house of Anne Hathaway at
Shottery, shunning the highway and following a path that followed
hedge-rows, crossed meadows and pastures, skirted turnip-fields and
cabbage-patches, to a quaint gathering of low thatched houses,--a
little village of farmers and laborers, about a mile from Stratford. At
the gate in front of the house a boy was hitching a little gray donkey,
almost hidden beneath two immense panniers filled with coarse hay.

"Whose house is this?" inquired I, not being quite able to make out the
name.

"Hann' Ataway's 'ouse," said he.

So I took a good look at Anne's house,--a homely, human-looking
habitation, with its old oak beams and thatched roof,--but did not go
in, as Mrs. Baker, who was eying me from the door, evidently hoped I
would, but chose rather to walk past it and up the slight rise of
ground beyond, where I paused and looked out over the fields, just lit
up by the setting sun. Returning, I stepped into the Shakespeare
Tavern, a little, homely wayside place on a street, or more like a
path, apart from the main road, and the good dame brought me some
"home-brewed," which I drank sitting by a rude table on a rude bench in
a small, low room, with a stone floor and an immense chimney. The coals
burned cheerily, and the crane and hooks in the fireplace called up
visions of my earliest childhood. Apparently the house and the
surroundings, and the atmosphere of the place and the ways of the
people, were what they were three hundred years ago. It was all sweet
and good, and I enjoyed it hugely, and was much refreshed.

Crossing the fields in the gloaming, I came up with some children, each
with a tin bucket of milk, threading their way toward Stratford. The
little girl, a child ten years old, having a larger bucket than the
rest, was obliged to set down her burden every few rods and rest; so I
lent her a helping hand. I thought her prattle, in that broad but
musical patois, and along these old hedge-rows, the most delicious I
ever heard. She said they came to Shottery for milk because it was much
better than they got at Stratford. In America they had a cow of their
own. Had she lived in America, then? "Oh, yes, four years," and the
stream of her talk was fuller at once. But I hardly recognized even the
name of my own country in her innocent prattle; it seemed like a land
of fable,--all had a remote mythological air, and I pressed my
inquiries as if I was hearing of this strange land for the first time.
She had an uncle still living in the "States of Hoio," but exactly
where her father had lived was not so clear. In the States somewhere,
and in "Ogden's Valley." There was a lake there that had salt in it,
and not far off was the sea. "In America," she said, and she gave such
a sweet and novel twang to her words, "we had a cow of our own, and two
horses and a wagon and a dog." "Yes," joined in her little brother,
"and nice chickens and a goose." "But," continued the sister, "we owns
none o' them here. In America 'most everybody owned their houses, and
we could 'a' owned a house if we had stayid."

"What made you leave America?" I inquired.

"'Cause me father wanted to see his friends."

"Did your mother want to come back?"

"No, me mother wanted to stay in America."

"Is food as plenty here,--do you have as much to eat as in the
States?"

"Oh, yes, and more.  The first year we were in America we could not get
enough to eat."

"But you do not get meat very often here, do you?"

"Quite often,"--not so confidently.

"How often?"

"Well, sometimes we has pig's liver in the week time, and we allers has
meat of a Sunday; we likes meat."

Here we emerged from the fields into the highway, and the happy
children went their way and I mine.

In the evening, as I was strolling about the town, a poor, crippled,
half-witted fellow came jerking himself across the street after me and
offered himself as a guide.

"I'm the Teller what showed Artemus Ward around when he was here.
You've heerd on me, I expect? Not? Why, he characterized me in
'Punch,' he did. He asked me if Shakespeare took all the wit out of
Stratford? And this is what I said to him: `No, he left some for me.'"

But not wishing to be guided just then, I bought the poor fellow off
with a few pence, and kept on my way.

Stratford is a quiet old place, and seems mainly the abode of simple
common folk. One sees no marked signs of either poverty or riches. It
is situated in a beautiful expanse of rich, rolling farming country,
but bears little resemblance to a rural town in America: not a tree,
not a spear of grass; the houses packed close together and crowded up
on the street, the older ones presenting their gables and showing their
structure of oak beams. English oak seems incapable of decay even when
exposed to the weather, while indoors it takes three or four centuries
to give it its best polish and hue.

I took my last view of Stratford quite early of a bright Sunday
morning, when the ground was white with a dense hoar-frost. The great
church, as I approached it, loomed up under the sun through a bank of
blue mist. The Avon was like glass, with little wraiths of vapor
clinging here and there to its surface. Two white swans stood on its
banks in front of the church, and, without regarding the mirror that so
drew my eye, preened their plumage; while, farther up, a piebald cow
reached down for some grass under the brink where the frost had not
settled, and a piebald cow in the river reached up for the same morsel.
Rooks and crows and jackdaws were noisy in the trees overhead and about
the church spire. I stood a long while musing upon the scene.

At the birthplace of the poet, the keeper, an elderly woman, shivered
with cold as she showed me about. The primitive, home-made appearance
of things, the stone floor much worn and broken, the rude oak beams and
doors, the leaden sash with the little window-panes scratched full of
names, among others that of Walter Scott, the great chimneys where
quite a family could literally sit in the chimney corner, were what I
expected to see, and looked very human and good. It is impossible to
associate anything but sterling qualities and simple, healthful
characters with these early English birthplaces. They are nests built
with faithfulness and affection, and through them one seems to get a
glimpse of devouter, sturdier times.

From Stratford I went back to Warwick, thence to Birmingham, thence to
Shrewsbury, thence to Chester, the old Roman camp, thence to Holyhead,
being intent on getting a glimpse of Wales and the Welsh, and maybe
taking a tramp up Snowdon or some of his congeners, for my legs
literally ached for a mountain climb, a certain set of muscles being so
long unused. In the course of my journeyings, I tried each class or
compartment of the cars, first, second, and third, and found but little
choice. The difference is simply in the upholstering, and, if you are
provided with a good shawl or wrap-up, you need not be particular about
that. In the first, the floor is carpeted and the seats substantially
upholstered, usually in blue woolen cloth; in the second, the seat
alone is cushioned; and in the third, you sit on a bare bench. But all
classes go by the same train, and often in the same car, or carriage,
as they say here. In the first class travel the real and the shoddy
nobility and Americans; in the second, commercial and professional men;
and in the third, the same, with such of the peasantry and humbler
classes as travel by rail. The only annoyance I experienced in the
third class arose from the freedom with which the smokers, always
largely in the majority, indulged in their favorite pastime. (I
perceive there is one advantage in being a smoker: you are never at a
loss for something to do,--you can smoke.)

At Chester I stopped overnight, selecting my hotel for its name, the
"Green Dragon." It was Sunday night, and the only street scene my
rambles afforded was quite a large gathering of persons on a corner,
listening, apparently with indifference or curiosity, to an ignorant,
hot-headed street preacher. "Now I am going to tell you something you
will not like to hear, something that will make you angry. I know it
will. It is this: I expect to go to heaven. I am perfectly confident I
shall go there. I know you do not like that." But why his hearers
should not like that did not appear. For my part, I thought, for the
good of all concerned, the sooner he went the better.

In the morning, I mounted the wall in front of the cathedral, and, with
a very lively feeling of wonder and astonishment, walked completely
around the town on top of it, a distance of about two miles. The wall,
being in places as high as the houses, afforded some interesting views
into attics, chambers, and back yards. I envied the citizens such a
delightful promenade ground, full of variety and interest. Just the
right distance, too, for a brisk turn to get up an appetite, or for a
leisurely stroll to tone down a dinner; while as a place for chance
meetings of happy lovers, or to get away from one's companions if the
flame must burn in secret and in silence, it is unsurpassed. I
occasionally met or passed other pedestrians, but noticed that it
required a brisk pace to lessen the distance between myself and an
attractive girlish figure a few hundred feet in advance of me. The
railroad cuts across one corner of the town, piercing the walls with
two very carefully constructed archways. Indeed, the people are very
choice of the wall, and one sees posted notices of the city authorities
offering a reward for any one detected in injuring it. It has stood now
some seven or eight centuries, and from appearances is good for one or
two more. There are several towers on the wall, from one of which some
English king, over two hundred years ago, witnessed the defeat of his
army on Rowton Moor. But when I was there, though the sun was shining,
the atmosphere was so loaded with smoke that I could not catch even a
glimpse of the moor where the battle took place. There is a gateway
through the wall on each of the four sides, and this slender and
beautiful but blackened and worn span, as if to afford a transit from
the chamber windows on one side of the street to those of the other, is
the first glimpse the traveler gets of the wall. The gates beneath the
arches have entirely disappeared. The ancient and carved oak fronts of
the buildings on the main street, and the inclosed sidewalk that ran
through the second stories of the shops and stores, were not less
strange and novel to me. The sidewalk was like a gentle upheaval in its
swervings and undulations, or like a walk through the woods, the oaken
posts and braces on the outside answering for the trees, and the
prospect ahead for the vista.

The ride along the coast of Wales was crowded with novelty and
interest,--the sea on one side and the mountains on the other,--the
latter bleak and heathery in the foreground, but cloud-capped and
snow-white in the distance. The afternoon was dark and lowering, and
just before entering Conway we had a very striking view. A turn in the
road suddenly brought us to where we looked through a black framework
of heathery hills, and beheld Snowdon and his chiefs apparently with
the full rigors of winter upon them. It was so satisfying that I lost
at once my desire to tramp up them. I barely had time to turn from the
mountains to get a view of Conway Castle, one of the largest and most
impressive ruins I saw. The train cuts close to the great round tower,
and plunges through the wall of gray, shelving stone into the bluff
beyond, giving the traveler only time to glance and marvel.

About the only glimpse I got of the Welsh character was on this route.
At one of the stations, Abergele I think, a fresh, blooming young woman
got into our compartment, occupied by myself and two commercial
travelers (bag-men, or, as we say, "drummers"), and, before she could
take her seat, was complimented by one of them on her good looks.
Feeling in a measure responsible for the honor and good-breeding of the
compartment, I could hardly conceal my embarrassment; but the young
Abergeless herself did not seem to take it amiss, and when presently
the jolly bag-man addressed his conversation to her, replied
beseemingly and good-naturedly. As she arose to leave the car at her
destination, a few stations beyond, he said "he thought it a pity that
such a sweet, pretty girl should leave us so soon," and seizing her
hand the audacious rascal actually solicited a kiss. I expected this
would be the one drop too much, and that we should have a scene, and
began to regard myself in the light of an avenger of an insulted Welsh
beauty, when my heroine paused, and I believe actually deliberated
whether or not to comply before two spectators! Certain it is that she
yielded the highwayman her hand, and, bidding him a gentle good-night
in Welsh, smilingly and blushingly left the car. "Ah," said the
villain, "these Welsh girls are capital; I know them like a book, and
have had many a lark with them."

At Holyhead I got another glimpse of the Welsh.  I had booked for
Dublin, and having several hours on my hands of a dark, threatening
night before the departure of the steamer, I sallied out in the old
town tilted up against the side of the hill, in the most adventurous
spirit I could summon, threading my way through the dark, deserted
streets, pausing for a moment in front of a small house with closed
doors and closely, shuttered windows, where I heard suppressed voices,
the monotonous scraping of a fiddle, and a lively shuffling of feet,
and passing on finally entered, drawn by the musical strains, a quaint
old place, where a blind harper, seated in the corner of a rude kind of
coffee and sitting room, was playing on a harp. I liked the atmosphere
of the place, so primitive and wholesome, and was quite willing to have
my attention drawn off from the increasing storm without, and from the
bitter cup which I knew the Irish sea was preparing for me. The harper
presently struck up a livelier strain, when two Welsh girls, who were
chatting before the grate, one of them as dumpy as a bag of meal and
the other slender and tall, stepped into the middle of the floor and
began to dance to the delicious music, a Welsh mechanic and myself
drinking our ale and looking on approvingly. After a while the
pleasant, modest-looking bar-maid, whom I had seen behind the
beer-levers as I entered, came in, and, after looking on for a moment,
was persuaded to lay down her sewing and join in the dance. Then there
came in a sandy-haired Welshman, who could speak and understand only
his native dialect, and finding his neighbors affiliating with an
Englishman, as he supposed, and trying to speak the hateful tongue,
proceeded to berate them sharply (for it appears the Welsh are still
jealous of the English); but when they explained to him that I was not
an Englishman, but an American, and had already twice stood the beer
all around (at an outlay of sixpence), he subsided into a sulky
silence, and regarded me intently.

About eleven o'clock a policeman paused at the door, and intimated that
it was time the house was shut up and the music stopped, and to outward
appearances his friendly warning was complied with; but the harp still
discoursed in a minor key, and a light tripping and shuffling of
responsive feet might occasionally have been heard for an hour later.
When I arose to go, it was with a feeling of regret that I could not
see more of this simple and social people, with whom I at once felt
that "touch of nature" which "makes the whole world kin," and my
leave-taking was warm and hearty accordingly.

Through the wind and the darkness I threaded my way to the wharf, and
in less than two hours afterward was a most penitent voyager, and
fitfully joining in that doleful gastriloquial chorus that so often
goes up from the cabins of those Channel steamers.

I hardly know why I went to Ireland, except it was to indulge the few
drops of Irish blood in my veins, and maybe also with a view to shorten
my sea voyage by a day. I also felt a desire to see one or two literary
men there, and in this sense my journey was eminently gratifying; but
so far from shortening my voyage by a day, it lengthened it by three
days, that being the time it took me to recover from the effects of it;
and as to the tie of blood, I think it must nearly all have run out,
for I felt but few congenital throbs while in Ireland.

The Englishman at home is a much more lovable animal than the
Englishman abroad, but Pat in Ireland is even more of a pig than in
this country. Indeed, the squalor and poverty, and cold, skinny
wretchedness one sees in Ireland, and (what freezes our sympathies) the
groveling, swiny shiftlessness that pervades these hovels, no traveler
can be prepared for. It is the bare prose of misery, the unheroic of
tragedy. There is not one redeeming or mitigating feature.

Railway traveling in Ireland is not so rapid or so cheap as in England.
Neither are the hotels so good or so clean, nor the fields so well
kept, nor the look of the country so thrifty and peaceful. The
dissatisfaction of the people is in the very air. Ireland looks sour
and sad. She looks old, too, as do all those countries beyond
seas,--old in a way that the American is a stranger to. It is not the
age of nature, the unshaken permanence of the hills through long
periods of time, but the weight of human years and human sorrows, as if
the earth sympathized with man and took on his attributes and
infirmities.

I did not go much about Dublin, and the most characteristic things I
saw there were those queer, uncomfortable dog-carts,--a sort of Irish
bull on wheels, with the driver on one side balancing the passenger on
the other, and the luggage occupying the seat of safety between. It
comes the nearest to riding on horseback, and on a side-saddle at that,
of any vehicle-traveling I ever did.

I stopped part of a day at Mallow, an old town on the Blackwater, in
one of the most fertile agricultural districts of Ireland. The
situation is fine, and an American naturally expects to see a charming
rural town, planted with trees and filled with clean, comfortable
homes; but he finds instead a wretched place, smitten with a plague of
filth and mud, and offering but one object upon which the eye can dwell
with pleasure, and that is the ruins of an old castle, "Mallow Castle
over Blackwater," which dates back to the time of Queen Elizabeth. It
stands amid noble trees on the banks of the river, and its walls, some
of them thirty or forty feet high, are completely overrun with ivy. The
Blackwater, a rapid, ambercolored stream, is spanned at this point by a
superb granite bridge.

And I will say here that anything like a rural town in our sense,--a
town with trees and grass and large spaces about the houses, gardens,
yards, shrubbery, coolness, fragrance,--seems unknown in England or
Ireland. The towns and villages are all remnants of feudal times, and
seem to have been built with an eye to safety and compactness, or else
men were more social, and loved to get closer together, then than now.
Perhaps the damp, chilly climate made them draw nearer together. At any
rate, the country towns are little cities; or rather it is as if
another London had been cut up in little and big pieces and distributed
over the land.

In the afternoon, to take the kinks out of my legs, and to quicken, if
possible, my circulation a little, which since the passage over the
Channel had felt as if it was thick and green, I walked rapidly to the
top of the Knockmeledown Mountains, getting a good view of Irish fields
and roads and fences as I went up, and a very wide and extensive view
of the country after I had reached the summit, and improving the
atmosphere of my physical tenement amazingly. These mountains have no
trees or bushes or other growth than a harsh prickly heather, about a
foot high, which begins exactly at the foot of the mountain. You are
walking on smooth, fine meadow land, when you leap a fence and there is
the heather. On the highest point of this mountain, and on the highest
point of all the mountains around, was a low stone mound, which I was
puzzled to know the meaning of. Standing there, the country rolled away
beneath me under a cold, gray November sky, and, as was the case with
the English landscape, looked singularly desolate,--the desolation of a
dearth of human homes, industrial centres, families, workers, and
owners of the soil. Few roads, scarce ever a vehicle, no barns, no
groups of bright, well-ordered buildings, indeed no farms and
neighborhoods and schoolhouses, but a wide spread of rich, highly
cultivated country, with here and there, visible to close scrutiny,
small gray stone houses with thatched roofs, the abodes of poverty and
wretchedness. A recent English writer says the first thing that struck
him in American landscape-painting was the absence of man and the
domestic animals from the pictures, and the preponderance of rude, wild
nature; and his first view of this country seems to have made the same
impression. But it is certainly true that the traveler through any of
our older States will see ten houses, rural habitations, to one in
England or Ireland, though, as a matter of course, nature here looks
much less domesticated, and much less expressive of human occupancy and
contact. The Old World people have clung to the soil closer and more
lovingly than we do. The ground has been more precious. They have had
none to waste, and have made the most of every inch of it. Wherever
they have touched they have taken root and thriven as best they could.
Then the American is more cosmopolitan and less domestic. He is not so
local in his feelings and attachments. He does not bestow himself upon
the earth or upon his home as his ancestors did. He feathers his nest
very little. Why should he? He may migrate tomorrow and build another.
He is like the passenger pigeon that lays its eggs and rears its young
upon a little platform of bare twigs. Our poverty and nakedness is in
this respect, I think, beyond dispute. There is nothing nest-like about
our homes, either in their interiors or exteriors. Even wealth and
taste and foreign aids rarely attain that cozy, mellowing atmosphere
that pervades not only the lowly birthplaces but the halls and manor
houses of older lands. And what do our farms represent but so much real
estate, so much cash value?

Only where man loves the soil, and nestles to it closely and long, will
it take on this beneficent and human look which foreign travelers miss
in our landscape; and only where homes are built with fondness and
emotion, and in obedience to the social, paternal, and domestic
instincts, will they hold the charm and radiate and be warm with the
feeling I have described.

And, while I am upon the subject, I will add that European cities
differ from ours in this same particular. They have a homelier
character,--more the air of dwelling-places, the abodes of men drawn
together for other purposes than traffic. People actually live in them,
and find life sweet and festal. But what does our greatest city, New
York, express besides commerce or politics, or what other reason has it
for its existence? This is, of course, in a measure the result of the
modern worldly and practical business spirit which more and more
animates all nations, and which led Carlyle to say of his own
countrymen that they were becoming daily more "flat, stupid, and
mammonish." Yet I am persuaded that in our case it is traceable also to
the leanness and depletion of our social and convivial instincts, and
to the fact that the material cares of life are more serious and
engrossing with us than with any other people.

I spent part of a day at Cork, wandering about the town, threading my
way through the back streets and alleys, and seeing life reduced to
fewer makeshifts than I had ever before dreamed of. I went through, or
rather skirted, a kind of secondhand market, where the most sorry and
dilapidated articles of clothing and household utensils were offered
for sale, and where the cobblers were cobbling up old shoes that would
hardly hold together. Then the wretched old women one sees, without any
sprinkling of young ones,--youth and age alike bloomless and unlovely.

In a meadow on the hills that encompass the city, I found the American
dandelion in bloom, and some large red clover, and started up some
skylarks as I might start up the field sparrows in our own uplying
fields.

Is the magpie a Celt and a Catholic?  I saw not one in England, but
plenty of them in France, and again when I reached Ireland.

At Queenstown I awaited the steamer from Liverpool, and about nine
o'clock in the morning was delighted to see her long black form moving
up the bay. She came to anchor about a mile or two out, and a little
tug was in readiness to take us off. A score or more of emigrants, each
with a bag and a box, had been waiting all the morning at the wharf.
When the time of embarkation arrived, the agent stepped aboard the tug
and called out their names one by one, when Bridget and Catherine and
Patrick and Michael, and the rest, came aboard, received their tickets,
and passed "forward," with a half-frightened, half-bewildered look. But
not much emotion was displayed until the boat began to move off, when
the tears fell freely, and they continued to fall faster and faster,
and the sobs to come thicker and thicker, until, as the faces of
friends began to fade on the wharf, both men and women burst out into a
loud, unrestrained bawl. This sudden demonstration of grief seemed to
frighten the children and smaller fry, who up to this time had been
very jovial; but now, suspecting something was wrong, they all broke
out in a most pitiful chorus, forming an anti-climax to the wail of
their parents that was quite amusing, and that seemed to have its
effect upon the "children of a larger growth," for they instantly
hushed their lamentations and turned their attention toward the great
steamer. There was a rugged but bewildered old granny among them, on
her way to join her daughter somewhere in the interior of New York, who
seemed to regard me with a kindred eye, and toward whom, I confess, I
felt some family affinity. Before we had got halfway to the vessel, the
dear old creature missed a sheet from her precious bundle of worldly
effects, and very confidentially told me that her suspicions pointed to
the stoker, a bristling, sooty "wild Irishman." The stoker resented the
insinuation, and I overheard him berating the old lady in Irish so
sharply and threateningly (I had no doubt of his guilt) that she was
quite frightened, and ready to retract the charge to hush the man up.
She seemed to think her troubles had just begun. If they behaved thus
to her on the little tug, what would they not do on board the great
black steamer itself? So when she got separated from her luggage in
getting aboard the vessel, her excitement was great, and I met her
following about the man whom she had accused of filching her bed linen,
as if he must have the clew to the lost bed itself. Her face brightened
when she saw me, and, giving me a terribly hard wink and a most
expressive nudge, she said she wished I would keep near her a little.
This I did, and soon had the pleasure of leaving her happy and
reassured beside her box and bundle.

The passage home, though a rough one, was cheerfully and patiently
borne. I found a compound motion,--the motion of a screw steamer, a
roll and a plunge--less trying to my head than the simple rocking or
pitching of the side-wheeled Scotia. One motion was in a measure a foil
to the other. My brain, acted upon by two forces, was compelled to take
the hypothenuse, and I think the concussion was considerably diminished
thereby. The vessel was forever trembling upon the verge of immense
watery chasms that opened now under her port bow, now under her
starboard, and that almost made one catch his breath as he looked into
them; yet the noble ship had a way of skirting them or striding across
them that was quite wonderful. Only five days was, I compelled to "hole
up" in my stateroom, hibernating, weathering the final rude shock of
the Atlantic. Part of this time I was capable of feeling a languid
interest in the oscillations of my coat suspended from a hook in the
door. Back and forth, back and forth, all day long, vibrated this black
pendulum, at long intervals touching the sides of the room, indicating
great lateral or diagonal motion of the ship. The great waves, I
observed, go in packs like wolves. Now one would pounce upon her, then
another, then another, in quick succession, making the ship strain
every nerve to shake them off. Then she would glide along quietly for
some minutes, and my coat would register but a few degrees in its
imaginary arc, when another band of the careering demons would cross
our path and harass us as before. Sometimes they would pound and thump
on the sides of the vessel like immense sledge-hammers, beginning away
up toward the bows and quickly running down her whole length, jarring,
raking, and venting their wrath in a very audible manner; or a wave
would rake along the side with a sharp, ringing, metallic sound, like a
huge spear-point seeking a vulnerable place; or some hard-backed
monster would rise up from the deep and grate and bump the whole length
of the keel, forcibly suggesting hidden rocks and consequent wreck and
ruin.

Then it seems there is always some biggest wave to be met somewhere on
the voyage,--a monster billow that engulfs disabled vessels, and
sometimes carries away parts of the rigging of the stanchest. This big
wave struck us the third day out about midnight, and nearly threw us
all out of our berths, and careened the ship over so far that it seemed
to take her last pound of strength to right herself up again. There was
a slamming of doors, a rush of crockery, and a screaming of women,
heard above the general din and confusion, while the steerage
passengers thought their last hour had come. The vessel before us
encountered this giant wave during a storm in mid-ocean, and was
completely buried beneath it; one of the officers was swept over board,
the engines suddenly stopped, and there was a terrible moment during
which it seemed uncertain whether the vessel would shake off the sea or
go to the bottom.

Besides observing the oscillations of my coat, I had at times a stupid
satisfaction in seeing my two new London trunks belabor each other
about my stateroom floor. Nearly every day they would break from their
fastenings under my berth and start on a wild race for the opposite
side of the room. Naturally enough, the little trunk would always get
the start of the big one, but the big one followed close, and sometimes
caught the little one in a very, uncomfortable manner. Once a knife and
fork and a breakfast plate slipped off the sofa and joined in, the
race; but, if not distanced, they got sadly the worst of it, especially
the plate. But the carpet had the most reason to complain. Two or three
turns sufficed to loosen it from the floor, when, shoved to one side,
the two trunks took turns in butting it. I used to allow this sport to
go on till it grew monotonous, when I would alternately shout and ring
until "Robert" appeared and restored order.

The condition of certain picture-frames and vases and other frail
articles among my effects, when I reached home, called to mind not very
pleasantly this trunken frolic.

It is impossible not to sympathize with the ship in her struggles with
the waves. You are lying there wedged into your berth, and she seems
indeed a thing of life and conscious power. She is built entirely of
iron, is 500 feet long, and, besides other freight, carries 2500 tons
of railroad iron, which lies down there flat in her bottom, a dead,
indigestible weight, so unlike a cargo in bulk; yet she is a quickened
spirit for all that. You feel every wave that strikes her; you feel the
sea bearing her down; she has run her nose into one of those huge
swells, and a solid blue wall of water tons in weight comes over her
bows and floods her forward deck; she braces herself, every rod and
rivet and timber seems to lend its support; you almost expect to see
the wooden walls of your room grow rigid with muscular contraction; she
trembles from stem to stern, she recovers, she breaks the gripe of her
antagonist, and, rising up, shakes the sea from her with a kind of
gleeful wrath; I hear the torrents of water rush along the lower decks,
and, finding a means of escape, pour back into the sea, glad to get
away on any terms, and I say, "Noble ship! you are indeed a god!"

I wanted to see a first-class storm at sea, and perhaps ought to be
satisfied with the heavy blow or hurricane we had when off Sable
Island, but I confess I was not, though, by the lying to of the vessel
and the frequent soundings, it was evident there was danger about. A
dense fog uprose, which did not drift like a land fog, but was as
immovable as iron; it was like a spell, a misty enchantment; and out of
this fog came the wind, a steady, booming blast, that smote the ship
over on her side and held her there, and howled in the rigging like a
chorus of fiends. The waves did not know which way to flee; they were
heaped up and then scattered in a twinkling. I thought of the terrible
line of one of our poets:--

       "The spasm of the sky and the shatter of the sea."

The sea looked wrinkled and old and oh, so pitiless!  I had stood long
before Turner's "Shipwreck" in the National Gallery in London, and this
sea recalled his, and I appreciated more than ever the artist's great
powers.

These storms, it appears, are rotary in their wild dance and promenade
up and down the seas. "Look the wind squarely in the teeth," said an
ex-sea-captain among the passengers, "and eight points to the right in
the northern hemisphere will be the centre of the storm, and eight
points to the left in the southern hemisphere." I remembered that, in
Victor Hugo's terrible dynamics, storms revolved in the other direction
in the northern hemisphere, or followed the hands of a watch, while
south of the equator they no doubt have ways equally original.

Late in the afternoon the storm abated, the fog was suddenly laid, and,
looking toward the setting sun, I saw him athwart the wildest, most
desolate scene in which it was ever my fortune to behold the face of
that god. The sea was terribly agitated, and the endless succession of
leaping, frothing waves between me and the glowing west formed a
picture I shall not soon forget.

I think the excuse that is often made in behalf of American literature,
namely, that our people are too busy with other things yet, and will
show the proper aptitude in this field, too, as soon as leisure is
afforded, is fully justified by events of daily occurrence. Throw a
number of them together without anything else to do, and they at once
communicate to each other the itch of authorship. Confine them on board
an ocean steamer, and by the third or fourth day a large number of them
will break out all over with a sort of literary rash that nothing will
assuage but some newspaper or journalistic enterprise which will give
the poems and essays and jokes with which they are surcharged a chance
to be seen and heard of men. I doubt if the like ever occurs among
travelers of any other nationality. Englishmen or Frenchmen or Germans
want something more warm and human, if less "refined;" but the average
American, when in company, likes nothing so well as an opportunity to
show the national trait of "smartness." There is not a bit of danger
that we shall ever relapse into barbarism while so much latent
literature lies at the bottom of our daily cares and avocations, and is
sure to come to the surface the moment the latter are suspended or
annulled!

While abreast of New England, and I don't know how many miles at sea,
as I turned in my deck promenade, I distinctly scented the land, a
subtle, delicious odor of farms and homesteads, warm and human, that
floated on the wild sea air, a promise and a token. The broad red line
that had been slowly creeping across our chart for so many weary days,
indicating the path of the ship, had now completely bridged the chasm,
and had got a good purchase down under the southern coast of New
England; and according to the reckoning we ought to have made Sandy
Hook that night; but though the position of the vessel was no doubt
theoretically all right, yet practically she proved to be much farther
out at sea, for all that afternoon and night she held steadily on her
course, and not till next morning did the coast of Long Island, like a
thin, broken cloud just defined on the horizon, come into view. But
before many hours we had passed the Hook, and were moving slowly up the
bay in the midday splendor of the powerful and dazzling light of the
New World sun. And how good things looked to me after even so brief an
absence!--the brilliancy, the roominess, the deep transparent blue of
the sky, the clear, sharp outlines, the metropolitan splendor of New
York, and especially of Broadway; and as I walked up that great
thoroughfare, and noted the familiar physiognomy and the native
nonchalance and independence, I experienced the delight that only the
returned traveler can feel,--the instant preference of one's own
country and countrymen over all the rest of the world.

INTRODUCTION                                          ix
       I. HUNTING THE SNOW                                 1
      II. THE TURKEY DRIVE                                15
     III. WHITE-FOOT                                      29
      IV. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO SEE THIS WINTER          39
       V. CHRISTMAS IN THE WOODS                          46
      VI. CHICKADEE                                       61
     VII. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO DO THIS WINTER           74
    VIII. THE MISSING TOOTH                               80
      IX. THE PECULIAR ’POSSUM                            94
       X. A FEBRUARY FRESHET                             105
      XI. A BREACH IN THE BANK                           112
     XII. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO HEAR THIS WINTER        123
    XIII. THE LAST DAY OF WINTER                         129
          NOTES AND SUGGESTIONS                          137




    ILLUSTRATIONS


    THE FOX SPARROWS’ BATH                         _Frontispiece_
    SKUNK TRACKS                                                3
    CAT TRACKS                                                  4
    TRACKS OF HARE JOINED BY DOGS                               6
    “IN A BURST OF SPEED ACROSS THE OPEN FIELD”                 7
    DOG TRACKS IN FOUR INCHES OF SNOW                           7
    TRACKS OF THE WHITE-FOOTED MOUSE                            9
    “A GRAY SQUIRREL WITH A RED SQUIRREL AT HIS HEELS”         11
    FOX TRACKS                                                 12
    MUSKRAT TRAIL                                              14
    “INTO THE AIR THEY WENT”                                   26
    WHITE-FOOT--“IN THE WINTER GALES”                          33
    “FIVE WEE MICE”                                            35
    WHITE-FOOT AND THE HICKORY-NUTS                            38
    A VIREO’S NEST IN WINTER                                   40
    “WIND-SWEEPINGS”                                           41
    ’POSSUM IN THE PERSIMMON TREE                              50
    WEASEL--“WATCHING ME FROM BETWEEN THE STICKS”              58
    “A CHICKADEE!”                                             62
    “DOING THE EXCAVATING THEMSELVES”                          69
    FOOD FOR THE NUTHATCHES                                    76
    THE MOURNING-CLOAK BUTTERFLY, AN EARLY FLITTER             77
    A RUFFED GROUSE TRAIL                                      78
    “THE SNOW HAD MELTED FROM THE RIVER MEADOWS”               80
    “CARRYING A BIG BOB-TAILED VOLE OUT OF MY ‘MOWING’”        85
    “SCURRYING THROUGH THE TOPS OF SOME PITCH PINES”           90
    “ALL THE AFTERNOON THE CROWS HAVE BEEN GOING OVER”         93
    THE DUCK-BILLED PLATYPUS, OR DUCK-BILL                     97
    THE ECHIDNA, OR PORCUPINE ANT-EATER                        98
    “STANDING BEFORE A LARGE ’POSSUM”                          99
    “OUT SHE SPILLED AND NINE LITTLE ’POSSUMS WITH HER”       100
    “A GREAT BLUE HERON WOULD BEAT PONDEROUSLY ACROSS”        106
    MEADOW MOUSE--“IN A DRIFTING CATBIRD’S NEST”              109
    “A LITTLE FIGURE IN YELLOW OIL-SKINS”                     114
    “DREW A LIMP LITTLE FORM OUT OF THE WATER”                121
    QUAIL--“ONE OF THE COVEY CALLING THE FLOCK TOGETHER”      127
    “A FLOCK OF ROBINS DASHING INTO THE CEDARS”               131
    PUSSY-WILLOWS AND WATERCRESS                              132
    “THE HAZELNUT BUSHES ARE IN BLOOM”                        133
    BLUEBIRD--“LIKE A BIT OF SUMMER SKY”                      135




INTRODUCTION


As in _The Fall of the Year_, so here in _Winter_, the second volume
of this series, I have tried by story and sketch and suggestion to
catch the spirit of the season. In this volume it is the large, free,
strong, fierce, wild soul of Winter which I would catch, the bitter
boreal might that, out of doors, drives all before it; that challenges
all that is wild and fierce and strong and free and large within us,
till the bounding red blood belts us like an equator, and the glow of
all the tropics blooms upon our faces and down into the inmost of our
beings.

Winter within us means vitality and purpose and throbbing life; and
without us in our fields and woods it means widened prospect, the
storm of battle, the holiness of peace, the poetry of silence and
darkness and emptiness and death. And I have tried throughout this
volume to show that Winter is only a symbol, that death is only an
appearance, that life is everywhere, and that everywhere life
dominates even while it lies buried under the winding-sheet of the
snow.

        “A simple child,
    That lightly draws its breath,
    What should it know of death?”

Why, this at least, that the winter world is not dead; that the cold
is powerless to destroy; that life flees and hides and sleeps, only
to waken again, forever stronger than death--fresher, fairer, sweeter
for its long winter rest.

But first of all, and always, I have tried here to be a naturalist and
nature-lover, pointing out the sounds and sights, the things to do,
the places to visit, the how and why, that the children may know the
wild life of winter, and through that knowledge come to love winter
for its own sake.

And they will love it. Winter seems to have been made especially for
children. They do not have rheumatism. Let the old people hurry off
down South, but turn the children loose in the snow. The sight of a
snowstorm affects a child as the smell of catnip affects a cat. He
wants to roll over and over and over in it. And he should roll in it;
the snow is his element as it is a polar bear cub’s.

I love the winter, and so do all children--its bare fields, empty
woods, flattened meadows, its ranging landscapes, its stirless
silences, its tumult of storms, its crystal nights with stars new cut
in the glittering sky, its challenge, defiance, and mighty wrath. I
love its wild life--its birds and animals; the shifts they make to
conquer death. And then, out of this winter watching, I love the
gentleness that comes, the sympathy, the understanding! One gets very
close to the heart of Nature through such understanding.

    DALLAS LORE SHARP.
    MULLEIN HILL, March, 1912.




WINTER




CHAPTER I

HUNTING THE SNOW


You want no gun, no club, no game-bag, no steel trap, no snare when
you go hunting the snow. Rubber boots or overshoes, a good, stout
stick to help you up the ridges, a pair of field-glasses and a keen
eye, are all you need for this hunt,--besides, of course, the snow and
the open country.

You have shoveled the first snow of the winter; you have been
snowballing in it; you have coasted on it; and gone sleigh-riding over
it; but unless you have gone hunting over it you have missed the
rarest, best sport that the first snowfall can bring you.

Of all the days to be out in the woods, the day that follows the first
snowfall is--the best? No, not the best. For there is the day in April
when you go after arbutus; and there is the day in June when the
turtles come out to lay in the sand; the muggy, cloudy day in August
when the perch are hungry for you in the creek; the hazy Indian
Summer day when the chestnuts are dropping for you in the pastures;
the keen, crisp February day when the ice spreads glassy-clear and
smooth for you over the mill-pond; the muddy, raw, half-thawed,
half-lighted, half-drowned March day when the pussy-willows are
breaking, and the first spring frogs are piping to you from the
meadow. Then there is--every day, every one of the three hundred and
sixty-five days, each of them best days to be out in the live world of
the fields and woods.

But _one_ of the very best days to be out in the woods is the day that
follows the first winter snowfall, for that is the day when you must
shoulder a good stout stick and go gunning. Gunning with a stick? Yes,
with a stick, and rubber boots, and bird-glasses. Along with this
outfit you might take a small jointed foot-rule with which to measure
your quarry, and a notebook to carry the game home in.

It ought to be the day after the first real snow, but not if that snow
happens to be a blizzard and lies deep in dry powdery drifts, for then
you could hardly follow a trail if you should find one. Do not try the
hunt, either, if the snow comes heavy and wet; for then the animals
will stay in their dens until the snow melts, knowing, as they do,
that the soft slushy stuff will soon disappear. The snow you need will
lie even and smooth, an inch or two deep, and will be just damp enough
to pack into tight snowballs.

If, however, the early snows are not ideal, then wait until over an
old crusted snow there falls a fresh layer about an inch deep. This
may prove even better hunting, for by this time in the winter the
animals and birds are quite used to snow-walking, and besides, their
stores of food are now running short, compelling them to venture forth
whether or not they wish to go.

It was early in December that our first hunting-snow came last year.
We were ready for it, waiting for it, and when the winter sun broke
over the ridge, we started the hunt at the hen-yard gate, where we saw
tracks in the thin, new snow that led us up the ridge, and along its
narrow back, to a hollow stump. Here the hunt began in earnest; for
not until that trail of close, double, nail-pointed prints went under
the stump were the four small boys convinced that we were tracking a
skunk and not a cat.

The creature had moved leisurely--that you could tell by the closeness
of the prints. Wide-apart tracks in the snow mean hurry. Now a cat,
going as slowly as this creature went, would have put down her dainty
feet almost in a single line, and would have left round,
cushion-marked holes in the snow, not triangular, nail-pointed prints
like these. Cats do not venture into holes under stumps, either.

We had bagged our first quarry! No, no! We had not pulled that wood
pussy out of his hole and put him into our game-bag. We did not want
to do that. We really carried no bag; and if we had, we should not
have put the wood pussy into it, for we were hunting tracks, not
animals, and “bagging our quarry” meant trailing a creature to its
den, or following its track till we had discovered something it had
done, or what its business was, and why it was out. We were on the
snow for animal _facts_, not pelts.

We were elated with our luck, for this stump was not five minutes by
the ridge path from the hen-yard. And here, standing on the stump, we
were only sixty minutes away from Boston Common by the automobile,
driving no faster than the law allows. So we were hunting, not in a
wilderness, but just outside our dooryard and almost within the
borders of a great city.

And that is the first interesting fact of our morning hunt. No one but
a lover of the woods and a careful walker on the snow would believe
that here in the midst of hayfields, in sight of the smoke of city
factories, so many of the original wild wood-folk still live and
travel their night paths undisturbed.

Still, this is a rather rough bit of country, broken, ledgy,
boulder-strewn, with swamps and woody hills that alternate with small
towns and cultivated fields for many miles around.

Here the animals are still at home, as this hole of the skunk’s under
the stump proved. But there was more proof. As we topped the ridge on
the trail of the skunk, we crossed another trail, made up of bunches
of four prints,--two long and broad, two small and roundish,--spaced
about a yard apart.

A hundred times, the winter before, we had tried that trail in the
hope of finding the form or the burrow of its maker; but it crossed
and turned and doubled, and always led us into a tangle, out of which
we never got a clue. It was the track of the great northern hare, as
we knew, and we were relieved to see the strong prints of our cunning
neighbor again; for, what with the foxes and the hunters, we were
afraid it might have fared ill with him. But here he was, with four
good legs under him; and, after bagging our skunk, we returned to pick
up the hare’s trail, to try our luck once more.

We followed his long, leisurely leaps down the ridge, out into our
mowing-field, and over to the birches below the house. Here he had
capered about in the snow, had stood up on his haunches and gnawed the
bark from off a green oak sucker two and a half feet from the ground.
This, doubtless, was pretty near his length, stretched out--an
interesting item; not exact to the inch, perhaps, but close enough for
us; for who would care to kill him in order to measure him with
scientific accuracy?

Nor was this all; for up the footpath through the birches came the
marks of two dogs. They joined the marks of the hare. And then, back
along the edge of the woods to the bushy ridge, we saw a pretty race.

It was all in our imaginations, all done for us by those long-flinging
footprints in the snow. But we saw it all--the white hare, the
yelling hounds, nip and tuck, in a burst of speed across the open
field which must have left a gap in the wind behind.

It had all come as a surprise. The hounds had climbed the hill on the
scent of a fox, and had started the hare unexpectedly. Off he had gone
with a jump. But just such a jump of fear is what a hare’s magnificent
legs were intended for.

Those legs carried him a clear twelve feet in some of the longest
leaps for the ridge; and they carried him to safety, so far as we
could read the snow. In the medley of hare-and-hound tracks on the
ridge there was no sign of a tragedy. He had escaped again--but how
and where we have still to learn.

We had bagged our hare,--yet we have him still to bag,--and taking up
the trail of one of the dogs, we continued our hunt. One of the joys
of this snow-hunting is having a definite road or trail blazed for you
by knowing, purposeful wild-animal feet.

You do not have to blunder ahead, breaking your way into this
wilderness world, trusting luck to bring you somewhere. The wild
animal or the dog goes this way, and not that, for a reason. You are
watching that reason all along; you are pack-fellow to the hound; you
hunt with him.

Here the hound had thrust his muzzle into a snow-capped pile of
slashings, had gone clear round the pile, then continued on his way.
But we stopped; for out of the pile, in a single, direct line, ran a
number of mouse prints, going and coming. A dozen white-footed mice
might have traveled that road since the day before, when the snow had
ceased falling.

We entered the tiny road, for in this kind of hunting a mouse is as
good as a mink, and found ourselves descending the woods toward the
garden patch below. Halfway down we came to a great red oak, into a
hole at the base of which, as into the portal of some mighty castle,
ran the road of the mice. That was the end of it. There was not a
single straying footprint beyond the tree.

I reached in as far as my arm would go, and drew out a fistful of
pop-corn cobs. So here was part of my scanty crop! I pushed in again,
and gathered up a bunch of chestnut shells, hickory-nuts and several
neatly rifled hazelnuts. This was story enough. There must be a family
of mice living under the slashing-pile, who for some good reason kept
their stores here in the recesses of this ancient red oak. Or was this
some squirrel’s barn being pilfered by the mice, as my barn is the
year round? It was not all plain. But this question, this constant
riddle of the woods, is part of our constant joy in the woods. Life
is always new, and always strange, and always fascinating.

It has all been studied and classified according to species. Any one
knowing the woods at all, would know that these were mouse tracks,
would even know that they were the tracks of the white-footed mouse,
and not the tracks of the jumping mouse, the house mouse, or the
meadow mouse. But what is the whole small story of these prints? What
purpose, what intention, what feeling, do they spell? What and why?--a
hundred times!

So it is not the bare tracks that we are hunting; it is the meaning of
the tracks--where they are going, and what they are going for. Burns
saw a little mouse run across the furrows as he was plowing and wrote
a poem about it. So could we write a poem if we like Burns would stop
to think what the running of these little mice across the snow might
mean. The woods and fields, summer and winter, are full of poems that
might be written if we only knew just all that the tiny snow-prints
of a wood mouse mean, or understood just what, “root and all, and all
in all,” the humblest flower is.

The pop-corn cobs, however, we did understand; they told a plain
story; and, falling in with a gray squirrel’s track not far from the
red oak, we went on, our burdenless game-bag heavier, our hearts
lighter that we, by the sweat of our brows, had contributed a few ears
of corn to the comfort of this snowy winter world.

The squirrel’s track wound up and down the hillside, wove in and out
and round and round, hitting every possible tree, as if the only road
for a squirrel was one that looped and doubled, and tied up every
stump, and zigzagged into every tree trunk in the woods.

But all this maze was no ordinary journey. He had not run this coil of
a road for breakfast, because a squirrel, when he travels, say for
distant nuts, goes as directly as you go to your school or office;
only he goes not by streets, but by trees, never crossing more of the
open in a single rush than the space between him and the nearest tree
that will take him on his way.

What interested us here in the woods was the fact that a second series
of tracks, just like the first, except that they were only about half
as large, dogged the larger tracks persistently, leaping tree for
tree, and landing track for track with astonishing accuracy--tracks
which, had they not been evidently those of a smaller squirrel, would
have read to us most menacingly.

As this was the mating season for squirrels, I suggested that it might
have been a kind of Atalanta’s race here in the woods. But why did so
little a squirrel want to mate with one so large? They would not look
well together, was the answer of the small boys. They thought it much
more likely that Father Squirrel had been playing wood-tag with one of
his children.

Then, suddenly, as sometimes happens in the woods, the true meaning of
the signs was fairly hurled at us, for down the hill, squealing and
panting, rushed a full-sized gray squirrel, with a red squirrel like a
shadow, like a weasel, at his heels.

For just an instant I thought it was a weasel, so swift and silent and
gliding were its movements, so set and cruel seemed its expression, so
sure, so inevitable, its victory.

Whether it ever caught the gray squirrel or not, and what it would
have done had it caught the big fellow, I do not know. But I have seen
the chase often--the gray squirrel nearly exhausted with fright and
fatigue, the red squirrel hard after him. They tore round and round
us, then up over the hill, and disappeared.

One of the rarest prints for most snow-hunters nowadays, but one of
the commonest hereabouts, is the quick, sharp track of the fox. In the
spring particularly, when my fancy young chickens are turned out to
pasture, I have spells of fearing that the fox will never be
exterminated here in this untillable but beautiful chicken country. In
the winter, however, when I see Reynard’s trail across my lawn, when I
hear the music of the baying hounds and catch a glimpse of the
white-tipped brush swinging serenely in advance of the coming pack, I
cannot but admire the capable, cunning rascal, cannot but be glad for
him, and marvel at him, so resourceful, so superior to his almost
impossible conditions, his almost numberless foes.

We started across the meadow on his trail, but found it leading so
straightaway for the ledges, and so continuously blotted out by the
passing of the pack, that, striking the wallowy path of a muskrat in
the middle of the meadow, we took up the new scent to see what the
shuffling, cowering water-rat wanted from across the snow.

A man is known by the company he keeps, by the way he wears his hat,
by the manner of his laugh; and among the wild animals nothing tells
more of character than their manner of moving. You can read animal
character as easily in the snow as you can read act and direction.

The timidity, the indecision, the lack of purpose, the restless,
meaningless curiosity of this muskrat were evident from the first in
the starting, stopping, returning, going-on track he had plowed out in
the thin snow.

He did not know where he was going or what he was going for; he knew
only that he insisted upon going back, but all the while kept going
on; that he wanted to go to the right or to the left, yet kept moving
straight ahead.

We came to a big wallow in the snow, where, in sudden fear, he had had
a fit at the thought of something that might not have happened to him
had he stayed at home. Every foot of the trail read, “He would if he
could; if he couldn’t, how could he?”

We followed him on, across a dozen other trails, for it is not every
winter night that the muskrat’s feet get the better of his head, and,
willy-nilly, take him abroad. Strange and fatal weakness! He goes and
cannot stop.

Along the stone wall of the meadow we tracked him, across the
highroad, over our garden, into the orchard, up the woody hill to the
yard, back down the hill to the orchard, out into the garden, and back
toward the orchard again; and here, on a knoll just at the edge of the
scanty, skeleton shadow where the sunlight fell through the trees, we
lost him.

Two mighty wings, we saw, had touched the snow lightly here, and the
lumbering trail had vanished as into the air.

Close and mysterious the shadowy silent wings hang poised indoors and
out. Laughter and tears are companions. Life begins, but death
sometimes ends the trail. Yet the sum of life, outdoors and in, is
peace, gladness, and fulfillment.




CHAPTER II

THE TURKEY DRIVE


The situation was serious enough for the two boys. It was not a large
fortune, but it was their whole fortune, that straggled along the
slushy road in the shape of five hundred weary, hungry turkeys, which
were looking for a roosting-place.

But there was no place where they could roost, no safe place, as the
boys well knew, for on each side of the old road stretched the forest
trees, a dangerous, and in the weakened condition of the turkeys, an
impossible roost on such a night as was coming.

For the warm south wind had again veered to the north; the slush was
beginning to grow crusty, and a fine sifting of snow was slanting
through the open trees. Although it was still early afternoon, the
gloom of the night had already settled over the forest, and the
turkeys, with empty crops, were peevishly searching the bare trees for
a roost.

It was a strange, slow procession that they made, here in the New
Brunswick forest--the flock of five hundred turkeys, toled forward by
a boy of eighteen, kept in line by a well-trained shepherd-dog that
raced up and down the straggling column, and urged on in the rear by
a boy of nineteen, who was followed, in his turn, by an old horse and
farm wagon, creeping along behind.

It was growing more difficult all the time to keep the turkeys moving.
But they must not be allowed to stop until darkness should put an end
to the march. And they must not be allowed to take to the trees at
all. Some of them, indeed, were too weak to roost high; but the flock
would never move forward again if exposed in the tall trees on such a
night as this promised to be.

The thing to do was to keep them stirring. Once allow them to halt,
give one of them time to pick out a roosting-limb for himself, and the
march would be over for that afternoon. The boys knew their flock.
This was not their first drive. They knew from experience that once a
turkey gets it into his small head to roost, he is bound to roost.
Nothing will stop him. And in this matter the flock acts as a single
bird.

In the last village, back along the road, through which they had
passed, this very flock took a notion suddenly to go to roost, and to
go to roost on a little chapel as the vesper bells were tolling. The
bells were tolling, the worshipers were gathering, when, with a loud
gobble, one of the turkeys in the flock sailed into the air and
alighted upon the ridge-pole beside the belfry! Instantly the flock
broke ranks, ran wildly round the little building, and with a clamor
that drowned the vesper bell, came down on the chapel in a feathered
congregation that covered every shingle of the roof. Only the humor
and quick wit of the kindly old priest prevented the superstitious of
his people from going into a panic. The service had to wait until the
birds made themselves comfortable for the night--belfry, roof,
window-sills, and porch steps thick with roosting turkeys!

The boys had come to have almost a fear of this mania for roosting,
for they never knew when it might break out or what strange turn it
might take. They knew now, as the snow and the gray dusk began to
thicken in the woods, that the flock must not go to roost. Even the
dog understood the signs,--the peevish _quint, quint, quint_, the
sudden bolting of some gobbler into the brush, the stretching necks,
the lagging steps,--and redoubled his efforts to keep the line from
halting.

For two days the flock had been without food. Almost a week’s supply
of grain, enough to carry them through to the border, had been loaded
into the wagon before starting in upon this wild, deserted road
through the Black Creek region; but the heavy, day-long snowstorm had
prevented their moving at all for one day, and had made travel so
nearly impossible since then that here they were, facing a blizzard,
with night upon them, five hundred starving turkeys straggling wearily
before them, and a two days’ drive yet to go!

The two brothers had got a short leave from college, and had started
their turkey drive in the more settled regions back from the New
Brunswick border. They had bought up the turkeys from farm to farm,
had herded them in one great flock as they drove them leisurely along,
and had moved all the while toward the state line, whence they planned
to send them through Maine for the New England market. Upon reaching
the railroad, they would rest and feed the birds, and ship them, in a
special freight-car ordered in advance, to a Boston commission house,
sell the horse and rig for what they could get, and, with their dog,
go directly back to college.

More money than they actually possessed had gone into the daring
venture. But the drive had been more than successful until the
beginning of the Black Creek road. The year before they had gone over
the same route, which they had chosen because it was sparsely settled
and because the prices were low. This year the farmers were expecting
them; the turkeys were plentiful; and the traveling had been good
until this early snow had caught them here in the backwoods and held
them; and now, with the sudden shift of the wind again to the north,
it threatened to delay them farther, past all chance of bringing a
single turkey through alive.

But George and Herbert Totman had not worked their way into their
junior year at college to sit down by the roadside while there was
light to travel by. They were not the kind to let their turkeys go to
roost before sundown. It was a slow and solemn procession that moved
through the woods, but it moved--toward a goal that they had set for
that day’s travel.

All day, at long intervals, as they had pushed along the deep forest
road, the muffled rumble of distant trains had come to them through
the silence; and now, although neither of them had mentioned it, they
were determined to get out somewhere near the tracks before the night
and the storm should settle down upon them. Their road, hardly more
here than a wide trail, must cross the railroad tracks, as they
remembered it, not more than two or three miles ahead.

Leaving more and more of the desolate forest behind them with every
step, they plodded doggedly on. But there was so much of the same
desolate forest still before them! Yet yonder, and not far away, was
the narrow path of the iron track through the interminable waste;
something human--the very sight of it enough to warm and cheer them.
They would camp to-night where they could see a train go by.

The leaden sky lowered closer upon them. The storm had not yet got
under full headway, but the fine icy flakes were flying faster,
slanting farther, and the wind was beginning to drone through the
trees.

Without a halt, the flock moved on through the thickening storm. But
the dog was having all that he could do to keep the stragglers in
order; and George, in the rear, saw that they must stir the flock, for
the birds were gradually falling back into a thick bunch before him.

Hurrying back to the wagon, he got two loaves of bread, and ran ahead
with them to Herbert. The famished turkeys seemed to know what he
carried, and broke into a run after him. For half a mile they kept up
the gait, as both boys, trotting along the road, dropped pieces of
bread on the snow.

Then the whole game had to be repeated; for the greater part of the
flock, falling hopelessly behind, soon forgot what they were running
after, and began to cry, “_Quint! quint! quint!_”--the roosting-cry!
So, starting again in the rear with the bread, George carried the last
of the flock forward for another good run.

“We should win this game,” Herbert panted, “if we only had loaves
enough to make a few more touch-downs.”

“There’s half an hour yet to play,” was George’s answer.

“But what on?”

“Oh, on our nerve now,” the older boy replied grimly.

“That railroad is not far ahead,” said Herbert.

“Half an hour ahead. We’ve got to camp by that track to-night or--”

“Or what?”

But George had turned to help the dog head off some runaways.

Herbert, picking up a lump of frozen leaves and snow, began to break
this in front of the flock to tole them on.

He had hardly started the birds again, when a long-legged gobbler
brushed past him and went swinging down the road, calling, “_Quint!
quint! quint!_” to the flock behind. The call was taken up and passed
along the now extended line, which, breaking immediately into
double-quick, went streaming after him.

Herbert got out of the way to let them pass, too astonished for a
moment to do more than watch them go. It was the roosting-cry! An old
gobbler had given it; but as it was taking him, for once, in the right
direction, Herbert ordered back the dog that had dashed forward to
head him off, and fell in with George to help on the stragglers in the
rear.

As the laggards were brought up to a slight rise in the road, the
flock was seen a hundred yards ahead, gathered in a dark mass about a
telegraph-pole! It could be nothing else, for through the whirling
snow the big cross-arms stood out, dim but unmistakable.

It was this that the gobbler had spied and started for, this sawed and
squared piece of timber, that had suggested a barnyard to him,--corn
and roost,--as to the boys it meant a human presence in the forest
and something like human companionship.

It was after four o’clock now, and the night was hard upon them. The
wind was strengthening every minute; the snow was coming finer and
swifter. The boys’ worst fears about the storm were beginning to be
realized.

But the sight of the railroad track heartened them. The strong-armed
poles, with their humming wires, reached out hands of hope to them;
and getting among the turkeys, they began to hurry them off the track
and down the steep embankment, which fortunately offered them here
some slight protection from the wind. But as fast as they pushed the
birds off, the one-minded things came back on the track. The whole
flock, meanwhile, was scattering up and down the iron rails and
settling calmly down upon them for the night.

They were going to roost upon the track! The railroad bank shelved
down to the woods on each side, and along its whitened peak lay the
two black rails like ridge-poles along the length of a long roof. In
the thick half-light of the whirling snow, the turkeys seemed suddenly
to find themselves at home: and as close together as they could crowd,
with their breasts all to the storm, they arranged themselves in two
long lines upon the steel rails.

And nothing could move them! As fast as one was tossed down the bank,
up he came. Starting down the lines, the boys pushed and shoved to
clear the track; but the lines re-formed behind them quickly, evenly,
and almost without a sound. As well try to sweep back the waves of the
sea! They worked together to collect a small band of the birds and
drive them into the edge of the woods; but every time the band
dwindled to a single turkey that dodged between their legs toward its
place on the roost. The two boys could have kept _two_ turkeys off the
rails, but not five hundred.

“The game is up, George,” said Herbert, as the sickening thought of a
passing train swept over him.

The words were hardly uttered when there came the _tankle, tankle_ of
the big cow-bell hanging from the collar of the horse, that was just
now coming up to the crossing!

George caught his breath and started over to stop the horse, when,
above the loud hum of the wires and the sound of the wind in the
forest trees, they heard through the storm the muffled whistle of a
locomotive.

“Quick! The horse, Herbert! Hitch him to a tree and come!” called
George, as he dived into the wagon and pulled out their lantern.
“Those birds could wreck the train!” he shouted, and hurried forward
along the track with his lighted lantern in his hand.

It was not the thought of the turkeys, but the thought of the people
on the flying Montreal express,--if that it was,--that sped him up
the track. In his imagination he saw the wreck of a ditched train
below him; the moans of a hundred mangled beings he heard sounding in
his ears!

On into the teeth of the blinding storm he raced, while he strained
his eyes for a glimpse of the coming train.

The track seemed to lie straightaway in front of him, and he bent his
head for a moment before the wind, when, out of the smother of the
snow, the flaring headlight leaped almost upon him.

He sprang aside, stumbled, and pitched headlong down the bank, as the
engine of a freight, with a roar that dazed him, swept past.

But the engineer had seen him, and there was a screaming of iron
brakes, a crashing of cars together, and a long-drawn shrieking of
wheels, as the heavy train slid along the slippery rails to a stop.

As the engineer swung down from his cab, he was met, to his great
astonishment, by a dozen turkeys clambering up the embankment toward
him. He had plowed his way well among the roosting flock and brushed
them unhurt from the rails as the engine skidded along to its slow
stop.

By this time the conductor and the train-hands had run forward to see
what it all meant, and stood looking at the strange obstruction on the
track, when Herbert came into the glare of the headlight and joined
them. Then George came panting up, and the boys tried to explain the
situation. But their explanation only made a case of sheer negligence
out of what at first had seemed a mystery to the trainmen. Both the
engineer and the conductor were anxious and surly. Their train was
already an hour late; there was a through express behind, and the
track must be cleared at once.

And they fell at once to clearing it--conductor, fireman, brakemen,
and the two boys. Those railroad men had never tried to clear a track
of roosting turkeys before. They cleared it,--a little of it,--but it
would not stay cleared, for the turkeys slipped through their hands,
squeezed between their legs, ducked about their heels, and got back
into place. Finally the conductor, putting two men in line on each
rail, ordered the engineer to follow slowly, close upon their heels,
with the train, as they scattered the birds before them.

The boys had not once thought of themselves. They had had no time to
think of anything but the danger and the delay that they had caused.
They helped with all their might to get the train through, and as they
worked, silently listened to the repeated threats of the conductor.

At last, with a muttered something, the conductor kicked one of the
turkeys into a fluttering heap beneath the engine, and, turning,
commanded his crew to stand aside and let the engineer finish the rest
of the flock.

The men got away from the track. Then, catching Herbert by the arm,
George pointed along the train, and bending, made a tossing motion
toward the top of the cars.

“Quick!” he whispered. “One on every car!” and stepping calmly back in
front of the engine, he went down the opposite side of the long train.

As he passed the tender, he seized a big gobbler, and sent him with a
wild throw up to the top of a low coal-car, just as Herbert, on his
side, sent another fluttering up to the same perch. Both birds landed
with a flap and a gobble that were heard by the other turkeys up and
down the length of the train.

Instantly came a chorus of answering gobbles as every turkey along the
track saw, in the failing light, that real, buildings--farmyard
buildings--were here to roost on! And into the air they went, helped
all along the train by the two boys, who were tossing them into the
cars, or upon the loads of lumber, as fast as they could pass from car
to car.

Luckily, the rails were sleety, and the mighty driving-wheels,
spinning on the ice with their long load, which seemed to freeze
continually to the track, made headway so slowly that the whole flock
had come to roost upon the cars before the train was fairly moving.

Conductor and brakeman, hurrying back to board the caboose, were
midway of the train before they noticed what was happening. _How_ it
was happening they did not see at all, so hidden were the movements of
the two boys in the swirl of the blinding snow.

For just an instant the conductor checked himself. But it was too late
to do anything. The train was moving, and he must keep it moving as
fast as he could to the freight-yards ahead at the junction--the very
yards where, even now, an empty car was waiting for the overdue
turkeys.

As he ran on down the track and swung aboard the caboose, two other
figures closed in behind the train. One of them, seizing the other by
the arm, landed him safe upon the steps, and then shouted at him
through the storm:--

“Certainly you shall! I’m safe enough! I’ll drive on to that old
sawmill to-night. Feed ’em in the morning and wait for me! Good-by,”
and as the wind carried his voice away, George Totman found himself
staring after a ghost-white car that had vanished in the storm.

He was alone; but the thought of the great flock speeding on to the
town ahead was company enough. Besides, he had too much to do, and to
do quickly, to think of himself; for the snow was blocking his road,
and the cold was getting at him. But how the wires overhead sang to
him! How the sounding forest sang to him as he went back to give the
horse a snatch of supper!

He was soon on the road, where the wind at his back and the tall trees
gave him protection. The four-wheeled wagon pulled hard through the
piling snow, but the horse had had an easy day, and George kept him
going until, toward eight o’clock, he drew up behind a lofty pile of
slabs and sawdust at the old mill.

A wilder storm never filled the resounding forests of the North. The
old mill was far from being proof against the fine, icy snow; but when
George rolled himself in his heavy blanket and lay down beside his
dog, it was to go to sleep to the comfortable munching of the horse,
and with the thought that Herbert and the turkeys were safe.

And they were safe. It was late in the afternoon the next day when
George, having left the wagon at the mill, came floundering behind the
horse through the unbroken road into the streets of the junction, to
find Herbert anxiously waiting for him, and the turkeys, with full
crops, trying hard to go to roost inside their double-decked car.




CHAPTER III

WHITE-FOOT


The December rain was falling down, down, down, as if the drops were
lead instead of water. The December sky, if you could call it sky, had
settled down, down, down, as if it too were of lead, and were being
propped up only by the tops of the stiff bare trees.

A green stick in the fireplace behind me sizzled and sputtered and
blew its small steam whistles to warn me away from the window,--from
the sight of the naked trees, and the cold, thick fog upon the meadow,
and the blur of the pine woods beyond, and the rain falling down,
down, down.

A dreary world out of doors surely, with not a sign of life! The pine
tree, rising up above the hillside in front of the window, was green,
but only a few lifeless leaves rattled among the middle branches of
the oaks, while up in the stark top of a hickory sapling was wedged a
robin’s nest, deserted and wet and going to pieces.

I shivered, in spite of the hearth-fire behind me, for the face of the
gray gloom pressed close up against the window outside. And the empty
robin’s nest, already a ruin! its mud walls broken, its tiny timbers
hanging loose in the rain!

But what a large nest for a robin, I thought; and how strangely peaked
and pointed it is, like a little haycock! Then all at once, inside of
me, and all over me, I felt a warm, delightful feeling.

“It isn’t possible,” said I aloud, but all to myself; “it isn’t
possible that little White-Foot has moved into that old robin’s nest
and fitted it up with a peaked roof for the winter?”

And the thought of it started the warm, delightful feeling again
inside of me and all over me; and snatching up the tongs by the
fireplace I ran out into the December rain and tapped a few times on
the slender hickory sapling.

And what do you think happened?

It stopped raining?

No.

You broke your tongs?

No.

The nest fell out and hit you on the head?

No.

You ran back into the house again out of the rain?

Yes, I did, and I went straight to the window and looked out again at
the robin’s nest,--my deserted, ruined robin’s nest, with its thick
thatch of waterproof cedar bark, with its little round door-hole in
the side, with its soft furry bed, all toasty warm, out of which with
my tapping tongs I had just roused White-Foot and brought him
sleepy-eyed to look down at me from his door.

The rain continued to fall down; but my spirits went up, and up, at
the thought of that little mouse all safe and warm for the winter in
Robin’s deserted nest.

And so, if “there are no birds in last year’s nest,” as mourns a
doleful poem, you need not be sad on that account, for if you look
closely, you may find, now and then, a mouse in last year’s nest--and
who will say that finding a mouse in a bird’s nest is not almost as
interesting as finding a bird there?

A robin’s nest in the winter-time would be the wettest, muddiest,
coldest place in the world for a robin; but a mouse can take that old
robin’s nest and turn it into a snuggery (if you know what a
“snuggery” is) so cozy and warm that neither the tip of Mr. Mouse’s
sharp nose, nor the tip of his thin ears, nor the tippy-tip of his
long bare tail ever feels one sharp nip of the cold outside.

So, if there are no birds in last year’s nest (as surely there ought
not to be), take your tongs and tap, or, better, climb up, and reach
gently into the nest with your finger, for a mouse may be waiting
inside to bite you,--and that would be interesting.

For a mouse is interesting--just as interesting in his mousy ways as a
whale in his whalish ways, or a robin in his ways. Can you name
anything that does not grow interesting as soon as you begin to watch
and study it? Large things, small things, Bengal tigers or
earthworms--all things will surprise and interest you if you will
study them for a season.

I have a friend, for instance, who has shot more tigers, in more
lands, than any other living man; who knows more about tiger habits
and the tempers of the dangerous beasts than any other man; and who,
as I am writing this, is himself writing a book which is to be called
“Tiger Lands.” That will be an exciting book, no doubt, for he has had
adventures that made my hair stand up on my head, just to hear about.
Yet I very much doubt if that book, with all its man-eaters, will be
any more interesting or any more valuable to us than Darwin’s book on
earthworms.

So am I going to sigh because there are no birds in last year’s nests?
Had the poem said, “there are no _mice_ in last year’s nests,” that
might have made me sad, perhaps; though I am sure that I could go into
the woods almost any winter day and find plenty of old _stumps_ with
mice in them. And I am equally sure that there will be plenty of birds
in next summer’s nests; so, until the robins come back and build new
nests, I am going to look out of the window these dark December days,
and think of White-Foot in Robin’s old nest, high up there in the
slender sapling, where no cat can climb to him, and where no crow
will dare come to tear his house to pieces.

[Illustration: “THERE HE WILL SWING IN THE WINTER GALES”]

There he will swing in the winter gales with the snow swirling around
and beneath him; there he will dream through the rain and the slanting
sleet when his high sapling stairway is coated with ice and impossible
for him to climb; there he will live, and whenever I thump with the
tongs at his outer gate, up there in the little round doorway will
appear his head--his eyes, I should say, for he looks all eyes up
there, so large, so black, so innocent, so inquiring are they, so near
to rolling off down the tip of his nose with sheer surprise.

I shall have many a cheering glimpse of White-Foot, many a comforting
thought of him, out there, his thatch snow-covered, his thick-walled
nest in the slender hickory riding the winter seas that sweep the
hilltop, as safe as the ships anchored yonder in the landlocked
harbor; and he will be much more comforting to me out there than here
in the house with me; for, strangely enough, while White-Foot never
seems to join the common mice in the barn, never a winter goes by
without one or more of his kind coming into the house for the cold
weather.

This would be very pleasant if they could keep out of the pop-corn and
the nuts and the apples and the linen-drawers. But only recently one
got into the linen in the china-closet, and _chewed together_ the
loveliest damask nest that any being ever slept in.

There was nothing for such conduct, then, of course, except to kill
her. But I did not kill her, though I take no credit to myself, for I
tried to kill her, as any one would have been tempted to do.

I got her out of that linen-drawer in a hurry and chased her from
cupboard to couch, to radiator and bookcase, and lost her. The next
day I resumed the chase, and upset most of the furniture before she
finally gave me the slip. The next day she appeared, and once more we
turned things upside down, and once more from some safe corner she
watched me put the chairs back on their legs and pick up the pieces of
things.

But the next morning, as I opened the grate of the kitchen stove to
light the fire, there in the ash-pan huddled that little mouse; and
under her in a bed of ashes, as if to reproach me forever, were five
wee mice, just born, blind and naked in the choking dust, babes that
should have been sleeping covered in a bed of downy damask in the
linen-drawer.

I said I did not kill her. No, I reached in slowly, lifted her and her
babes out softly in my hand, carried them into a safe, warm place and
left them, devoutly hoping that they might all grow up to help
themselves, if need be, to an ear of pop-corn, or even to a cozy
corner and a sip of honey in the beehives.

No, I don’t believe I hoped all of that, for White-Foot is exceedingly
fond of honey, and no roof in all the out-of-doors is so much to his
liking as a beehive, warm with the heat of the clustered swarm; and
nowhere can he make such a nuisance of himself as inside the hive.

A robin’s nest, a beehive, a linen-drawer, a woodpecker’s hole--almost
any place will do for the winter home, so thick and warm can the mice
build their walls, so many bins of acorns and grain do they lay up,
and so bold are they to forage when their winter stores run low.

I had a curious experience with a white-footed mouse in the cellar one
winter. The small boys had carried into the cellar (to hide them from
me, I imagine) about four quarts of chestnuts which they had gathered.
A little later, when they went to get their nuts, the box was empty.
Not a chestnut left!

“Have you eaten all our chestnuts, father?”

“No, I haven’t--not a nut,” I answered.

“Well, they are all gone!” was the wail.

And so they were, but how, and where, we did not know. House mice had
not eaten them, for no shells were left behind; there were no rats or
squirrels in the cellar that fall; and as for one of the small
boys--that was past thought. The fact is, more suspicion was attached
to me in the case than anything in my previous conduct called for;
and, though altogether guiltless, I continued to be uncomfortably
quizzed from time to time about those chestnuts, until I began to
wonder if I _had_ got up in my sleep and devoured the four quarts,
shells and all.

Then one day, while we were putting things shipshape in the vegetable
cellar, what did we come upon but a nice little pile of chestnuts
hidden away in a dark corner; then we discovered another pile, laid up
carefully, neatly, in a secret spot, where no human eye--except the
human house-cleaning eye, that misses nothing--would ever have seen
them, and where no big human hand would ever have put them.

I was allowed to go then and there scot-free; and a trap was set for
the wood mouse. It was White-Foot, we knew. But we never caught her.
And I am glad of it, for after we took away what chestnuts we could
find, she evidently felt it necessary to make a new hoard, and began
with a handful of old hickory-nuts, shagbarks, that had been left in
the vegetable cellar beside the box of chestnuts.

Now, however, she felt the insecurity of the inner cellar, or else she
had found a fine big bin out in the furnace cellar, for out there by
the furnace she took those nuts and tucked them compactly away into
the toe of one of my tall hunting-boots.

There were double doors and a brick partition wall between the two
cellars. No matter. Here were the nuts she had not yet stored; and out
yonder was the hole, smooth and deep and dark, to store them in. She
found a way past the partition wall.

Every morning I shook those nuts out of my boot and sent them rattling
over the cellar floor. Every night the mouse gathered them up and put
them snugly back into the toe of the boot. She could not have carried
more than one nut at a time--up the tall boot-leg and down the oily,
slippery inside.

I should have liked to see her scurrying about the cellar, looking
after her curiously difficult harvest. Apparently, they were new nuts
to her every evening. Once I came down to find them lying untouched.
The mouse, perhaps, was away over night on other business. But the
following morning they were all gathered and nicely packed in the boot
as before. And as before I sent them sixty ways among the barrels and
boxes of the furnace room.

But I did it once too often, for it dawned upon the mouse one night
that these were the same old nuts that she had gathered now a dozen
times. That night they disappeared. Where? I wondered.

Weeks passed, and I had entirely forgotten about the nuts, when I came
upon them, the identical nuts of my boot, tiered carefully up in a
corner of the deep, empty water-tank away off in the attic!




CHAPTER IV

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO SEE THIS WINTER


I

The first snowstorm! I would not miss seeing the first snowstorm, not
if I had to climb up to my high, tarry, smoky roof in the city and lie
down on my back, as I once did, in order to shut out everything but
the gray wavering flakes that came scattering from the sky. But how
marvelously white and airy they looked, too, coming down over the
blackened city of roofs, transfiguring it with their floating veil of
purity! You must see the first snowfall, and, if you want to, jump and
caper with the flakes, as I always do.


II

The sorrows of winter are its storms. They are its greatest glories
also. One should no more miss the sight of the winter storms than he
should miss the sight of the winter birds and stars, the winter suns
and moons! A storm in summer is only an incident; in winter it is an
event, a part of the main design. Nature gives herself over by the
month to the planning and bringing off of the winter storms--vast
arctic shows, the dreams of her wildest moods, the work of her
mightiest minions. Do not miss the soft feathery fall that plumes the
trees and that roofs the sheds with Carrara marble; the howling
blizzard with its fine cutting blast that whirls into smoking crests;
the ice-storm that comes as slow, soft rain to freeze as it falls,
turning all the world to crystal: these are some of the miracles of
winter that you must not fail to see.


III

You must see how close you had passed to and fro all summer to the
vireo’s nest, hanging from the fork on a branch of some low bush or
tree, so near to the path that it almost brushed your hat. Yet you
never saw it! Go on and make a study of the empty nests; see
particularly how many of them were built out along the roads or
paths, as if the builders wished to be near their human neighbors--as,
indeed, I believe they do. Study how the different birds
build--materials, shapes, finish, supports; for winter is the better
season in which to make such study, the summer being so crowded with
interests of its own.


IV

When the snow hardens, especially after a strong wind, go out to see
what you can find in the wind furrows of the snow--in the holes,
hollows, pockets, and in footprints in the snow. Nothing? Look again,
closely--that dust--wind-sweepings--seeds! Yes, seeds. Gather several
small boxes of them and when you return home take a small magnifying
glass and make them out--the sticktights, gray birches, yellow
birches, pines, ragweeds, milfoil--I cannot number them! It is a
lesson in the way the winds and the snows help to plant the earth.
Last winter I followed for some distance the deep frozen tracks of a
fox, picking out the various seeds that had drifted into every
footprint, just so far apart, as if planted in the snow by some modern
planting-machine. It was very interesting.


V

When the snow lies five or six inches deep, walk out along the
fence-rows, roadsides, and old fields to see the juncos, the sparrows,
and goldfinches feeding upon the seeds of the dead weeds standing
stiff and brown above the snow. Does the sight mean anything to you?
What does it mean?


VI

Burns has a fine poem beginning--

    “When biting Boreas, fell and doure,
    Sharp shivers thro’ the leafless bow’r,”

in which, he asks,--

    “Ilk happing bird--wee, helpless thing!--

           *       *       *       *       *

                    What comes o’ thee?
    Whare wilt thou cow’r thy chittering wing,
                    An’ close thy e’e?”

Did you ever ask yourself the question? Go forth, then, as the dusk
begins to fall one of these chill winter days and try to see “what
comes o’” the birds, where they sleep these winter nights. You will
find an account of my own watching in a chapter called “Birds’ Winter
Beds” in “Wild Life Near Home.”


VII

You will come back from your watching in the dusk with the feeling
that a winter night for the birds is unspeakably dreary, perilous, and
chill. You will close the door on the darkness outside with a shiver
as much from dread as from the cold.

    “List’ning the doors an’ winnocks rattle,”--

you will think of the partridge beneath the snow, the crow in his
swaying pine-top, the kinglet in the close-armed cedar, the wild duck
riding out the storm in his freezing water-hole, and you will be glad
for your four thick walls and downy blankets, and you will wonder how
any creature can live through the long, long night of cold and dark
and storm. But there is another view of this same picture; another
picture, rather, of this same stormy, bitter night which you must not
miss seeing. Go out to see how the animals sleep, what beds they have,
what covers to keep off the cold: the mice in the corn-shocks; the
muskrats in their thick mud homes; the red squirrels in their rocking,
wind-swung beds, so soft with cedar bark and so warm that never a
tooth of the cold can bite through!

    “I heard nae mair, for Chanticleer
      Shook off the pouthery snaw,
    And hail’d the morning with a cheer,
      A cottage-rousing craw.”


VIII

This winter I have had two letters asking me how best to study the
mosses and lichens, and I answered, “Begin now.” Winter, when the
leaves are off, the ground bare, the birds and flowers gone, and all
is reduced to singleness and simplicity--winter is the time to observe
the shapes, colors, varieties, and growth of the lichens. Not that
every lover of nature needs to know the long Latin names (and many of
these lesser plants have no other names), but that every lover of the
out-of-doors should notice them--the part they play in the color of
things, the place they hold in the scheme of things, their exquisite
shapes and strange habits.


IX

You should see the brook, “bordered with sparkling frost-work ... as
gay as with its fringe of summer flowers.” You should examine under a
microscope the wonderful crystal form of the snow-flakes--each flake
shaped by an infinitely accurate hand according to a pattern that
seems the perfection, the very poetry, of mechanical drawing.


X

What a world of gray days, waste lands, bare woods, and frozen waters
there is to see! And you should see them--gray and bare and waste and
frozen. But what is a frozen pond for if not to be skated on? and
waste white lands, but to go sleighing over? and cold gray days, but
so many opportunities to stay indoors with your good books?

See the winter bleak and cheerless as at times you will, and as at
times you ought; still if you will look twice, and think as you look,
you will see the fishermen on the ponds catching pickerel through the
ice--life swimming there under the frozen surface! You will see the
bare empty woodland fresh budded to the tip of each tiny twig--life
all over the trees thrust forward to catch the touch of spring! You
will see the wide flinty fields thick sown with seeds--life, more life
than the sun and the soil can feed, sleeping there under “the tender,
sculpturesque, immaculate, warming, fertilizing snow”!




CHAPTER V

CHRISTMAS IN THE WOODS

    “’Twas the night before Christmas, and all through the house
    Not a creature was stirring, not even a mouse.”


But on the night before this particular Christmas every creature of
the woods that could stir was up and stirring; for over the old snow
was falling swiftly, silently, a soft, fresh covering that might mean
a hungry Christmas unless the dinner were had before morning.

Yet, when the morning dawned, a cheery Christmas sun broke across the
great gum swamp, lighting the snowy boles and soft-piled limbs of the
giant trees with indescribable glory, and pouring, a golden flood,
into the deep, spongy bottom of the swamp below. It would be a perfect
Christmas in the woods, clear, mild, stirless, with silent footing for
me, and everywhere the telltale snow.

And everywhere in the woods would be the Christmas spirit, too. As I
paused among the pointed cedars of the pasture, looking down into the
tangle at the head of the swamp, a clear, wild whistle rang in the
thicket, followed by a flash through the alders like a tongue of fire,
as a cardinal grosbeak shot down to the tangle of greenbrier and
magnolia under the slope of the hill. The bird was a fleck of flaming
summer. As warm as summer, too, were the pointed cones of stag-horn
sumac burning on the crest of the ridge against the group of holly
trees--trees as fresh as April, and all aglow with red berries.

The woods were decorated for the Holy Day. The gentleness of the soft,
new snow touched everything; cheer and good-will lighted the unclouded
sky and warmed the thick depths of the evergreens, and blazed in the
crimson-berried bushes of the ilex and the alder. The Christmas woods
were glad. The heart of the woods was full of Christmas peace.

Now I did not imagine all of this as I went along. Perhaps there was
the spirit of Christmas in my heart, and so I found the spirit of
Christmas in the woods; but so it must have been with the household I
had just left, back on the city street. Every one had Christmas in his
heart, and so every one found Christmas in the Christmas-tree blazing
and glittering in its candle-flame blossoms and jeweled fruit.

So there was real Christmas joy and peace--a real Christmas
spirit--abroad in the woods this snowy Christmas morning. The sky had
it, the trees had it, the soft white slopes had it, the softly flowing
creek had it, flowing softly toward the bay.

But doubtless my own feelings had something to do with it all. This
was Christmas Day, and these were my home woods, the woods where I
tramped and trapped and “grew up” when a boy; and this was I, after
twenty years of absence, I, the boy again, back in the old familiar
pasture on my way to Lupton’s Pond!

Yes, I must say that I was almost afraid as I followed the old
cow-path across the pasture, now only a slightly sunken line in the
snow; I was afraid that the path might be gone. Twenty years are a
good many years for a cow-path to last. But evidently the cows had
been crossing every year since I had been away; and not a single new
crook had they worn in the old winding trail. Then I was afraid, as I
came to the fence where I could look down upon the pond, lest the pond
might have disappeared. But no, there it lay, sealed over, as if kept
for me by the snow! Then I looked fearfully over the pond, over the
steep ridge on the opposite shore to where there used to stand two
particular persimmon trees.

My heart beat wildly for a moment. The woods up the ridge had been cut
off! Things had changed! I was confused and looked this way and that,
when, so near to me that I could scarcely believe my eyes, I saw the
twin trees, their hard, angular limbs closely globed with fruit, and
standing softly out against the sky!

It was enough. Forgetting the twenty years, I hurried down across the
pond and up to the persimmon trees on the other side--up _into_ the
trees indeed, for I never stopped until I had climbed clear up into
the top among the ripe persimmons!

Do you know what a persimmon, picked from a particular tree along
Cohansey Creek on Christmas Day, tastes like? especially when you have
not had a taste of persimmon for twenty years? No, you do not--because
you are not twenty years old, perhaps, and because you were not a boy
along Cohansey Creek, perhaps, and because, if you were, you did not
know those two particular persimmon trees, maybe.

Nobody ever seemed to know the perfection of those persimmons, except
myself and the ’possums. Not one of the Luptons, who owned the
pasture, the pond, and the trees, had ever been a boy, so far as I
could remember, and certainly not one of them had ever tasted the
fruit of those two trees. There were other persimmon trees up and down
the township, others here along the pond; but these two were the only
trees to hold their fruit until Christmas, preserved with such
richness of flavor, such a gummy, candied, wild, woodsy quality, that
it could not decay. Those persimmons never decayed. They candied,
evaporated, wrinkled, fell, and vanished away.

Or else the ’possums ate them--those that I did not eat. A ’possum had
already been here this Christmas morning before me. I had noted his
fresh tracks beneath the tree when I came up; and now, in the tree, I
saw where the snow had been brushed from several of the large limbs as
the ’possum had moved about in the top, eating his Christmas dinner.

You never ate a Christmas dinner high up in the top of a persimmon
tree? But you will, perhaps, some day, as good a Christmas dinner, I
hope, as ours was. For such persimmons! Bob Cratchit’s goose (“There
never was such a goose!”) could not have been any better flavored. Nor
could the little Cratchits have been any hungrier for goose than I was
for persimmons.

Now the ’possum had been having persimmons every night since the
frosts of October; so of course he felt no such hunger for persimmons
as I felt. But ripe persimmons would be a Christmas dinner for a
’possum every day in the year. There is nothing so unspeakably good as
persimmons if you happen to be a ’possum, or if you happen to be a
boy--even after twenty years!

So the ’possum and I had our Christmas dinner together at Nature’s
invitation, in the top of the persimmon tree. The ’possum, to be
sure, had eaten and gone before I came. But that is good form in the
woods. He was expecting me, so he came early, just before dawn, that
neither of us might be embarrassed, leaving his greetings for me in
sign-language in the snow.

A Christmas dinner all alone would be cold cheer indeed. But I was not
alone. Here was good company and plenty of it. Did not the tracks talk
to me? With abundance of fruit still left in the tree, did I need to
see that ’possum fold up his napkin, pull down his vest, spread his
hands over his expansive person and groan in the fullness of his
feast? No; all of that was printed plainly in the snow. Why, I could
even hear his groans in his tumbled tracks at the foot of the tree,
where the fat old fellow had literally fallen over himself! What an
appetite! What a pudding of persimmons he must be! He can hardly walk
for fat! Look at his trail in the snow leading down toward the pond--a
big wide wallow where he has bounced along!

So I slide down the tree and take up the ’possum’s trail. We have
broken bread together, this ’possum and I, and now we will enter the
woods together in the same good-fellowship for the rest of the day.
Persimmons and good-will are very proper things to be filled with when
you go into the Christmas woods.

And there is no better fellowship for such a tramp than the trail of
some animal like the possum or the mink or the fox. To go in with one
of these through the woods-door is to find yourself at home. Any one
can manage to get inside the woods, as the grocery boy or the census
man manages to get inside our houses. You can bolt in at any time on
business. But a _trail_, remember, is Nature’s invitation. Go softly
in with possum, or rabbit, or coon, and at the threshold of the trees
you will be met by the Spirit of the Woods--you will be made a guest
in this secret, shadowy house of the out-of-doors.

But do not fail first to break bread with the ’possum. A persimmon, or
a handful of wintergreen berries, or a nip of sassafras root, or a
piece of spruce gum, or a lump of liquid amber--share anything, take
any small part in the life of these who live wild in the woods, and
they will meet you at the threshold and make you more than welcome.

I went in with the ’possum. He had traveled home leisurely and without
fear, as his tracks plainly showed. He was full of persimmons. A good
happy world this, where such fare could be had for the picking! What
need to hurry home? Unless, indeed, one were in danger of falling
asleep by the way! So I thought, too, as I followed his winding path;
and if I was tracking him to his den, it was only to wake him for a
moment with the compliments of the season. But when I finally found
him in his hollow gum, he was so sound asleep he barely knew that
some one was poking him gently in the ribs and wishing him a merry
Christmas.

The ’possum had led me far along the creek to the centre of the empty,
hollow swamp, where the great-boled gums lifted their branches like a
timbered, unshingled roof between me and the wide sky. Far away
through the spaces of the rafters I saw a pair of wheeling buzzards,
and under them, in lesser circles, a broad-winged hawk. Here, at the
feet of the tall, clean trees, looking up through the leafless limbs,
I had something of a measure for the flight of the great birds. And
what power, what majesty and mystery in those distant buoyant wings!

I have seen the turkey buzzard sailing the skies on the bitterest
winter days. To-day, however, could hardly be called winter. Indeed,
nothing yet had felt the pinch of the cold. There was no hunger yet in
the swamp, though this new snow had scared the raccoons out, and their
half-human tracks along the margin of the swamp stream showed that, if
not hungry, they at least feared that they might be.

For a coon hates snow. He invariably stays in during the first light
snowfalls, and even in the late winter he will not venture forth in
fresh snow unless driven by hunger or some other dire need. Perhaps,
like a cat or a hen, he dislikes the wetting of his feet. Or it may be
that the soft snow makes bad hunting--for him. The truth is, I
believe, that such a snow makes too good hunting for the dogs and the
gunner. The new snow tells too clear a story. For the coon’s home is
no dark den among the ledges; only a hollow in some ancient oak or
tupelo. Once within, he is safe from the dogs, but his long, fierce
fight for life taught him generations ago that the nest-tree is a
fatal trap when behind the dogs come the axe and the gun. So he has
grown wary and enduring. He waits until the snow grows crusty, when
without sign, and almost without scent, he can slip forth among the
long shadows and prowl to the edge of dawn.

Skirting the stream out toward the higher back woods, I chanced to spy
a bunch of snow in one of the great sour gums, that I thought was an
old nest. A second look showed me tiny green leaves, then white
berries, then mistletoe!

It was not a surprise, however, for I had found it here before--a
long, long time before. It was back in my schoolboy days that I first
stood here under the mistletoe and had my first romance. There was no
chandelier, no pretty girl, in that romance--only a boy, the
mistletoe, the giant trees, and the sombre silent swamp. But there was
more than that, there was the thrill of discovery, for until that day
the boy did not know that mistletoe grew outside of England, did not
know that it grew in his own native swamps! Rambling alone through the
swamps along the creek that day, he stopped under a big curious bunch
of green, high up in one of the gums, and--made his first discovery!

So this Christmas Day the boy climbed up again at the peril of his
precious neck, and brought down a bit of that old romance.

       *       *       *       *       *

I followed the stream along through the swamp to the open meadows, and
then on under the steep wooded hillside that ran up to the higher land
of corn and melon fields. Here at the foot of the slope the winter sun
lay warm, and here in the sheltered, briery border I came upon the
Christmas birds.

There was a great variety of them, feeding and preening and chirping
in the vines. The tangle was a-twitter with their quiet, cheery talk.
Such a medley of notes you could not hear at any other season outside
a city bird store. How far the different species understood one
another I should like to know, and whether the hum of voices meant
sociability to them, as it certainly did to me. Doubtless the first
cause of their flocking here was the sheltered warmth and the great
numbers of berry-laden bushes, for there was no lack of abundance or
of variety on this Christmas table.

In sight from where I stood hung bunches of withering chicken, or
frost, grapes, plump clusters of blue-black berries of the greenbrier,
and limbs of the smooth winterberry beaded with their flaming fruit.
There were bushes of crimson ilex, too, trees of fruiting dogwood and
holly, cedars in berry, dwarf sumac and seedy sedges, while patches on
the wood slopes uncovered by the sun were spread with trailing
partridge-berry and the coral-fruited wintergreen. I had eaten part of
my dinner with the ’possum; now I picked a quantity of these
wintergreen berries, and continued my meal with the birds. And they
too, like the ’possum, had enough, and to spare.

Among the birds in the tangle was a large flock of northern fox
sparrows, whose vigorous and continuous scratching in the bared spots
made a most lively and cheery commotion. Many of them were splashing
about in tiny pools of snow-water, melted partly by the sun and partly
by the warmth of their bodies as they bathed. One would hop to a
softening bit of snow at the base of a tussock, keel over and begin to
flop, soon sending up a shower of sparkling drops from his rather
chilly tub. A winter snow-water bath seemed a necessity, a luxury
indeed; for they all indulged, splashing with the same purpose and
zest that they put into their scratching among the leaves.

A much bigger splashing drew me quietly through the bushes to find a
marsh hawk giving himself a Christmas souse. The scratching, washing,
and talking of the birds; the masses of green in the cedars, holly,
and laurels; the glowing colors of the berries against the snow; the
blue of the sky, and the golden warmth of the light made Christmas in
the heart of the noon, that the very swamp seemed to feel.

Two months later there was to be scant picking here, for this was the
beginning of the severest winter I ever knew. From this very ridge, in
February, I had reports of berries gone, of birds starving, of whole
coveys of quail frozen dead in the snow; but neither the birds nor I
dreamed to-day of any such hunger and death. A flock of robins whirled
into the cedars above me; a pair of cardinals whistled back and forth;
tree sparrows, juncos, nuthatches, chickadees, and cedar-birds cheeped
among the trees and bushes; and from the farm lands at the top of the
slope rang the calls of meadowlarks.

Halfway up the hill I stopped under a blackjack oak, where, in the
thin snow, there were signs of something like a Christmas revel. The
ground was sprinkled with acorn-shells and trampled over with feet of
several kinds and sizes,--quail, jay, and partridge feet; rabbit,
squirrel, and mouse feet, all over the snow as the feast of acorns had
gone on. Hundreds of the acorns were lying about, gnawed away at the
cup end, where the shell was thinnest, many of them further broken and
cleaned out by the birds.

As I sat studying the signs in the snow, my eye caught a tiny trail
leading out from the others straight away toward a broken pile of
cord-wood. The tracks were planted one after the other, so directly in
line as to seem like the prints of a single foot. “That’s a weasel’s
trail,” I said, “the death’s-head at this feast,” and followed it
slowly to the pile of wood. A shiver crept over me as I felt, even
sooner than I saw, a pair of small, sinister eyes fixed upon mine. The
evil pointed head, heavy but alert, and with a suggestion of fierce
strength out of all proportion to the slender body, was watching me
from between the sticks of cord-wood. And just so had it been watching
the mice and the rabbits and the birds feasting under the tree!

I packed a ball of snow round and hard, slipped forward upon my knees
and hurled it. _Spat!_ it struck the end of a stick within an inch of
the ugly head, nearly filling the crevice with snow. Instantly the
head appeared at another crack, and another ball struck viciously
beside it. Now it was back where it first appeared, nor did it flinch
for the next ball, or the next. The third went true, striking with a
_chug_ and packing the crack. But the black, hating eyes were still
watching me a foot lower down.

It is not all peace and good-will in the Christmas woods. But happily
the weasels are few. More friendly and timid eyes were watching me
than bold and murderous. It was foolish to want to kill--even the
weasel, for one’s woods are what one makes them. And so I let the man
with the gun, who just then chanced along, think that I had turned boy
again, and was snowballing the woodpile just for the fun of trying to
hit the end of the biggest stick.

I was glad he had come. The sight of him took all hatred out of me. As
he strode off with his stained bag I felt kindlier toward the
weasel--there were worse in the woods than he. He must kill to live,
and if he gloated over the kill, why, what fault of his? But the
other, the one with the blood-stained game-bag, he killed for the love
of killing. I was glad he had gone.

The crows were winging over toward their great roost in the pines when
I turned toward the town. They, too, had had good picking along the
creek flats and the ditches of the meadows. Their powerful wing-beats
and constant play up in the air told of full crops and no fear for the
night, already softly gray across the silent fields.

The air was crisper; the snow began to crackle under foot; the twigs
creaked and rattled as I brushed along; a brown beech leaf wavered
down and skated with a thin scratch over the crust; and pure as the
snow-wrapped crystal world, and sweet as the soft gray twilight, came
the call of a quail.

These were not the voices, colors, odors, and forms of summer. The
very face of things had changed; all had been reduced, made plain,
simple, single, pure! There was less for the senses, but how much
keener now their joy! The wide landscape, the frosty air, the tinkle
of tiny icicles, and, out of the quiet of the falling twilight, the
voice of the quail!

There is no day but is beautiful in the woods; and none more beautiful
than one like this Christmas Day--warm, and still, and wrapped to the
round red berries of the holly in the magic of the snow.




CHAPTER VI

CHICKADEE


I was crunching along through the January dusk toward home. The cold
was bitter. A half-starved partridge had just risen from the road and
fluttered off among the naked bushes--a bit of life vanishing into the
winter night of the woods. I knew the very hemlock in which he would
roost; but what were the thick, snow-bent boughs of his hemlock, and
what were all his winter feathers in such a night as this?--this night
of cutting winds and frozen snow!

The road dipped from the woods down into a wide, open meadow, where
the winds were free. The cold was driving, numbing here, with a power
for death that the thermometer could not mark. I backed against the
gale and sidewise hastened forward toward the double line of elms that
arched the road in front of the house. Already I could hear them creak
and rattle like things of glass. It was not the sound of life. Nothing
was alive; for what could live in this long darkness and fearful cold?

The question was hardly thought, when an answer was whirled past me
into the nearest of the naked elms. A chickadee! He caught for an
instant on a dead stub of a limb that stuck out over the road,
scrambled along to its broken tip, and whisked into a hole that ran
straight down the centre of the old stub, down, for I don’t know how
far.

I stopped. The limb lay out upon the wind, with only an eddy of the
gale sucking at the little round hole in the broken end, while
somewhere far down in its hollow heart, huddling himself into a downy,
dozy ball for the night, had crept the chickadee. I knew by the very
way he struck the limb and by the way he turned in at the hole that he
had been there before. He knew whither, across the sweeping meadows,
he was being blown. He had even helped the winds as they whirled him,
for, having tarried along the roads until late, he was in a great
hurry to get home. But he was safe for the night now, in the very bed,
it may be, where he was hatched last summer, and where at this moment,
who knows, were crowded half a dozen other chickadees, the rest of
that last summer’s brood, unharmed still, and still sharing the old
home hollow, where they were as snug and warm this fierce, wild night
as ever they were in the soft May days when they nestled here
together.

The cold drove me on; but the sight of the chickadee had warmed me,
and all my shivering world of night and death. And so he ever does.
For the winter has yet to be that drives him seeking shelter to the
sunny south. I never knew it colder than in January and February of
1904. During both of those months I drove morning and evening through
a long mile of empty, snow-buried woods. For days at a time I would
not see even a crow, but morning and evening at a certain dip in the
road two chickadees would fly from bush to bush across the hollow and
cheer me on my way.

They came out to the road, really to pick up whatever scanty crumbs of
food were to be found in my wake. They came also to hear me, and to
see me go past--to escape for a moment, I think, from the silence, the
desertion, and the death of the woods. They helped me to escape, too.

Four other chickadees, all winter long, ate with us at the house,
sharing, so far as the double windows would allow, the cheer of our
dining-room. We served them their meals on the lilac bush outside the
window, tying their suet on so that they could see us and we could see
them during meal-time. Perhaps it was mere suet, and nothing else at
all, that they got; but constantly, when our “pie was opened, the
birds began to sing”--a dainty dish indeed, a dish of live, happy
chickadees that fed our souls.

There are states in the far Northwest where the porcupine is protected
by law, as a last food resource for men who are lost and starving in
the forests. Porcupine is so slow that a dying man can catch him and
make a meal on him. Perhaps the porcupine was not designed by nature
for any such purpose, and would not approve of it at all. Perhaps
Chickadee was not left behind by Summer to feed my lost and starving
hope through the cheerless months of winter. But that is the use I
make of him. He is Summer’s pledge to me. He tells me that this winter
world is a living world and not a dreary world of death. The woods are
hollow, the winds are chill, the earth is cold and stiff, but there
flits Chickadee, and--I cannot lose faith, nor feel that this
procession of bleak white days is all a funeral! If Chickadee can
live, then so can I.

He is the only bird in my out-of-doors that I can find without fail
three hundred and sixty-five days in the year. From December to the
end of March he comes daily to my lilac bush for suet; from April to
early July he is busy with domestic cares in the gray birches down the
hillside; from August to December he and his family come hunting
quietly and sociably as a little flock among the trees and bushes of
the farm; and from then on he is back again for his winter meals at
“The Lilac.”

Is it any wonder that he was the first bird I ever felt personally
acquainted with? That early acquaintance, however, was not brought
about by his great abundance, nor by his very bad, bold manners, as
might be with the English sparrow. I got acquainted with him first,
because he wanted to get acquainted with me, he is such a cheerful,
confiding, sociable little bird! He drops down and peeps under your
hat-brim to see what manner of boy you are, and if you are really fit
to be abroad in this beautiful world, so altogether good both summer
and winter--for chickadees.

He is not quite so sociable in summer as in winter, but if you were no
bigger than a chickadee (two and one half inches without your tail!)
and had eight babies nearly as big as yourself to hunt grubs for,
besides a wife to pet and feed, do you think you could be very
sociable? In the winter, however, he is always at liberty to stop and
talk to you, a sweet little way he has that makes him the easiest bird
in the world to get acquainted with.

Last winter while I was tying up a piece of suet that had fallen into
the snow, a hungry and impatient chickadee lighted on the brim of my
felt hat. The brim bent under him, and he came fluttering down against
my nose, which I thought for an instant he was going to take for suet!
He didn’t snip it off, however, as a certain blackbird did a certain
maiden’s nose, but lighted instead on my shoulder. Then, seeing the
lump of suet in my hand, he flew up and perched upon my fingers and
held on, picking at the suet all the time I was tying it fast in the
bush.

He is a friendly little soul, who loves your neighborhood, as, indeed,
most birds do; who has no fear of you, because he cannot think that
you could fear him and so would want to hurt him.

Nature made him an insect-eater; but he has a mission to perform
besides eating pestiferous insects, and their eggs and grubs. This
destruction of insects he does that the balance of things may be
maintained out of doors, lest the insects destroy us. He has quite
another work to do, which is not a matter of grubs, and which in no
wise is a matter of fine feathers or sweet voice, but simply a matter
of sweet nature, vigor, and concentrated cheerfulness.

Chickadee is a sermon. I hear him on a joyous May morning calling
_Chick-a-dee! dee! Chick-a-dee! dee!_--brisk, bright, and cheery; or,
soft and gentle as a caress, he whistles, _Phœ-ee-bee!
Phœ-ee-bee!_ I meet him again on the edge of a bleak winter night.
He is hungry and cold, and he calls, as I hasten along, _Chick-a-dee!
dee! Chick-a-dee! dee!_ brisk, bright, and cheery; or, following after
me, he talks to me with words as soft and gentle as a caress.

Will you lend me your wings, Chickadee, your invisible wings on which
you ride the winds of life so evenly?

The abundant summer, the lean and wolfish winter, find Chickadee
cheerful and gentle. He is busier at some seasons than at others, with
fewer chances for friendship. He almost disappears in the early
summer. But this is because of family cares; and because the bigger,
louder birds have come back, and the big leaves have come out and
hidden him. A little searching, and you will discover him, in one of
your old decayed fence-posts, maybe, or else deep in the swamp,
foraging for a family of from six to eight, that fairly bulge and boil
over from the door of their home.

Here about Mullein Hill, this is sure to be a gray-birch home. Other
trees will do--on a pinch. I have found Chickadee nesting in live
white oaks, maples, upturned roots, and tumbling fence-posts. These
were shifts, only, mere houses, not real homes. The only good homelike
trees are old gray birches, dead these many years and gone to
punk--mere shells of tough circular bark walls. Halfway down the hill
is a small grove of these birches that we call the Seminary (because,
as a poet friend says, “they look like seminary girls in white
frocks”). Here the chickadees love to build.

Why has Chickadee this very decided preference? Is it a case of
protective coloration--the little gray and black bird choosing to nest
in this little gray and black tree because bird and tree so exactly
match one another in size and color? Or is there a strain of poetry
in Chickadee’s soul, something fine, that leads him into this
exquisite harmony--into this little gray house for his little gray
self?

Explain it as you may, it is a fact that the little bird shows this
marked preference, makes this deliberate choice; and in the choice is
protection and poetry, too. Doubtless he follows the guidance of a
sure and watchful instinct. But who shall deny to him a share of the
higher, finer things of the imagination?

His life is like his home--gentle and sweet and idyllic. There is no
happier spot in the summer woods than that about the birch of the
chickadees; and none whose happiness you will be so little liable to
disturb.

Before the woods were in leaf last spring I found a pair of chickadees
building in a birch along the edge of the swamp. They had just begun,
having dug out only an inch of the cavity. It was very interesting to
discover them doing the excavating themselves, for usually they refit
some abandoned chamber or adapt to their needs some ready-made hole.

The birch was a long, limbless cylinder of bark, broken off about
fourteen feet up, and utterly rotten, the mere skin of a tree stuffed
with dust. I could push my finger into it at any point. It was so weak
that every time the birds lighted upon the top the whole stub wobbled
and reeled. Surely they were building their house upon the sand! Any
creature without wings would have known that. The birds, however,
because they have wings, seem to have lost the sense of such
insecurity, often placing their nests as if they expected the nests
themselves to take wings and fly to safety when the rains descend and
the winds come.

This shaking stub of the chickadees was standing directly beneath a
great overshadowing pine, where, if no partridge bumped into it, if
two squirrels did not scamper up it together, if the crows nesting
overhead in the pine did not discover it, if no strong wind bore down
upon it from the meadow side, it might totter out the nesting-season.
But it didn’t. The birds were leaving too much to luck. I knew it, and
perhaps I should have pushed their card house down, then and there,
and saved the greater ruin later. Perhaps so, but who was I to
interfere in their labor?

Both birds were at the work when I discovered them, and so busily at
it that my coming up did not delay them for a single billful. It was
not hard digging, but it was very slow, for Chickadee is neither
carpenter nor mason. He has difficulty killing a hard-backed beetle.
So, whenever you find him occupying a clean-walled cavity, with a
neat, freshly chipped doorway, you may be sure that some woodpecker
built the house, and not this short-billed, soft-tailed little tit.
Chickadee lacks both the bill chisel and the tail brace. Perhaps the
explanation of his fondness for birch trees lies here--because the
birch trees die young and soon decay!

The birds were going down through the broken-off top, and not by a
hole through the leathery rind of the sides, for the bark was too
tough for their beaks. They would drop into the top of the stub, pick
up a wad of decayed wood and fly off to a dead limb of the pine. Here,
with a jerk and a snap of their bills, they would scatter the punk in
a shower so thin and far that I could neither hear it fall nor find a
trace of it upon the dead leaves of the ground. This nest would never
be betrayed by the workmen’s chips, as are the woodpeckers’
nest-holes.

Between the pair there averaged three beakfuls of excavating every two
minutes, one of the birds regularly shoveling twice to the other’s
once. They looked so exactly alike that I could not tell which bird
was pushing the enterprise; but I had my suspicions. It was Mrs.
Chickadee!

Mr. Chickadee was doing only part of his duty, and only
half-heartedly at that! Hers was the real interest, the real anxiety.
To be a Mr. Chickadee and show off! That’s the thing!

I sat a long time watching the work. It went on in perfect silence,
not a chirp, not the sound of a fluttering wing. The swamp along whose
margin the birds were building had not a joyous atmosphere. Damp,
dim-shadowed, and secret, it seemed to have laid its spell upon the
birds. Their very color of gray and black was as if mixed out of the
dusky colors of the swamp; their noiseless coming and going was like
the slipping to and fro of small shadows. They were a part of the
swamp--of its life, of its color, of its silence. They were children
of the swamp, sharing its very spirit, and that sharing was their
defense, the best protection that they could have had.

It didn’t save their nest, however. They felt and obeyed the spirit of
the Swamp in their own conduct, but the Swamp did not tell them where
to build. Birds and animals have wonderful instinct, or family wisdom,
but not much personal, individual wisdom.

It was about three weeks later when I stopped again under the pine and
found the birch stub in pieces upon the ground. Some strong wind had
come, or some robber had been after the eggs, and had brought the
whole house tumbling down.

But this is not the fate of all such birch-bark houses. Now and again
they escape; yet when they do it is always a matter for wonder.

I was following an old disused wood-road once when I frightened a
robin from her nest. Her mate joined her, and together they raised a
great hubbub. Immediately a chewink, a pair of vireos, and two black
and white warblers joined the robins in their din. Then a chickadee
appeared. He had a worm in his beak. His anxiety seemed so real that I
began to watch him, when, looking down among the stones for a place to
step, what should I see but his mate emerging from the end of a tiny
birch stump at my very feet! She had heard the racket and had come out
to see what it was all about. At sight of her, Mr. Chickadee hastened
with his worm, brushing my face, almost, as he darted to her side. She
took the worm sweetly, for she knew he had intended it for her. But
how do I know it was intended for her, and not for the young? There
were no young in the nest; only eggs. Even after the young came (there
were eight of them!), when life, from daylight to dark, was one
ceaseless, hurried hunt for worms, I saw him over and over again fly
to Mrs. Chickadee’s side caressingly and tempt her to eat.

The house of this pair did not fall. How could it when it stood
precisely two and a half feet from the ground? But that it wasn’t
looted is due to the amazing boldness of its situation. It stood
alone, close to the road, so close that the hub of a low wheel in
passing might have knocked it down. Perhaps a hundred persons had
brushed it in going by. How many dogs and cats had overlooked it no
one can say; nor how many skunks and snakes and squirrels. The
accident that discovered it to me had happened apparently to no one
else, so here it stood still safe, but only by the grace of Luck!

Cutting a tiny window in the bark just above the eggs, I looked in
upon the little children every day. I watched them hatch, grow, and
fill the cavity and hang over at the top. I was there the day they
forced my window open; I was there the day when there was no more room
at the top, and when, at the call of their parents, one child after
another of this large, sweet bird family found his wings and flew away
through the friendly woods.




CHAPTER VII

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO DO THIS WINTER


I

You should go skating--crawling, I ought to say--over a pond of glare
ice this winter. Take the pond you are most familiar with. Go early on
a bright day, before any skater arrives, and lying flat upon the
clear, “black” ice, study the bottom of the pond and the fish that
swim below you. They have boats with glass bottoms along the
California coast, through which to watch the marvelous bottoms off
shore. But an Eastern pond covered with glare ice is as good, for such
ice is a plate-glass window into a wonder world.


II

Fight your way one of these winter days to the crest of some high hill
and stand up against a northwest gale. Feel the sweep of the winds
from across the plain beneath you; hear them speaking close in your
ear, as they fly past; catch them and breathe them, until they run red
in your leaping veins. Master them, and make them, mighty as they are,
your own. And something large and free, strong and sound will pass
into you; and you will love the great world more, and you will feel
how fit a place, for the strong of heart, is this earth to live on.


III

Keep a careful list of the winter birds you see; and visit every
variety of wood, meadow, and upland in your neighborhood--not
neglecting the parks and city trees--for a sight of the rarer winter
visitors, such as the snowy owl, the snow buntings, and the
crossbills.


IV

If you know little about the birds, then this is the time to begin
your study. When they are so few and scarce? Yes, just because they
are few and scarce. On a June morning (unless you are at home in the
woods) you will be confused by the medley of songs you hear, and the
shapes flitting everywhere about you; and you may be tempted to give
up your study for the very multitude. Get a pair of good field or
opera glasses and a good bird book, such as Hoffmann’s, “Guide to the
Birds,” and go into the fields and woods--leaving the book at home.
The first bird you see follow up until you can remember (1) his size,
color--whether he has a white bar on wings, or small spots or large
clear spots on breast; (2) his chirp, or call; (3) something peculiar
about his flight--a flirt of the tail, a habit of flying down to the
ground in getting away. Then come back to your book and identify him
_from memory_. If you cannot, then go out again and again; and it will
not be long before either this first one, or others, will be
accurately made out--the beginning of an acquaintance that you can
extend in the summer, but which will be plenty large enough for your
“coming-out” winter into bird society. For here is a list of the birds
you may be able to find during the winter:--

Screech owl, crow, robin, flicker, jay, goldfinch, tree sparrow,
English sparrow, song sparrow, junco, golden-crowned kinglet,
nuthatch, brown creeper, downy woodpecker, quail, partridge.


V

See to it that no bird in your neighborhood starves for lack of food
that you can supply. Tie a piece of suet to a tree or bush near the
house (by the window if you can) for the chickadees and blue jays;
keep a place on the lawn cleared of snow and well supplied with crumbs
and small seeds for the juncos and the sparrows; hang a netted bag of
cracked nuts out somewhere for the nuthatches; and provide corn and
nuts for the squirrels.


VI

Go out on a cold December day, or a January day, and see how many
“signs” of spring--“Minor Prophets,” as Mr. Torrey calls them--you can
bring home. They will be mostly buds of various sorts. Then, on a
warm, soft day, go again to see what you can bring home--flitting,
creeping, crawling things that the warm sun has brought from their
winter hiding.


VII

Make a map of your sky, showing the positions of the planets, the
constellations, and the most brilliant stars, the points in the
horizon for the rising and setting of the sun, say, in January, noting
the changes in places of things since your last map drawn in October.
Any school child can do it, and, in doing it, learn the few large
facts about the sky that most people are pitifully ignorant of.


VIII

Go out after a fresh light snow and take up the trail of a fox or a
rabbit or a partridge, as you might take up a problem in arithmetic,
or as a detective might take up a clew, and “solve” it--where the
creature came from, where going, what for, in a hurry or not, pursued
or pursuing, etc. It will give you one of the best of lessons in
observation, in following a clew, and in learning to take a hint.


IX

Go out to study the face of the ground--the ridges, hollows, level
places, the ledges, meadows, sandbanks, the course of the streams, the
location of the springs--the general shape and contour, the pitch and
slant and make-up of the region over which you tramp in the summer.
Now, when the leaves are off and things swept bare, you can get a
general idea of the lay of the land that will greatly aid you in your
more detailed study of plants and birds, of individual things, in the
summer. It is like an outline map in your geography.


X

Winter is the time to do much good reading. A tramp over real fields
is to be preferred to a tramp in a book. But a good book is pretty
nearly as good as anything under the stars. You need both fields and
books. And during these cold days--impossible days, some of them, for
work afield--you will read, read. Oh, the good things to read that
have been written about the out-of-doors!




CHAPTER VIII

THE MISSING TOOTH


The snow had melted from the river meadows, leaving them flattened,
faded, and stained with mud--a dull, dreary waste in the gray
February. I had stopped beside a tiny bundle of bones that lay in the
matted grass a dozen feet from a ditch. Here, still showing, was the
narrow path along which the bones had dragged themselves; there the
hole by which they had left the burrow in the bank of the ditch. They
had crawled out in this old runway, then turned off a little into the
heavy autumn grass and laid them down. The rains had come and the
winter snows. The spring was breaking now and the small bundle, gently
loosened and uncovered, was whitening on the wide, bare meadow.

Shall I stop beside this small bundle of whitening bones or shall I
turn my head away and pass on? Shall I allow you to stop with me in
our winter ramble and let you see the tragedy here in the flattened
meadow grass, or shall I hide from your eyes the dark, the bitter, the
tragic in the lives of the wild things out of doors?

I think it is best to hide nothing from you. Real love for nature is
largely sympathy with nature; and there can be no sympathy without
intimate and full understanding of the struggle and suffering in the
lives out of doors. There is a dark story in this little bundle of
bones. Do you wish to hear it? There is a fierce, cruel threat in the
growl of the winter wind. Do you wish to hear that? There is menace
and death in the shrill scream of the hawk. Do you wish to hear that?
Or do you wish to hear only the song of the robin? only the whisper of
the summer breeze? only the story of the life and love and joy of
things?

No, there are two sides to life--two sides to your life, the bright
and dark sides; two sides to the lives of all men, and to the lives of
all things. Summer is the bright side of Nature’s life; winter is the
dark side. Summer and winter are both needed to round out the life of
the year; so tears and laughter seem to be needed in our lives; joy
and sorrow, peace and suffering, rest and hardship--these, or
something like them, seem to be needed in the lesser lives of birds
and beasts to round out their experience and make them keen and
strong.

Happily, the pain and suffering in nature are largely hidden from us.
Wild things when stricken “turn their faces to the wall,” retreat,
slink silently away out of sight to be alone. They do not wish us to
know. But we do know, and we need to know, if we would enter into
their lives as a sharer in them; and if we would enter into and
understand the larger, wider, deeper life of which they, and we, and
all things, are a part.

You must pause with me above this little bundle of bones until I tell
you their story.

       *       *       *       *       *

I had recognized the bones at once as the skeleton of a muskrat. But
it was something peculiar in the way they lay that had caused me to
pause. They seemed outstretched, as if composed by gentle hands, the
hands of sleep. They had not been flung down. The delicate ribs had
fallen in, but not a bone was broken nor displaced, not one showed the
splinter of shot, or the crack that might have been made by a steel
trap. No violence had been done them. They had been touched by nothing
rougher than the snow. Out into the hidden runway they had crept.
Death had passed by them here; but no one else in all the winter
months.

The creature had died--a “natural” death. It had starved, while a
hundred acres of plenty lay round about. Picking up the skull, I
found the jaws locked together as if they were a single solid bone.
One of the two incisor teeth of the upper jaw was missing, and
apparently had never developed. The opposite tooth on the lower jaw,
thus unopposed and so unworn, had grown beyond its normal height up
into the empty socket above, then on, turning outward and piercing the
cheek-bone in front of the eye, whence, curving like a boar’s tusk, it
had slowly closed the jaws and locked them, rigid, set, as fixed as
jaws of stone.

At first the animal had been able to gnaw; but as the tooth curved
through the bones of the face and gradually tightened the jaws, the
creature got less and less to eat, until, one day, creeping out of the
burrow for food, the poor thing was unable to get back.

We seldom come upon the like of this. It is commoner than we think;
but, as I have said, it is usually hidden away and quickly over. How
often do we see a wild thing sick--a bird or animal suffering from an
accident, or dying, like this muskrat, because of some physical
defect? The struggle between animals--the falling of the weak as prey
to the strong--is ever before us; but this single-handed fight between
the creature and Nature is a far rarer, silenter tragedy. Nature is
too swift to allow us time for sympathy.

At best there is only a fighting chance in the meadow. Only strength
and craft may win; only those who have all of their teeth. The muskrat
with a single missing tooth never enters the real race of life at all.
He slinks from some abandoned burrow, and, if the owl and mink are not
watching, he dies alone in the grass, and we rarely know.

I shall never forget the impression made upon me by those quiet bones.
It was like that made by my first visit to a great city hospital--out
of the busy, cheerful street into a surgical ward, where the sick and
injured lay in long white lines. We tramp the woods and meadows and
never step from the sweet air and the pure sunlight of health into a
hospital. But that is not because no sick, ill-formed, or injured are
there. The proportion is smaller than among us humans, and for very
good reasons, yet there is much real suffering, and to come upon it,
as we will, now and then, must certainly quicken our understanding and
deepen our sympathy with the life out of doors.

No sensible person could for a moment believe the animals capable of
suffering as a human being can suffer; nor that there is any such call
for our sympathy from them as from our human neighbors. But an
unselfish sharing of the life of the fields demands that we take part
in all of it.

Nature wears a brave face. Her smile is ever in the open, her laughter
quick and contagious. This brave front is no mask. It is real.
Sunlight, song, color, form, and fragrance are real. And so is our
love and joy in Nature real. Real, also, should be our sympathy and
sorrow with Nature.

Here, for instance, are my crows: do I share fully in the life of
Nature so long as I think of the crow only with admiration for his
cunning or with wrath at his destruction of my melons and corn?

A crow has his solemn moments. He knows fear, pain, hunger, accident,
and disease; he knows something very like affection and love. For all
that, he is a mere crow. But a mere crow is no mean thing. He is my
brother, and a real love will give me part in all his existence. I
will forage and fight with him; I will parley and play; and when the
keen north winds find him in the frozen pines, I will suffer with him,
too.

Here again are my meadow voles. I know that my hay crop is shorter
every year for them,--a very little shorter. And I can look with
satisfaction at a cat carrying a big bob-tailed vole out of my
“mowing,” for the voles, along with other mice, are injurious to man.

But one day I came upon two of my voles struggling for life in the
water, exhausted and well-nigh dead. I helped them out, as I should
have helped out any other creature, and having saved them, why, what
could I do but let them go--even into my own meadow? This has happened
several times.

When the drought dries the meadow, the voles come to the deep,
plank-walled spring at the upper end, to drink. The water usually
trickles over the curb, but in a long dry spell it shrinks to a foot
or more below the edge, and the voles, once within for their drink,
cannot get out. Time and again I had fished them up, until I thought
to leave a board slanting down to the water, so that they could climb
back to the top.

It is wholesome to be the good Samaritan to a meadow mouse, to pour
out, even waste, a little of the oil and wine of sympathy on the
humblest of our needy neighbors.

Here are the chimney swallows, too. One can look with complacency,
with gratitude, indeed, upon the swallows of other chimneys, as they
hawk in the sky; yet, when the little creatures, so useful, but so
uncombed and unfumigated, set up their establishments in _your_
chimney, to the jeopardy of the whole house, then you need an
experience like mine.

I had had a like experience years before, when the house did not
belong to me. This time, however, the house was mine, and if it became
infested with vermin because of the swallows, I could not move away;
so I felt like burning them in the chimney, bag and baggage. There
were four nests, as nearly as I could make out, and, from the
frequent squeakings, I knew they were all filled with young. Then one
day, when the young were nearly ready to fly, there came a rain that
ran wet far down the sooty chimney, loosened the mortar of the nests,
and sent them crashing into the fireplace.

Some of the young birds were killed outright; the others were at my
mercy, flung upon me,--helpless, wailing infants! Of course I made it
comfortable for them on the back-log, and let their mothers flutter
down unhindered to feed them. Had I understood the trick, I would have
hawked for them and helped feed them myself!

They made a great thunder in the chimney; they rattled down into the
living-room a little soot; but nothing further came of it. We were not
quarantined. On the contrary, we had our reward, according to promise;
for it was an extremely interesting event to us all. It dispelled some
silly qualms, it gave us intimate part in a strange small life, so
foreign, yet so closely linked to our own; and it made us pause with
wonder that even our empty, sooty chimney could be made use of by
Nature to our great benefit.

I wonder if the nests of the chimney swallows came tumbling down when
the birds used to build in caves and hollow trees? It is a most
extraordinary change, this change from the trees to the chimneys, and
it does not seem to have been accompanied by an increase of
architectural wisdom necessary to meet all the conditions of the new
hollow. The mortar or glue, which, I imagine, held firmly in the empty
trees, will not mix with the chimney soot, so that the nest,
especially when crowded with young, is easily loosened by the rain,
and sometimes even broken away by the slight wing stroke of a
descending swallow, or by the added weight of a parent bird as it
settles with food.

We little realize how frequent fear is among the birds and animals,
and how often it proves fatal. A situation that would have caused no
trouble ordinarily, becomes through sudden fright a tangle or a trap.
I have known many a quail to bolt into a fast express train and fall
dead. Last winter I left the large door of the barn open, so that my
flock of juncos could feed inside upon the floor. They found their way
into the hayloft and went up and down freely. On two or three
occasions I happened in so suddenly that they were thoroughly
frightened and flew madly into the cupola to escape through the
windows. They beat against the glass until utterly dazed, and would
have perished there, had I not climbed up later and brought them down.
So thousands of the migrating birds perish yearly by flying wildly
against the dazzling lanterns of the lighthouses, and thousands more
either lose their course in the thick darkness of the stormy nights,
or else are blown out of it, and drift far away to sea.

Hasty, careless, miscalculated movements are not as frequent among the
careful wild folk as among us, perhaps; but there is abundant evidence
of their occasional occurrence and of their sometimes fatal results.

Several instances are recorded of birds that have been tangled in the
threads of their nests; and one instance of a bluebird that was caught
in the flying meshes of an oriole’s nest into which it had been
spying.

I once found the mummied body of a chippy twisting and swinging in the
leafless branches of a peach tree. The little creature was suspended
in a web of horsehair about two inches below a nest. It looked as if
she had brought a snarled bunch of the hair and left it loose in the
twigs. Later on, a careless step and her foot was fast, when every
frantic effort for freedom only tangled her the worse. In the nest
above were four other tiny mummies--a double tragedy that might with
care have been averted.

A similar fate befell a song sparrow that I discovered hanging dead
upon a barbed-wire fence. By some chance it had slipped a foot through
an open place between the two twisted strands, and then, fluttering
along, had wedged the leg and broken it in the struggle to escape.

We have all held our breath at the hazardous traveling of the
squirrels in the treetops. What other animals take such
risks?--leaping at dizzy heights from bending limbs to catch the tips
of limbs still smaller, saving themselves again and again by the
merest chance.

But luck sometimes fails. My brother, a careful watcher in the woods,
on one occasion when he was hunting, saw a gray squirrel miss its
footing in a tree and fall, breaking its neck upon a log beneath.

I have frequently known squirrels to fall short distances, and once I
saw a red squirrel come to grief like this gray squirrel. He was
scurrying through the tops of some lofty pitch pines, a little hurried
and flustered at sight of me, and, nearing the end of a high branch,
was in the act of springing, when the dead tip cracked under him and
he came tumbling headlong. The height must have been forty feet, so
that before he reached the ground he had righted himself,--his tail
out and legs spread,--but the fall was too great. He hit the earth
heavily, and before I could reach him he lay dead upon the needles,
with blood oozing from his eyes and nostrils.

Unhoused and often unsheltered, the wild things suffer as we hardly
yet understand. No one can estimate how many of our wild creatures die
in a year from severe cold, heavy storms, high winds and tides. I
have known the nests of a whole colony of gulls and terns to be swept
away in a great storm; while the tides, over and over, have flooded
the inlet marshes and drowned out the nests in the grass--those of the
clapper rails by thousands.

I remember a late spring storm that came with the returning redstarts
and, in my neighborhood, killed many of them. Toward evening of that
day one of the little black-and-orange voyageurs fluttered against the
window and we let him in, wet, chilled, and so exhausted that for a
moment he lay on his back in my open palm. Soon after there was
another soft tapping at the window,--and _two_ little redstarts were
sharing our cheer and drying their butterfly wings in our warmth. Both
of these birds would have perished had we not harbored them for the
night.

The birds and animals are not as weather-wise as we; they cannot
foretell as far ahead nor provide as certainly against need, despite
the popular notion to the contrary.

We point to the migrating birds, to the muskrat houses, to the hoards
of the squirrels, and say, “How wise and far-sighted these
Nature-taught children are!” True, they are, but only for conditions
that are normal. Their wisdom does not cover the unusual. The gray
squirrels did not provide for the unusually hard weather of last
winter. Three of them from the woodlot came begging of me, and lived
on my wisdom, not their own.

Consider the ravens, that neither sow nor reap, that have neither
storehouse nor barn, yet they are fed--but not always. Indeed, there
are few of our winter birds that go hungry so often as do the cousins
of the ravens, the crows, and that die in so great numbers for lack of
food and shelter.

After severe and protracted cold, with a snow-covered ground, a
crow-roost looks like a battlefield, so thick lie the dead and
wounded. Morning after morning the flock goes over to forage in the
frozen fields, and night after night returns hungrier, weaker, and
less able to resist the cold. Now, as the darkness falls, a bitter
wind breaks loose and sweeps down upon the pines.

    “List’ning the doors an’ winnocks rattle,
    I thought me on the ourie cattle,”--

and how often I have thought me of the crows biding the night yonder
in the moaning pines! So often, as a boy, and with so real an awe,
have I watched them returning at night, that the crows will never
cease flying through my wintry sky,--an endless line of wavering black
figures, weary, retreating figures, beating over in the early dusk.

And to-night another wild storm sweeps across the winter fields. All
the afternoon the crows have been going over, and are still passing as
the darkness settles at five o’clock. Now it is nearly eight, and the
long night is but just begun. The storm is increasing. The wind
shrieks about the house, whirling the fine snow in hissing eddies past
the corners and driving it on into long, curling crests across the
fields. I can hear the roar as the wind strikes the shoal of pines
where the fields roll into the woods--a vast surf sound, but softer
and higher, with a wail like the wail of some vast heart in pain.

I can see the tall trees rock and sway with their burden of dark
forms. As close together as they can crowd on the bending limbs cling
the crows, their breasts turned all to the storm. With crops empty and
bodies weak, they rise and fall in the cutting, ice-filled wind for
thirteen hours of night.

Is it a wonder that the life fires burn low? that sometimes the small
flames flicker and go out?




CHAPTER IX

THE PECULIAR ’POSSUM


If you are a New Englander, or a Northwesterner, then, probably, you
have never pulled a ’possum out of his hollow stump or from under some
old rail-pile, as I have done, many a time, down in southern New
Jersey. And so, probably, you have never made the acquaintance of the
most peculiar creature in our American woods.

Even roast ’possum is peculiar. Up to the time you taste roast ’possum
you quite agree with Charles Lamb that roast pig is peculiarly the
most delicious delicacy “in the whole _modus edibilis_,” in other
words, bill of fare. But once you eat roast ’possum, you will go all
over Lamb’s tasty “Dissertation upon Roast Pig,” marking out “pig”
with your pencil and writing in “’possum,” making the essay read
thus:--

“There is no flavor comparable, I will contend, to that of the crisp,
tawny, well-watched, not over-roasted, _’possum_, as it is
called,--the very teeth are invited to their share of the pleasure at
this banquet in overcoming the coy, brittle resistance,--with the
adhesive oleaginous--O call it not fat! but an indefinable sweetness
growing up to it--the tender blossoming of fat--fat cropped in the
bud--taken in the shoot--in the first innocence--” For no matter how
old your roast ’possum, he is as tender as the tenderest roast pig.
And that, of course, is peculiar.

But live ’possum is more peculiar than roast ’possum. It is peculiar,
for instance, that almost all of the ’possum’s relations, except his
immediate family, dwell apart in Australia,--in Australasia, for
marsupials are found also in Tasmania, New Guinea, and the
Moluccas--which islands the marsupials seem to have had given them for
their own when the world was made. There, at least, most of them live
and have lived for ages, except the ’possums. These latter, strangely
enough, live in South and North America, and nowhere else. The
peculiar, puzzling thing about them is: how they, and they only of the
marsupials, got away from Australia across the sea to America. Did a
family of them get set adrift on a log and float across? Or was there
once, as geologists tell us, a long string of islands close together,
stretching from the tip of South America, from the “Horn,” off across
the sea to Australia, over which the ’possums might once have made
their way? But if they came by such a route, why did not the kangaroos
come too? Ah, the kangaroo is not a ’possum. There is no other
creature in the woods that would dare play “Follow the leader” with
the ’possum. No, I am half inclined to think the scientists right who
say that the ’possum is the great-great-grandfather of all the
marsupials, and that the migration might have been the other way
about--from America, across the sea.

But what is the use of speculating? Here is the ’possum in our woods;
that we know; and yonder in Australasia are his thirteen sets of
cousins, and there they seem always to have been, for of these
thirteen sets of cousins, four sets have so long since ceased to live
that they are now among the fossils, slowly turning, every one of
them, to stone!

A queer history he has, surely! But queerer than his history, is his
body, and the way he grows from babyhood to twenty-pound ’possumhood.

For besides having a tail that can be used for a hand, and a paw with
a thumb like the human thumb, the female ’possum has a pocket or pouch
on her abdomen, just as the kangaroo has, in which she carries her
young.

Now that is peculiar, so very peculiar when you study deeply into it,
that the ’possum becomes to the scientist quite the most interesting
mammal in North America.

Returning from a Christmas vacation one year, while a student in
college, I brought back with me twenty-six live ’possums so that the
professor of zoölogy could study the peculiar anatomy of the ’possum
for several of its many meanings.

This pouch, for instance, and the peculiar bones of the ’possum, show
that it is a very primitive mammal, one of the very oldest mammals, so
close to the beginning of the mammalian line that there are only two
other living “animals” (we can hardly call them mammals) older and
more primitive--the porcupine ant-eater, and, oldest of all, the
duck-bill, not “older” at all perhaps, but only more primitive.

For the duck-bill, though classed as a mammal, not only has the bill
of the duck, but also lays eggs like the birds. The porcupine
ant-eater likewise lays eggs, and so seems almost as much bird or
reptile as mammal. And as the birds and reptiles lived upon the earth
before the age of mammals, and are a lower and more primitive order of
creatures, so the duck-bill, the porcupine ant-eater, and the ’possum,
because in their anatomy they are like the birds and the reptiles in
some respects, are perhaps the lowest and the oldest of all the
mammals.

The ’possum, therefore, is one of the most primitive of mammals, and
dates as far back as the reptilian age, when only traces of mammalian
life are to be found, the ’possum’s fossil ancestors being among the
notable of these early remains.

The mammals at that time, as I have just said, were only partly
mammal, for they were partly bird or reptile, as the duck-bill and
ant-eater still are. Now the ’possum does not lay eggs as these other
two do, for its young are born, not hatched; yet so tiny and
undeveloped are they when born, that they must be put into their
mother’s pouch and nursed, as eggs are put into a nest and brooded
until they are hatched--really born a second time.

For here in their mother’s pouch they are like chicks in the shell,
and quite as helpless. It is five weeks before they can stick their
heads out and take a look at the world.

No other mammalian baby is so much of a baby and yet comes so near to
being no baby at all. It is less than an inch long when put into the
pouch, and it weighs only four grains! Four grains? Think how small
that is. For there are 7000 grains to a pound, which means that it
would take 1750 baby ’possums to weigh as much as two cups of sugar!

“I should say he was peculiar!” I hear you exclaim; and you will agree
with an ancient History of Carolina which I have, when it declares:
“The Opoffom is the wonder of all the land animals.”

I wish you had been with me one spring day as I was stretching a
“lay-out” line across Cubby Hollow. (A lay-out line is a long
fish-line, strung with baited hooks, and reaching across the pond from
shore to shore.) I was out in the middle of the pond, lying flat on a
raft made of three cedar rails, when my dog began to bark at something
in a brier-patch on shore.

Paddling in as fast as I could, I found the dog standing before a
large ’possum, which was backed up against a tree. I finally got Mrs.
’Possum by the tail and dropped her unhurt into my eel-pot--a
fish-trap made out of an empty nail-keg--which I had left since fall
among the bushes of the hillside. Then paddling again to the middle of
the pond, I untangled and set my hooks on the lay-out line, and came
back to shore for my ’possum.

I didn’t quite fancy pushing my hand down through the burlap cover
over the end of the keg; so I turned it upside down to spill the
’possum out,--and out she spilled and nine little ’possums with her!

I had put in one and spilled out--ten! And this proves again that the
’possum is peculiar. Nine of these were babies that had been hidden
from me and the dog in their mother’s pouch.

Peculiar, too, was the history of one of these nine young ’possums
(the one we named “Pinky”). For after Pinky’s mother choked to death
on a fish-bone, I gave all his brothers and sisters away, and devoted
myself to training Pinky up in the way he should go. And strangely
enough, when he was grown, unlike any other wild animal I had ever
tamed, he would not depart from these domesticated ways, but insisted
upon coming back home every time I took him away to the woods. Of
course he was only a few months old when I tried to turn him loose in
the woods, and that may account for his returning and squeezing
through the opening of the pump-box trough into the kitchen and going
fast asleep on the cushion of the settee; as it may also account for
his getting into a neighbor’s yard by mistake on his way back one
night and drowning in the well.

You have read of ’possum hunts;--and they are peculiar, too, as
naturally they must needs be. For you hunt ’possums with rabbit
hounds, and shoot them with a meal-sack--shoot them _into_ a meal-sack
would be more exact. And you hunt by moonlight if you really love
’possum.

We used to start out just as the moon, climbing over the woods, fell
soft across the bare fields. The old dog would be some distance ahead,
her nose to the ground, sometimes picking up a trail in the first
cornfield, or again not until we reached the woods, or again leading
us for miles along the creek meadows among the scattered persimmon
trees, before striking a fresh scent.

Wherever the trail started it usually led away for the woods, for some
hollow stump or tree, where the ’possum made his nest. Once in a while
I have overtaken the fat fellow in an open field or atop a fence, or
have even caught him in a hencoop; but usually, if hunting at night,
it has been a long, and not always an easy, chase, for a ’possum, in
spite of his fat and his fossil ancestors, is not stupid. Or else he
is so slow-witted that there is no telling, by man or dog, which way
he will go, or what he may do next.

A rabbit, or a deer, or a coon, when you are on their trail, will do
certain things. You can count upon them with great certainty. But a
’possum never seems to do anything twice alike; he has no traveled
paths, no regular tricks, no set habits. He knows the road home,
but it is always a different road--a meandering, roundabout,
zigzag, criss-cross, up-and-down (up-the-trees-and-down) road,
we-won’t-get-home-till-morning road, that takes in all the way
stations, from the tops of tall persimmon trees to the bottoms of all
the deep, dark holes that need looking into, along the route.

Peculiar!--So, at least, a dog with an orderly mind and well-regulated
habits thinks, anyhow. For a ’possum trail will give a good rabbit dog
the blues; he hasn’t the patience for it. Only a slow rheumatic old
hound will stick to a ’possum trail with the endurance necessary to
carry it to its end--in a hollow log, or a hollow stump, or under a
shock of corn or a rail-pile. Once the trail actually led me, after
much trouble, into a hen-house and into a stove in the hen-house,
where, upon the grate, I found three ’possums in their nest!

It is a peculiar sport, this ’possum-hunting; yet it is mildly
exciting; and when you get your ’possum by the tail, he smiles at
you--grins, I ought to say--and has a fit. To go hunting for a
creature that smiles at you in a dreadful manner when you capture him,
that flops down in a dead faint or has a fit when you take him up by
the tail, that shows the spunk and fight of a boiled cabbage--to go
hunting for such a beast must be exciting, as exciting as going to the
store for a quart of beans.

But here are the winter woods at night, and the wide, moonlit fields,
covered, it may be, with the glistening snow. The full, round moon
rides high overhead, the pointed corn-shocks stand silent over the
fields, the woods rise dark and shadowy beyond. Only the slow, musical
cry of the hound echoes through the stirless air, which seems to
sparkle like the snow, as if filled with gleaming frost-dust that only
the moonlight can catch and set to glancing silvery-bright.

You don’t care whether you catch a ’possum or not; you are abroad in a
world so large and silent, so crystal-clear and shining, so crisp, so
open, so acreep with shadows, so deep and mysterious in its distances,
so pure and beautiful and unblemished, that just to be abroad is
wonder enough, and you are not sorry to come back under the brilliant
midnight sky with the old dog at your heels and over your shoulder an
empty bag.

But if your bag is heavy with fat ’possum then that, too, is good. You
have peered into his black hole; you have reached in and pulled him
out--nothing more. No roar of a gun has shattered your world of
crystal; you have killed nothing, wounded nothing--no, not even the
silence and the serenity of your soul. You and the clear, calm night
are still one.

You have dropped a smiling ’possum into an easy, roomy bag. He feels
warm against your back. The old dog follows proud and content at your
heels. And you feel--as the wide, softly shining sky seems to feel.

And that, too, is peculiar.




CHAPTER X

A FEBRUARY FRESHET


One of the very interesting events in my out-of-door year is the
February freshet. Perhaps you call it the February _thaw_. That is all
it could be called this year; and, in fact, a _thaw_ is all that it
ever is for me, nowadays, living, as I do, high and dry here, on
Mullein Hill, above a sputtering little trout brook that could not
have a freshet if it tried.

But Maurice River could have a freshet without trying. Let the high
south winds, the high tides, and the warm spring rains come on
together, let them drive in hard for a day and a night, as I have
known them to do, and the deep, dark river goes mad! The tossing tide
sweeps over the wharves, swirls about the piles of the great bridge,
leaps foaming into the air, and up and down its long high banks beats
with all its wild might to break through into the fertile meadows
below.

There are wider rivers, and other, more exciting things, than spring
freshets; but there were not when I was a boy. Why, Maurice River was
so wide that there was but a single boy in the town, as I remember,
who could stand at one end of the drawbridge and skim an oyster-shell
over to the opposite end! The best that I could do was to throw my
voice across and hear it echo from the long, hollow barn on the other
bank. It would seem to me to strike the barn in the middle, leap from
end to end like a creature caged, and then bound back to me faint and
frightened from across the dark tide.

I feared the river. Oh, but I loved it, too. Its tides were always
rising or falling--going down to the Delaware Bay and on to the sea.
And in from the bay, or out to the bay, with white sails set, the big
boats were always moving. And when they had gone, out over the wide
water the gulls or the fish hawks would sail, or a great blue heron,
with wings like the fans of an old Dutch mill, would beat ponderously
across.

I loved the river. I loved the sound of the calking-maul and the adze
in the shipyard, and the smell of the chips and tarred oakum; the
chatter of the wrens among the reeds and calamus; the pink of the
mallow and wild roses along the high mud banks; the fishy ditches with
their deep sluiceways through the bank into the river; and the vast,
vast tide-marshes that, to this day, seem to me to stretch away to the
very edge of the world.

What a world for a boy to drive cows into every morning, and drive
them home from every night, as I used to help do! or to trap muskrats
in during the winter; to go fishing in during the summer; to go
splashing up and down in when the great February freshet came on!

For of all the events of the year, none had such fascination for me as
the high winds and warm downpour that flooded the wharves, that drove
the men of the village out to guard the river-banks, and that drowned
out of their burrows and winter hiding-places all the wild things that
lived within reach of the spreading tide.

The water would pour over the meadows and run far back into the swamps
and farm lands, setting everything afloat that could float--rails,
logs, branches; upon which, as chance offered, some struggling
creature would crawl, and drift away to safety.

But not always to safety; for over the meadows the crows and fish
hawks, gulls, herons, bitterns, and at night the owls, were constantly
beating to pounce upon the helpless voyagers, even taking the
muskrats an easy prey, through their weakness from exposure and long
swimming in the water.

There would be only two shores to this wild meadow-sea--the
river-bank, a mere line of earth drawn through the water, and the
distant shore of the upland. If the wind blew from the upland toward
the bank, then the drift would all set that way, and before long a
multitude of shipwrecked creatures would be tossed upon this narrow
breakwater, that stood, a bare three feet of clay, against the wilder
river-sea beyond.

To walk up and down the bank then was like entering a natural history
museum where all the specimens were alive; or like going to a small
menagerie. Sparrows, finches, robins, mice, moles, voles, shrews,
snakes, turtles, squirrels, muskrats, with even a mink and an opossum
now and then, would scurry from beneath your feet or dive back into
the water as you passed along.

And by what strange craft they sometimes came! I once saw two muskrats
and a gray squirrel floating along on the top of one of the muskrats’
houses. And again a little bob-tailed meadow mouse came rocking along
in a drifting catbird’s nest which the waves had washed from its
anchorage in the rosebushes. And out on the top of some tall stake, or
up among the limbs of a tree you would see little huddled bunches of
fur, a muskrat perhaps that had never climbed before in his life,
waiting, like a sailor lashed to the rigging, to be taken off.

But it was not the multitude of wild things--birds, beasts,
insects--that fascinated me most, that led me out along the slippery,
dangerous bank through the swirling storm; it was rather the fear and
confusion of the animals, the wild giant-spirit raging over the face
of the earth and sky, daunting and terrifying them, that drew me.

Many of the small creatures had been wakened by the flood out of their
deep winter sleep, and, dazed and numbed and frightened, they seemed
to know nothing, to care for nothing but the touch of the solid earth
to their feet.

All of their natural desires and instincts, their hatreds, hungers,
terrors, were sunk beneath the waters. They had lost their wits, like
human creatures in a panic, and, struggling, fighting for a foothold,
they did not notice me unless I made at them, and then only took to
the water a moment to escape the instant peril.

The sight was strange, as if this were another planet and not our
orderly, peaceful world at all. Nor, indeed, was it; for fear cowered
everywhere, in all the things that were of the earth, as over the
earth and everything upon it raged the fury of river and sky.

The frail mud bank trembled under the beating of the waves; the sunken
sluices strangled and shook deep down through the whirlpools sucking
at their mouths; the flocks of scattered sea-birds--ducks and
brant--veered into sight, dashed down toward the white waters or drove
over with mad speed, while the winds screamed and the sky hung black
like a torn and flapping sail.

And I, too, would have to drop upon all fours, with the mice and
muskrats, and cling to the bank for my life, as the snarling river,
leaping at me, would plunge clear over into the meadow below.

A winter blizzard is more deadly, but not more fearful, nor so wild
and tumultuous. For in such a storm as this the foundations of the
deep seem to be broken up, the frame of the world shaken, and you, and
the mice, and the muskrats, share alike the wild, fierce spirit and
the fear.

To be out in such a storm, out where you can feel its full fury, as
upon a strip of bank in the midst of the churning waters, is good for
one. To experience a common peril with your fellow mortals, though
they be only mice and muskrats, is good for one; for it is to share
by so much in their humble lives, and by so much to live outside of
one’s own little self.

And then again, we are so accustomed to the order and fair weather of
our part of the globe, that we get to feel as if the universe were
being particularly managed for us; nay, that we, personally, are
managing the universe. To flatten out on a quaking ridge of earth or
be blown into the river; to hear no voice but the roar of the storm,
and to have no part or power in the mighty tumult of such a storm,
makes one feel about the size of a mouse, makes one feel how vast is
the universe, and how fearful the vortex of its warring forces!

The shriek of those winds is still in my ears, the sting of the
driving rains still on my face, the motion of that frail mud bank,
swimming like a long sea-serpent in the swirling waters, I can still
feel to my finger-tips. And the growl of the river, the streaming
shreds of the sky, the confusion beneath and about me, the mice and
muskrats clinging with me for a foothold--I live it all again at the
first spatter of a February rain upon my face.

To be out in a February freshet, out in a big spring break-up, is to
get a breaking up one’s self, a preparation, like Nature’s, for a new
lease of life--for spring.




CHAPTER XI

A BREACH IN THE BANK


The February freshet had come. We had been expecting it, but no one
along Maurice River had ever seen so wild and warm and ominous a
spring storm as this. So sudden and complete a break-up of winter no
one could remember; nor so high a tide, so rain-thick and driving a
south wind. It had begun the night before, and now, along near noon,
the river and meadows were a tumult of white waters, with the gale so
strong that one could hardly hold his own on the drawbridge that
groaned from pier to pier in the grip of the maddened storm.

It was into the teeth of this gale that a small boy dressed in large
yellow “oil-skins” made his slow way out along the narrow bank of the
river toward the sluices that controlled the tides of the great
meadows.

The boy was _in_ the large yellow oil-skins; not dressed, no, for he
was simply inside of them, his feet and hands and the top of his head
having managed to work their way out. It seems, at least, that his
head was partly out, for on the top of the oil-skins sat a large black
sou’wester. And in the arms of the oil-skins lay an old army musket,
so big and long that it seemed to be walking away with the oil-skins,
as the oil-skins seemed to be walking away with the boy.

I can feel the kick of that old musket yet, and the prick of the dried
sand-burs among which she knocked me. I can hear the rough rasping of
the chafing legs of those oil-skins too, though I was not the boy this
time inside of them. But I knew the boy who was, a real boy; and I
know that he made his careful way along the trembling river-bank out
into the sunken meadows, meadows that later on I saw the river burst
into and claim--and it still claims them, as I saw only last summer,
when after thirty years of absence I once more stood at the end of
that bank looking over a watery waste which was once the richest of
farm lands.

Never, it seemed, had the village known such wind and rain and such a
tide. It was a strange, wild scene from the drawbridge--wharves
obliterated, river white with flying spume and tossing ice-cakes, the
great bridge swaying and shrieking in the wind, and over everything
the blur of the swirling rain.

The little figure in yellow oil-skins was not the only one that had
gone along the bank since morning, for a party of men had carefully
inspected every foot of the bank to the last sluice, for fear that
there might be a weak spot somewhere. Let a breach occur with such a
tide as this and it could never be stopped.

And now, somewhat past noon, the men were again upon the bank. As they
neared Five-Forks sluice, the central and largest of the water-gates,
they heard a smothered _boom_ above the scream of the wind in their
ears. They were startled; but it was only the sound of a gun somewhere
off in the meadow. It was the gun of the boy in the oil-skins.

Late that afternoon Doctor “Sam,” driving home along the flooded road
of the low back swamp, caught sight, as he came out in view of the
river, of a little figure in yellow oil-skins away out on the meadow.

The doctor stopped his horse and hallooed. But the boy did not hear.
The rain on his coat, the wind and the river in his ears drowned every
other sound.

The dusk was falling, and as the doctor looked out over the wild
scene, he put his hands to his mouth and called again. The yellow
figure had been blotted out by the rain. There was no response, and
the doctor drove on.

Meanwhile the boy in the yellow oil-skins was splashing slowly back
along the narrow, slippery clay bank. He was wet, but he was warm, and
he loved the roar of the wind and the beat of the driving rain.

As the mist and rain were fast mixing with the dusk of the twilight,
he quickened his steps. His path in places was hardly a foot wide,
covered with rose and elder bushes mostly, but bare in spots where
holes and low worn stretches had been recently built up with cubes of
the tough blue mud of the flats.

The tide was already even with the top of the bank and was still
rising. It leaped and hit at his feet as he picked his way along. The
cakes of white ice crunched and heeled up against the bank with here
and there one flung fairly across his path. The tossing water
frequently splashed across. Twice he jumped places where the tide was
running over down into the meadows below.

How quickly the night had come! It was dark when he reached
Five-Forks sluice--the middle point in the long, high bank. While
still some distance off he heard the sullen roar of the big sluice,
through which the swollen river was trying to force its way.

He paused to listen a moment. He knew the peculiar voice of every one
of these gateways, as he knew every foot of the river-bank.

There was nothing wrong with the sullen roar. But how deep and
threatening! He could _feel_ the sound even better than he could hear
it, far down below him. He started forward, to pass on, when he half
felt, through the long, regular throbbing of the sluice, a shorter,
faster, closer quiver, as of a small running stream in the bank very
near his feet.

Dropping quickly to his knees, he laid his ear to the wet earth. A
cold, black hand seemed to seize upon him. He heard the purr of
running water!

It must be down about three feet. He could distinctly feel it tearing
through.

Without rising he scrambled down the meadow side of the bank to see
the size of the breach. He could hear nothing of it for the boiling at
the gates of the sluice. It was so dark he could scarcely see. But
near the bottom the mud suddenly caved beneath his feet, and a rush of
cold water caught at his knees.

The hole was greater than he feared.

Crawling back to the top of the bank, he leaned out over the river
side. A large cake of ice hung in water in front of him. He pushed it
aside and, bending until his face barely cleared the surface of the
river, he discovered a small sucking eddy, whose swirling hole he knew
ran into the breach.

He edged farther out and reached down under the water and touched the
upper rim of the hole. How large might it be? Swinging round, he dug
his fingers into the bank and lowered himself feet first until he
stood in the hole. It was the size of a small bucket, but he could
almost feel it going beneath his feet, and a sudden terror took hold
upon him.

He was only a boy, and the dark night, the wild river, the vast,
sweeping storm, the roar and tremor and tumult flattened him for a
moment to the ridge of the bank in a panic of fear!

But he heard the water running, he felt the bank going directly
beneath where he lay, and getting to his feet he started for the
village. A single hasty step and, but for the piles of the sluice, he
would have plunged into the river.

He must feel his way; but he never could do it in time to save the
bank. The breach must be stopped at once. He must stop it and keep it
stopped until the next patrol brought help.

Feeling his way back, he dropped again upon his hands and knees above
the breach to think for a moment. The cake of ice hung as before in
the eddy. Catching it, he tipped it and thrust it down across the
mouth of the hole, but it slipped from his cold fingers and dived
away. He pushed down the butt of his musket, turned it flat, but it
was not broad enough to cover the opening. Then he lowered himself
again, and stood in it, wedging the musket in between his boots; but
he could feel the water still tearing through at the sides, and eating
all the faster.

He clambered back to the top of the bank, put his hand to his mouth
and shouted. The only answer was the scream of the wind and the cry of
a brant passing overhead.

Then the boy laughed. “Easy enough,” he muttered, and, picking up the
musket, he leaned once more out over the river and thrust the steel
barrel of the gun hard into the mud just below the hole. Then,
stepping easily down, he sat squarely into the breach, the gun like a
stake in front of him sticking up between his knees.

Then he laughed again, as he caught his breath, for he had squeezed
into the hole like a stopper into a bottle, his big oil-skins filling
the breach completely.

The water stood above the middle of his breast, and the tide was still
rising. Darkness had now settled, but the ghostly ice-cakes, tipping,
slipping toward him, were spectral white. He had to shove them back as
now and then one rose before his face. The sky was black, and the deep
water below him was blacker. And how cold it was!

Doctor Sam had been stopped by the flooded roads on his way home, and
lights shone in the windows as he entered the village. He turned a
little out of his way and halted in front of a small cottage near the
bridge.

“Is Joe here?” he asked.

“No,” answered the mother; “he went down the meadow for muskrats and
has not returned yet. He’s probably over with the men at the store.”

Doctor Sam drove on to the store.

There was no boy in yellow oil-skins in the store.

Doctor Sam picked up a lighted lantern.

“Come on,” he said; “I’m wet, but I want a look at those sluices,” and
started for the river, followed immediately by the men, whom he led in
single file out along the bank.

Swinging his lantern low, he pushed into the teeth of the gale at a
pace that left the line of lights straggling far behind.

“What a night!” he growled. “If I had a boy of my own--” and he threw
the light as far as he could over the seething river and then down
over the flooded meadow.

Ahead he heard the roar of Five-Forks sluice, and swung his lantern
high, as if to signal it, so like the rush of a coming train was the
sound of the waters.

But the little engineer in yellow oil-skins could not see the signal.
He had almost ceased to watch. With his arm cramped about his gun, he
was still at his post; but the ice-cakes floated in and touched him;
the water no longer felt cold.

On this side, then on that, out over the swollen river, down into the
tossing meadow flared the lantern as the doctor worked his way along.

Above the great sluice he paused a moment, then bent his head to the
wind and started on, when his foot touched something soft that yielded
strangely, sending a shiver over him, and his light fell upon a bunch
of four dead muskrats lying in the path.

Along the meadow side flashed the lantern, up and over the riverside,
and Doctor Sam, reaching quickly down, drew a limp little form in
yellow oil-skins out of the water, as the men behind him came up.

A gurgle, a hiss, a small whirlpool sucking at the surface,--and the
tide was again tearing through the breach that the boy had filled.

The men sprang quickly to their task, and did it well, while Doctor
Sam, shielding the limp little form from the wind, forced a vial of
something between the white lips, saying over to himself as he watched
the closed eyes open, “If I had a boy of my own--If I had a boy--”

       *       *       *       *       *

No, Doctor Sam never had a boy of his own; but he always felt, I
think, that the boy of those yellow oil-skins was somehow pretty
nearly his.

       *       *       *       *       *

After a long, cold winter how I love the spatter on my face of the
first February rain! The little trout brook below me foams and
sometimes overruns the road, and as its small noise ascends the hill,
I can hear--the wind on a great river, the wash of waves against a
narrow bank, and the muffled roar of quaking sluices as when a
February freshet is on.

[Illustration: “DREW A LIMP LITTLE FORM OUT OF THE WATER”]




CHAPTER XII

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO HEAR THIS WINTER


I

You should hear the three great silences of winter: the wide, sudden
silence that falls at twilight on the coming of the first winter
frost; the smothered hush that waits the breaking of a winter storm;
the crystal stillness, the speech of the stars, that pervades earth
and sky on a brilliant, stirless winter night. You should hear--or is
it _feel_?--them all.


II

So should you hear the great voices of the winter: the voice of the
north wind; the voice of a pine forest; the voice of the surf on a
stormy shore. There is no music that I know like the wild mighty music
of the winter winds in the winter woods. It will often happen that you
can pass through a bare stretch of naked hardwoods immediately into a
grove of thick-limbed spruces or pines. Never miss such an
opportunity. Do not let the high winds of this winter blow on and away
without your hearing them--at least once--as they sweep through the
hardwoods on into the deep resounding pines.


III

Did you ever hear the running, rumbling, reverberating sound of the
shore-to-shore split of a wide sheet of new ice? You will hear it as
the sun rises over the pond, as the tide turns in the ice-bound river,
and when the ice contracts with falling temperature,--a startling bolt
of sound, a quake, that cleaves the ice across and splits its way into
the heart of the frozen hills.


IV

One of the most unnatural of all the sounds out-of-doors is the
clashing, glassy rattle of trees ice-coated and shaken by the wind. It
is as if you were in some weird china shop, where the curtains, the
very clothes of the customers, were all of broken glass. It is the
rattle of death, not of life; no, rather it is the rustle of the
ermine robe of Winter, as he passes crystal-booted down his crystal
halls.


V

If winter is the season of large sounds, it is also the season of
small sounds, for it is the season of wide silence when the slightest
of stirrings can be heard. Three of these small sounds you must listen
for this winter: the smothered _tinkle-tunkle_ of water running under
thin ice, as where the brook passes a pebbly shallow; then the
_tick-tick-tick_ of the first snowflakes hitting the brown leaves on
a forest floor; then the fine sharp scratch of a curled and toothed
beech leaf skating before a noiseless breath of wind over the crusty
snow. Only he that hath ears will hear these sounds, speaking, as they
do, for the vast voiceless moments of the winter world.


VI

I have not heard the “covey call” of the quail this winter. But there
is not a quail left alive in all the fields and sprout-lands within
sound of me. I used to hear them here on Mullein Hill; a covey used to
roost down the wooded hillside in front of the house; but even they
are gone--hunted out of life; shot and eaten off of my small world.
What a horribly hungry animal man is!

But you may have the quail still in your fields. If so, then go out
toward dusk on a quiet, snowy day, especially if you have heard
shooting in the fields that day, and try to hear some one of the covey
calling the flock together: _Whir-r-rl-ee! Whir-r-rl-ee!
Whirl-ee-gee!_--the sweetest, softest, tenderest call you will ever
hear!


VII

And you certainly do have chickadees in your woods. If so, then go out
any time of day, but go on a cold, bleak, blustery day, when
everything is a-shiver, and, as Uncle Remus would say, “meet up” with
a chickadee. It is worth having a winter, just to meet a chickadee in
the empty woods and hear him call--a little pin-point of live sound,
an undaunted, unnumbed voice interrupting the thick jargon of the
winter to tell you that all this bluster and blow and biting cold
can’t get at the heart of a bird that must weigh, all told, with all
his winter feathers on, fully--an ounce or two!


VIII

And then the partridge--you must hear him, bursting like a bottled
hurricane from the brown leaves at your feet!


IX

Among the sweet winter sounds, that are as good to listen to as the
songs of the summer birds, you should hear: the loud joyous cackling
of the hens on a sunny January day; the munching of horses at night
when the wild winds are whistling about the barn; the quiet hum about
the hives,--

    “When come the calm mild days, as still such days will come,
    To call the squirrel and the bee from out their winter home.”

And then, the sound of the first rain on the shingles--the first
February rain after a long frozen period! How it spatters the shingles
with _spring--spring--spring!_

[Illustration: “ONE OF THE COVEY CALLING THE FLOCK TOGETHER”]


X

It was in the latter end of December, upon a gloomy day that was heavy
with the oppression of a coming storm. In the heart of the maple swamp
all was still and cold and dead. Suddenly, as out of a tomb, I heard
the small, thin cry of a tiny tree-frog. And how small and thin it
sounded in the vast silences of that winter swamp! And yet how clear
and ringing! A thrill of life tingling out through the numb, nerveless
body of the woods that has ever since made a dead day for me
impossible.

Have you heard him yet?


XI

“After all,” says some one of our writers, “it is only a matter of
which side of the tree you stand on, whether it is summer or winter.”
Just so. But, after all, is it not a good thing to stand on the winter
side during the winter? to have a winter while we have it, and then
have spring? No shivering around on the spring side of the tree for
me. I will button up my coat, brace my back against the winter side
and shout to the hoary old monarch--

    “And there’s a hand, my trusty fiere,
    And gie’s a hand o’ thine;”

and what a grip he has!




CHAPTER XIII

THE LAST DAY OF WINTER


According to the almanac March 21st is the last day of winter. The
almanac is not always to be trusted--not for hay weather, or picnic
weather, or sailing weather; but you can always trust it for March
21st weather. Whatever the weather man at Washington predicts about
it, whatever comes,--snow, sleet, slush, rain, wind, or frogs and
sunshine,--March 21st _is_ the last day of winter.

The sun “crosses the line” that day; spring crosses with him; and I
cross over with the spring.

Let it snow! I have had winter enough. Let the wind rage! It cannot
turn back the sun; it cannot blow away the “equinoctial line”; it
cannot snow under my determination to have done, here and now, with
winter!

The sun crosses to my side of the Equator on the 21st of March; there
is nothing in the universe that can stop him. I cross over the line
with him; and there is nothing under the sun that can stop me. When
you want it to be spring, if you have the sun on your side of the line
you can have spring. Hitching your wagon to a star is a very great
help in getting along; but having the big sun behind you--

    “When descends on the Atlantic
        The gigantic
    Storm-wind of the equinox”

is a tremendous help in ridding you of a slow and, by this time,
wearisome winter, storm-wind and all.

Almanacs are not much to trust in; but if ever you prize one, it is on
the 21st of March,--that is, if you chance to live in New England. Yet
you can get along without the almanac--even in New England. Hang it up
under the corner of the kitchen mantelpiece and come out with me into
the March mud. We are going to find the signs of spring, the proofs
that this is the last day of winter, that the sun is somewhere in the
heavens and on _this_ side of the equatorial line.

Almanac or no, and with all other signs snowed under, there are still
our bones! Spring is in our bones. I cannot tell you how it gets into
them, nor describe precisely how it feels. But, then, I do not need
to. For you feel it in _your_ bones too--a light, hollow feeling, as
if your bones were birds’ bones, and as if you could flap your arms
and fly!

Only that you feel it more in your feet; and you will start and run,
like the Jungle-folk, like Mowgli--run, run, run! Oh, it is good to
have bones in your body, young bones with the “spring-running,” in
their joints, instead of the grit of rheumatism to stiffen and cripple
you!

The roads are barely thawed. The raw wind is penetrating, and we need
our greatcoats to keep out the cold. But look! A flock of
robins--twenty of them, dashing into the cedars, their brown breasts
glowing warm and red against the dull sky and the dark green of the
trees! And wait--before we go down the hill--here behind the barn--no,
there he dives from the telephone wire--Phœbe! He has just gotten
back, and is simply killing time now (and insects too), waiting for
Mrs. Phœbe to arrive, and housekeeping to begin.

Don’t move! There in the gray clouds--two soaring, circling hen-hawks!
_Kee-ee-you!_ _Kee-ee-you!_ Round and round they go, their shrill,
wild whistle piercing the four quarters of the sky and tingling down
the cold spine of every forest tree and sapling, stirring their life
blood until it seems to run red into their tops.

For see the maple swamp off yonder--the ashy gray of the boles, a
cold steel-color two thirds of the way toward the top, but there
changing into a faint garnet, a flush of warmth and life that seems
almost to have come since morning!

Let us go on now, for I want to get some watercress from the
brook--the first green growing thing for the table thus far!--and some
pussy-willows for the same table, only not to eat. (There are many
good things in this world that are not good to eat.) If the sun were
shining I should take you by way of the beehives to show you, dropping
down before their open doors, a few eager bees bringing home baskets
of pollen from the catkins of the hazelnut bushes. The hazelnut bushes
are in bloom! Yes, in bloom! No, the skunk-cabbages are not out yet,
nor the hepaticas, nor the arbutus; but the hazelnut bushes are in
bloom, and--see here, under the rye straw that covers the
strawberry-bed--a small spreading weed, green, and cheerily starred
with tiny white flowers!

It is the 21st of March; the sun has crossed the line; the phœbes
have returned; and here under the straw in the garden the
chickweed,--_starwort_,--first of the flowers, is in blossom!

But come on; I am not going back yet. This is the last day of winter.
Cold? Yes, it is cold, raw, wretched, gloomy, with snow still in the
woods, with frost still in the ground, and with not a frog or hyla
anywhere to be heard. But come along. This is the last day of
winter--of winter? No, no, it is the first day of spring. Robins back,
phœbes back, watercress for the table, chickweed in blossom, and a
bird’s nest with eggs in it! Winter? Spring? Birds’ eggs, did I say?

The almanac is mixed again. It always is. Who’s Who in the Seasons
when all of this is happening on the 21st of March? For here is the
bird’s nest with eggs in it, just as I said.

Watch the hole up under that stub of a limb while I tap on the trunk.
How sound asleep! But I will wake them. _Rap-rap-rap!_ There he
comes--the big barred owl!

Climb up and take a peek at the eggs, but don’t you dare to touch
them! Of course you will not. I need not have been so quick and severe
in my command; for, if we of this generation do not know as much about
some things as our fathers knew, we do at least know better than they
that the owls are among our best friends and are to be most jealously
protected.

Climb up, I say, and take a peek at those round white eggs, and
tell me, Is it spring or winter? Is it the last day, or the first
day, or the first and last in one? What a high mix-up is the
weather--especially this New England sort!

But look at that! A snowflake! Yes, it is beginning to snow--with the
sun crossing the line! It is beginning to snow, and down with the
first flakes, like a bit of summer sky drops a bluebird, calling
softly, sweetly, with notes that melt warm as sunshine into our
hearts.

“For, lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone.” But see how
it snows! Yes, but see--

    The willows gleam with silver light;
      The maples crimson glow--
    The first faint streaks on winter’s east,
      Far-off and low.

    The northward geese, with winged wedge,
      Have split the frozen skies,
    And called the way for weaker wings,
      Where midnight lies.

    To-day a warm wind wakes the marsh;
      I hear the hylas peep
    And o’er the pebbly ford, unbound,
      The waters leap.

    The lambs bleat from the sheltered folds;
      Low whispers spread the hills:
    The rustle of the spring’s soft robes
      The forest fills.

    The night, ah me! fierce flies the storm
      Across the dark dead wold;
    The swift snow swirls; and silence falls
      On stream and fold.

    All white and still lie stream and hill--
      The winter dread and drear!
    Then from the skies a bluebird flies
      And--spring is here!
SUGAR BOILING.


This branch of the trade or business of a confectioner is perhaps the
most important. All manufacturers are more or less interested in it, and
certainly no retail shop could be considered orthodox which did not
display a tempting variety of this class. So inclusive is the term
"boiled goods" that it embraces drops, rocks, candies, taffies, creams,
caramels, and a number of different sorts of hand-made, machine-made,
and moulded goods. It is the most ancient method of which we have any
knowledge, and perhaps the most popular process of modern times; the
evidence of our everyday experience convinces us that (notwithstanding
the boom which heralds from time to time a new sweet, cooked in a
different manner, composed of ingredients hitherto unused in business),
it is the exception when such goods hold the front rank for more than a
few months, however pretty, tasty, or tempting they may be, the public
palate seems to fall back on those made in the old lines which, though
capable of improvement, seem not to be superceded. Of the entire make of
confectionery in Canada, at least two-thirds of it may be written down
under the name of boiled sugar. They are undoubtedly the chief features
with both manufacturers and retailers, embracing, as they do, endless
facilities for fertile brains and deft fingers for inventing novelties
in design, manipulation, combination, and finish. Notwithstanding the
already great variety, there is always daily something new in this
department brought into market. Many of the most successful houses owe
their popularity more to their heads than their hands, hence the
importance of studying this branch in all its ramifications. The endless
assortment requiring different methods for preparing and manipulating
make it necessary to sub-divide this branch into sections, order and
arrangement being so necessary to be thoroughly understood. _When we
consider the few inexpensive tools required to make so many kinds of
saleable goods, it is not to be wondered at so many retailers have a
fancy to make their own toffees and such like, there is no reason why a
man or woman, with ordinary patience, a willing and energetic
disposition, favored with a fair amount of intelligence, should not be
able to become with the aid of THIS BOOK and a few dollars for tools,
fairly good sugar boilers, with a few months practice._

There are reasons why a retail confectioner should study sugar boiling.
It gives character to the business, a fascinating odour to the premises,
and a general at-homeness to the surroundings. No goods look more
attractive and tempting to the sweet eating public than fresh made goods
of this kind. A bright window can be only so kept by makers. Grainy or
sticky drops may be reboiled; scraps and what would otherwise be almost
waste (at least unsightly) may be redressed in another shape, and
become, not only saleable, but profitable. _There are many advantages
which a maker possesses over one who buys all._ For instance, clear
boiled goods should be kept air tight, and are therefore delivered to
the retailers in bottles, jars, or tins, on which charge is made, these
have to be repacked and returned. Breakages are an important item, so is
freight--the cost of the latter is saved and the former reduced to a
minimum.

Whatever means are adopted to benefit the retailer and advertise the
business by brighter windows, cleaner shops, less faded goods, and
healthier financial conditions must contribute to the general prosperity
of the trade, from the bottom step to the top rung of the ladder.

It should be the aim of all amateurs to study quality rather than price.
Goods well made, carefully flavored, and nicely displayed will always
command a ready sale at a fair price, giving satisfaction to the
consumer and credit to the maker. Give your customers something to
please the eye as well as the palate, so that every sale may be looked
upon as an advertisement. Cheap, bulky, insipid stuff is unprofitable
and damaging to the trade as well as to the seller. I venture to assert
that more would-be makers have come to grief trying to cut each other in
price for rubbishy candies than through any other cause. Look at the
number of firms who have a reputation, whose very name command trade
at good prices, year after year add to the turnover. What is the
talisman? Look at their goods. There is perhaps nothing very striking in
them, but they are _invariably good_, busy or slack they are made with
care, packed with taste, and delivered neatly in a business-like
fashion. Compare this to our makers of cheap stuff; to obtain orders
they sell at unprofitable prices, often at a loss, and try to make up
the difference by resorting to various methods of increasing the bulk,
the result is ultimate ruin to themselves, loss to their creditors, and
injury to every one concerned. Few who read these lines will not be able
to verify all that is stated. The writer's advice has always been to
keep up a _high degree of excellence, try to improve in every direction,
and success is only a matter of patience, energy and civility_.

It is not intended to give a complete list of all kinds of candy known
in the trade, that would be absurd and impossible. To be able to make
any particular kind will require knowledge only to be gained by
experience, so that much depends on the thoughtful endeavor of the
beginner.


THE WORKSHOP.

Sugar boiling, like every other craft, requires a place to do it, fitted
with tools and appliances. The requisites and requirements can be easily
suited to the purse of the would-be confectioner. A work to be useful to
all must cater for all, and include information which will be useful to
the smaller storekeeper as well as the larger maker. To begin at the
bottom, one can easily imagine a person whose only ambition is to make a
little candy for the window fit for children. This could be done with a
very small outlay for utensils. The next move is the purchase of a sugar
boiler's furnace not very costly and certainly indispensable where
quality and variety are required, it will be a great saving of time as
well as money, the sugar will boil a much better color, so that cheaper
sugar may be used for brown or yellow goods, while one can make acid
drops and other white goods from granulated. Dutch crush, or loaf sugar,
which would be impossible to make on a kitchen stove from any sort of
sugar.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.

Steel Candy Furnace.

No. 1--24 in. high, 19 in. diameter. Price, $7.50. No. 2--30 in. high,
23 in. diameter. Price, $12.00.]

[Illustration: Fig. 206 a.

Excelsior Furnace.

Height 26 in., 4 holes, from 9 to 18 in. diameter. Made entirely of cast
iron. Price, $16. Weight 225 lbs.]

[Illustration: Fig. 12.

CARAMEL CUTTERS--2 Styles.

Each with Steel Shaft and Screw Handles and two sets Blocks.

No. 2--with 13 Steel Cutters, price      $6.50

We make this Cutter with longer rod and any number of extra cutters at
50c. each cutter.

No. 1--with 13 Tinned Cutters, price       $11.00

With longer rods and any number of extra cutters at 30c. each cutter.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.

Copper Candy Boiling Pan.

  15 × 6  $4.50,  16 × 7      $5.50,
  17 × 8  $6.00,  18 × 9      $7.00,
  19 × 10 $8,     20 × 10-1/2 $9.
]

[Illustration: Fig. 16. Price 76c. Improved Slide Candy Hook.]

[Illustration: Fig. 6.

STEAM JACKET--MADE TO ORDER.]


LIST OF SUGAR BOILING TOOLS REQUIRED FOR A START.

  1 Candy Furnace               Price, $7 50
  1 Copper Boiling pan 15×6        "    4 50
  1 Candy Thermometer              "    1 75
  1 Marble Slab 48×24×2            "    8 00
  1 Caramel Cutter                 "    6 50
  1 Candy Hook                     "      75
  1 Pallette Knife                 "      50
  1 Doz. Taffy Pans                "    2 00
  1 Pair English Candy Shears      "    1 50
                                      ------
           Total                      $33 00

More slab room will be required as trade increases.

We cannot go any further into the mysteries of this art successfully
unless we provide ourselves with a candy machine and rolls to enable us
to make drops. _They are indispensable_, and if we are to go on, we must
have them to enable us to make drops, and every confectioner sells
drops. These machines are made to suit all classes of trade, big and
little. The small ones make just as nice drops as the large ones, and
will turn out in the course of a day 2 or 3 cwt., by constant use, so
that for retail purposes this quantity would generally be sufficient.

[Illustration: Fig. 12-1/2.

Candy Machine and Rollers for Boiled Sugar.

For Fruit Drops, Acid or Cough Drops Imperials, Etc.

These Machines are made to fit a Standard Gauge, and will admit of any
number of Rollers being fitted to one frame. Thus parties having our
frames can at any time order additional rollers which will work
satisfactorily.

The Rollers are 2 in. diameter, 3-5/8 in. long. Almost every conceivable
pattern can be cut on them.

  CANDY ROLL FRAMES,          $ 6 00 each.
  PLAIN DROP ROLLS,            14 00 per pair.
  FANCY DROP ROLLS,       from 16 00    "
]

Having so far got our workshop arranged the next thing is to keep it in
order. Sugar boiling is dirty sticky business, especially on wet days,
unless every part is kept scrupulously clean and dry, slabs and tables
should be washed, no trace of sifting, scraps, or boiled goods, should
be left exposed to the atmosphere during the night, the floor well
swept, and a little clean sawdust put down every night.

The comfort and ease in working in a clean place far more than offsets
the trouble and time it takes to put it in order, besides the goods are
much drier, brighter and easier to bottle or pack. Nothing is more
unpleasant than to work with sticky slabs, slimy machines or dirty
scales. The boil adheres to the slabs, sticks to the rollers, spoiling
the shapes, and become cloudy and spotty in weighing. We are not writing
without knowledge. Any one who has worked or visited small workshops can
endorse the value of these remarks, and call to mind this imaginary
picture. However, there are exceptions, still the hint will be useful in
a good many cases.

[Illustration: Fig. 5.

Steel Candy Shears.

English Candy Shears, $1.50.]

[Illustration: Fig. 201 a. Price, $1.75

Copper Cased Candy Thermometer.]


METHOD OF SUGAR BOILING.

If the learner will study the following instructions, the author
guarantees to place him in a position to boil sugar as correctly as the
most experienced workman. To accomplish this, the reader should provide
himself with the sugar boiler's tools named on the preceding page.
While the sugar is undergoing the process of boiling, it is almost
impossible for a learner to determine the exact degree which the sugar
has attained without a thermometer, and even the journeyman finds it so
useful that you will find very few indeed who boil sugar without it; in
fact many of the larger shops will not allow a sugar boiler to work
without one. For almost any purpose the following degrees will be found
all that is necessary. For instance put into the pan in which you intend
to boil, 7 lbs. granulated sugar together with one quart of water,
placing it on the fire and allow it to boil. Put a cover over the pan
and allow it to boil for ten minutes; then take off the cover and put
the thermometer in the pan, immersing the bottom part of it in the
boiling sugar, and let it remain there until the sugar is boiled to the
degree you require. The following five degrees are those used by
confectioners for different purposes:

[Illustration: Fig. 87.

IRON BELL SHAPED MORTAR.

English Make, Extra Heavy, Tinned inside.

  1    Pint       $1 00
  1-1/2 "          1 50
  1    Quart       2 00
  2     "          3 00
]

1st. The smooth, viz.,--215 to 220 by the thermometer. When the mercury
registers these figures the sugars may then be used for crystalizing
creams, gum goods and liqueurs.

2nd. The Thread, viz., 230 and 235 is the degree which is used for
making liqueurs.

3rd. The Feather, viz., 240 to 245. Only a few minutes elapse between
these degrees, and the sugar must be watched closely during the boiling
at this point. This degree may be used for making fondants, rich creams,
cream for chocolates and fruit candying.

4th. The Ball, viz., 250 to 255. The sugar at this point is used for
making cocoanut and other candies, cocoanut ice, and almost every
description of grain sugar generally.

5th. The Crack, viz., 310 to 315. This is the degree which is used, with
little variation, for all kinds of drops, taffies, and all clear goods,
whether for the purpose of passing through machines or manipulating with
the hands.

These degrees can be tested by an experienced hand without the aid of
the thermometer, and the learner may accustom himself by trying them in
the following manner: Take the stem of a clay pipe and dip it into the
sugar as it boils, draw it out again and pass it through the forefinger
and thumb; when it feels oily you will find by looking at your
thermometer that it has reached the degree of smooth, 215 to 220 by the
glass.

The next degree or thread, may be tried by your taking a little of the
sugar off the pipe between your finger and thumb and part them gently;
if you see small threads hang between your finger and thumb that degree
has arrived.

For the degree of Ball, 250 to 255, you must have by your hand a small
jug of cold water; when you draw the pipe out of the sugar dip it in the
water, and when taken out of the water, if you can work it like a piece
of putty, you have got the degree of ball.

The degree of Crack must be tested the same way, and the sugar must
leave the pipe clean; dip it again into cold water; when off the pipe
break off a piece with your teeth; if it snaps clean in your teeth, pour
your sugar on the slab at once.

NOTE.--This last degree must be tried sharply, in giving the process for
trying it without the thermometer. We caution all beginners to get a
thermometer, as practice alone can instruct you without. It is also
necessary to state that thermometers differ a little, and should be
tested.

During hot weather, it is necessary to bring the sugars up to the full
degree; during winter months, the lower degrees marked will answer the
purpose.


CUTTING THE GRAIN, LOWERING OR GREASING.

Almost all sugar, especially refined, whether loaf, crystalized or
granulated, and most sugars known to the trade as pieces will, if boiled
beyond the degree of ball, or 250 by the thermometer, when turned out of
the pan becomes cloudy, then grainy, and ultimately a solid lump of
hard opaque sugar. To prevent this candying, as it is called several
agents are used, such as glucose, cream of tartar pyroligneous acid,
vinegar &c., the action of which will cause the sugar to boil clear, be
pliable while hot and transparent when cold. It is therefore necessary
to use some lowering agent for all boilings intended for clear goods,
such as drops, taffies, rocks &c.

[Illustration: Fig. 29.

Pyramid Forms.

  No. 1, 22-1/2 inch, 2 rings
    Price,    90c.
  No. 2, 32 inch, 3 rings
    Price,  $1 10.
]

[Illustration: Fig. 21.

CANDY SCRAPER AND SPREADER.

  12 inches long      65c
   6   "      "       30c
]

Experience has taught most of the old hands that two of these agents
possess all the merits necessary for the purpose, and are to be
preferred to others for reasons it is unnecessary to state--they are
cream of tartar and glucose. A great deal could be said in favor of
either or both; cream of tartar is handier and cleaner to use as well as
more exact in its action; goods boiled with it will be a better color
and, some assert, more crisp; for acids and all best and export goods it
is to be recommended--use a proportion of half an ounce to every 14 lbs.
of sugar--we say about, as some strong sugars require a little more,
this is generally measured in a teaspoon, two spoonfuls to every 14 lbs.
of sugar.

_Glucose_, being cheaper than sugar, is valuable to the confectioner,
not only for its lowering qualities, but also as a bulk producer,
_reducing the cost of the product_. On this account there is a tendency
to overdo it by using too much, the result causing goods to become
sticky and turn soft immediately they are exposed to the atmosphere, not
only so, but we have seen drops running to a solid lump in bottles
through being overdosed. If glucose is used in proper proportions, it
makes an excellent lowering agent, and will answer the purpose first
rate for ordinary drops and the like. Use three lbs. of glucose to every
14 lbs. of sugar; keep a panful on the furnace top, so that it will
always be hot and may be easily measured by means of a saucepan or ladle
holding the exact quantity; add the glucose when sugar begins to boil.


FLAVORS AND COLORS.

These form almost as important a part of the trade as the sugar itself,
and it should be the chief object of every workman to try and excel in
these two important features; if you do not use _good flavors_, it is a
moral certainty you cannot produce _good candies_. Flavors for boiled
sugars should be specially prepared, those bought at an ordinary
_chemist shop may do very well for flavoring custards and pastry, but
are of no use for boiled sugars, in fact better use no essence at all,
as they_ are so weak that, to give the drops &c., even a slight taste
the quantity required reduces the degree to which the sugar has been
boiled so much that it works like putty, and sticks to the machine while
being pressed through; the drops when finished look dull, dragged and
stick together when bottled; tons of drops are weekly spoiled by small
makers using such flavors, while a little trouble and less expense would
put them out of their misery, besides giving to the goods that clear
bright dry appearance to be found in the drops of a respectable house.

It must be remembered that the flavor is the very life of the candy.
Color may please the eye, but excellence in that alone is not all that
is required. A buyer may be attracted by the eye, but he does not eat
with it. Neither old or young would knowingly eat only colored sugar. A
sweet taste may be satisfied with sugar alone.

It is the variety of pleasant flavors that is desired and it is the
business of the confectioner to supply it. Flavors for sugar boiling
should be as concentrated as it is possible for it to be. Several large
houses who have confined their attention to the wants and requirements
of the confectionery and mineral water trades have succeeded in
producing fruit essences of quality, which is a pleasure to work with.
Being very powerful, little is required to give the boil rich flavor,
consequently it passes through the machine easily, forming a perfect
drop on which the clear imprint of the engraving characteristic of the
machine used. Essential oils used by confectioners are those having an
agreeable aromatic flavor, and should be used in their original
strength, without being adulterated or reduced. It is absolutely
necessary that they should be pure and fresh, more particularly the oils
of lemon and orange, as when not fresh and pure they partake of the
flavor of turpentine, and are particularly unpleasant to the taste.

Small makers would do well to buy carefully from a good house not more
than would be used up in two or three months, especially the two before
mentioned. Some oils on the contrary, improve by keeping such as
peppermint and lavender. All essences and oils are best kept well corked
in a cool dark place.

These oils being powerful, popular and expensive, they are frequently
adulterated. Cream of tartar and tartaric acid on account of the price
is often increased, the former with different cheap powders, the latter
usually with alum. Many people fail in the process through no fault of
their own, but simply through their being supplied with inferior
ingredients, it is therefore of importance, that colors and flavors
should be purchased at some respectable house; get list of oils'
extracts and essences from Fletcher Mnf'g. Co. who are large dealers in
these goods.

The colors prepared, consisting of several very nice shades of yellow
and red, also coffee brown, jetoline black, damson blue, and apple
green; they are in paste, ready for use, being vegetable, they are
guaranteed strictly wholesome, and may be used with confidence.


WRINKLES WORTH READING ON SUGAR BOILING.

To make an acid drop to perfection, the pan must not only be clean but
bright; use best white sugar, and just enough water to melt it, with a
little extra cream of tartar (no glucose); boil on a sharp fire to 305;
after passing through machine, well dust with icing sugar and bottle.
Beginners should not try to work with less water, as the boil is more
liable to grain, which can be seen by an expert and avoided. Before
putting on the boil see that there is sufficient fuel on the furnace to
carry through the operation. To make up a fire during the process spoils
the color and quality. The sharper the sugar is boiled the better the
appearance and durability.

When boiling common sugars have the pan large enough,--some throw up a
good deal of foam when they reach the boiling point and are liable to
flow over--watch closely, and if unable to beat the foam down, lift the
pan on the side of the fire a few minutes until boiled through.

Many weak sugars burn on a clear fire before they come to a degree of
crack. In this case sprinkle a little fresh fuel or ashes over the fire
and replace the pan again. Should it again catch, repeat the operation
nursing it up to the desired degree. Bad boiling sugar is very
troublesome. A good plan is to make a rule of straining the batch just
after it boils, through a very fine copper wire or hair sieve, this
prevents foreign matter such as grit, saw dust or even nails, which is
often mixed with the sugar getting into the goods. Keep thermometer when
not in use in jar of water standing on the furnace plate by the side of
the pan, wash out the jar and fill with cold water every morning; keep
the thermometer clean, especially the top part, as the sugar which
adheres to it becomes grainy, and might spoil a whole boil. After making
many dark candies thoroughly wash the thermometer before putting into a
light boil.

In using colors for drops and clear goods, use them in the form of a
paste where practicable, then you can mix them in when the boil is on
the slab, thus saving your pan; keep the colors damp in jars, look over
them every night, and, where necessary, add a little cold water to keep
them moist, or the top may get dry and hard, which would make the goods
specky. Use a separate piece of stick for each color to rub in with, and
be careful not to use too much color; a very little goes a long way with
clear boiled goods. Goods are more often spoiled by using too much than
too little; more can always be added if the shades are too light, but
there is no remedy if you have added too much. When coloring taffies,
this must be done in the pan; liquid colors are best; trouble will be
saved if used in the following order. Suppose Raspberry, Everton and
Lemon taffies were wanted, make the Lemon taffy first, add saffron just
before the boil is ready, then the lemon, and pour out; make the Everton
taffy next in the same way, add the butter before the lemon; then make
the Raspberry. In this arrangement there is no necessity of steaming out
the pan. Had the Raspberry taffy been made first, the pan would have to
be cleaned out before the Lemon or Everton taffy could have been made,
because it would have been red.

Measure the flavors in a graduated glass; wash out the glass frequently,
or it will get rancid; weigh the acid and see that it is well ground; if
it has become dry and lumpy, rub it down to a powder with a rolling pin
or heavy bottle on a sheet of paper before using. In using fruit
essences a little powdered tartaric acid throws up the flavor, half the
essences will have a better effect. Put the acid on the boil after it
has been poured on the slab in a little heap, and pour the essence over
it, then thoroughly incorporate the whole.

Use the best oil for the slab with a clean flannel cloth; keep the cloth
in a saucer, if it lies about it falls on the floor and picks up dirt
and carries it to the pouring plate. When it gets hard or gritty burn it
at once and get a new one, or it may be used by mistake and make a mess.
We have seen the beauty of a boil spoilt scores of times by using dirty
rags and rancid oil. A sugar boiler cannot be too careful in these
little details, the success of his work largely depends upon it. It is
easy to inaugurate a good system, and much more comfortable to work to
it than a slovenly "what shall I do next" sort of a method. Know where
to find and put your hand on everything; when the boil is hot there is
no time to look for what you require. "A place for everything and
everything in its place" should be a practical feature in every boiling
shop.


STICKY CANDIES.

Perhaps there is nothing more annoying to the trade than sticky boiled
sugars. All clear goods when exposed to the atmosphere will turn damp,
especially in wet weather. It is a question of degree, some slightly and
some will run almost to syrup; it is impossible to obviate the former
but the latter can be prevented. Great care should be used in adding the
lowering, whether cream of tartar or glucose, too much of either will
cause the goods to run immediately after they are turned out. Weak or
inferior sugars, or not sufficient boiling, has also this effect. We
know of no reliable agent which will altogether prevent this result but
we do know that a careful arrangement of the different proportions,
using good sugar and well boiling greatly mitigate, if not altogether
prevent the grievance. Goods intended for exposure should contain just
sufficient lowering to prevent the boil from growing grainy and boiled
right up to the standard. Of course different sugars will carry more or
less lowering, but this can be easily tested by the workman. A few
experiments will determine the exact quantity for each boil. There is no
excuse for drops sticking in bottles when corked, this should not
occur, if it does, the fault is in the making; the water has a great
deal to do with causing the candies to be sticky. The writer has
experienced this in several country places, where the only supply of
this indispensable ingredient was drawn from the artesian wells. To look
at it, it was all that could be desired--a beautiful, cold, clear and
wholesome beverage. Of its chemical constituents I do not pretend to
give an opinion, but the drops and other clear boils for which it was
used got damp directly after they were exposed, and would have run to a
syrup had they not been covered up. The goods keep all right in bottles,
but it is very annoying, not to speak of the injury and loss to a
business, when this is the position with regard to the water supply. The
only remedy we could suggest, and which was very successful, was
powdered borax. We used this in the proportion of a teaspoonful to every
14 lbs. of sugar adding it just as the sugar began to boil. Borax has
been found useful with any water when making goods to be exposed in the
window or on the counters, such as taffies, rocks and clear boiled
sugars generally. Where the supply of water, as in most large towns is
suitable, given good sugar, cream of tartar or glucose, in proper
proportions, and careful boiling up to the standard, the addition of
borax is unnecessary and should only be resorted to under special
circumstances.


PLAIN TAFFY.

  14 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 quarts Water.
  1/2 ounce Cream Tartar.

PROCESS.--This is an easy and capital recipe to begin with. The process
is practically the same as for all other clear goods, but the
ingredients being fewer there is little chance of their getting
complicated. With a thermometer it is hardly possible to make a mistake,
besides it will make the instruction more intelligible: should he not
possess this appliance, we must ask that the instructions "How to boil
sugar" should be committed to memory, as it would be tedious and a great
waste of time and space to keep explaining how to tell the different
degrees through which the sugar passes before it comes to the point
required for the different goods given in this book. For this and other
reasons I will assume the learner to be working with one.

Put the sugar and water in a clean pan, place it on the fire and stir it
occasionally till melted; when it comes to the boil add the cream of
tartar and put a lid on the pan; allow it to boil in this way for ten
minutes, remove the lid and immerse the bottom part of the thermometer
in the boiling liquid and allow it to remain in this position until it
records 310 degrees, then quickly take out the thermometer, lift off the
pan and pour contents into frames, tins, or on a pouring slab, which
have been previously oiled. If on a pouring slab, mark the boil into
bars or squares, while warm, with a knife or taffy cutter: when quite
cold it is ready for sale.


LEMON TAFFY.

  14 lbs. White Sugar.
  1/2 ounce Cream Tartar.
  Saffron Coloring.
  2 quarts Water.
  Lemon Flavoring.

PROCESS.--Proceed as directed for plain taffy. When the sugar reaches
305 degrees, add a few drops of saffron color; when it reaches 310
degrees, add a few drops of oil of lemon and pour out immediately into
frames or tins; or if on pouring slab, mark out into bars or squares
before it gets cold. The pouring slab should be level so that the sheet
should be all the same thickness.


BUTTER SCOTCH.

  8 lbs. White Sugar.
  1 lb. Fresh Butter.
  Lemon Flavoring.
  1/4 oz. Cream of Tartar.
  1 quart Water.

PROCESS.--Melt the sugar in the water by an occasional stir when the pan
is on the fire, then add the cream of tartar and boil up to 300, lift
the pan on to the side of the furnace and add butter in small pieces
broken off by the hand; slip the pan on the fire again, adding the lemon
flavoring; let it boil through so that all the butter is boiled in then
pour into frames; when partly cold mark with cutter into small squares;
when cold divide the squares; wrap each in wax-paper; sold generally in
one cent packages.

N.B.--There is good butter scotch and better butter scotch, but no bad
butter scotch; this quality may be improved by the addition of a large
proportion of butter: some makers would put 2 lbs. or even 3 lbs. to
this quantity, but that would be regulated by the class of trade and the
size squares. These frames are made to hold 144 squares; a boil this
size will make each square weigh about 1 oz., but any weight of square
may be arranged by the adding or deducting from the boil.


EVERTON TAFFY.

  12 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 lbs. Dark Sugar.
  2 lbs. Fresh Butter.
  1/2 oz. Cream of Tartar.
  2 quarts Water.
  Lemon Flavoring.

PROCESS.--Melt the sugar in the water, add the cream of tartar and boil
the whole to the degree of 300; lift the pan on the side of the fire put
in the butter in small pieces, place the pan again on the fire and let
it boil through; add the lemon and give it time to mix in, then pour out
contents into frame, or on pouring plate to cut up into bars. Everton
taffy and butter scotch are similar, except in color; same remarks as to
quality will apply in both cases; if the fire is very fierce, do not put
the pan down flat on it after adding butter; nurse it gently to prevent
burning; little fresh coke shaken over the fire would assist.


RASPBERRY TAFFY.

  14 lbs. White Sugar.
  1/2 oz. Cream of Tartar.
  Raspberry Flavor.
  2 quarts Water.
  Brilliant Rose.

PROCESS.--Bring the sugar and water to a boil, add the cream of tartar,
put on the lid for ten minutes, then uncover and immerse the
thermometer; continue to boil to 300; tinge a bright red with liquid,
brilliant rose; add raspberry essence; pour out on frame or pouring
plate and mark into bars or squares of convenient size; when cold the
taffy is ready for packing and sale.


FIG TAFFY.

  10 lbs Good Yellow Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  3 lbs Figs Chopped Fine.
  3 pints Water.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, water and glucose to a weak crack, 295; lift
the pan partly off the fire, putting a piece of iron under it to prevent
it burning; add the figs, gently letting the whole thoroughly boil
through and mix; pour in oiled tins or on slab, and mark into squares.
When adding the figs let them drop through the fingers, not in a heap.


WALNUT TAFFY.

  5 lbs. Brown Sugar.
  5 lbs. Crystal Sugar.
  2-1/2 lbs. Glucose.
  3 lbs. Walnuts.
  2 quarts Water.
  Lemon Flavoring.

PROCESS.--Shell the walnuts, peel off the skin chop very fine. Boil the
glucose, sugar and water as before directed to the degree of weak crack,
300. Lift the pan a little from the fire; add the prepared nuts by
letting them run through the finger gently; let the whole boil through,
then add a few drops of the oil of lemon; when thoroughly mixed in, pour
out the boil and mark into bars before too cold. The flavor is improved
by roasting the walnuts a little before putting in the boil.


PEANUT CANDY.

Boil to the crack, 1 quart best New Orleans Molasses, 1 lb. glucose and
1 quart water.

Prepare the meats by removing the thin reddish skin in which they are
enveloped and fill a tray to about the depth of an inch. Pour over them
the hot candy prepared as directed, stirring the meats till each one is
covered. A little less candy should be used than will suffice to
entirely cover the meats, though each separate one should be covered,
the object being to use just enough of the candy to cause the meats to
adhere firmly together, thus forming a large cake, which when nearly
cold may be divided into squares or bars with a sharp knife.

Almonds and other nuts may be used in the same manner above described.


BARCELONA TAFFY.

  5 lbs. Brown Sugar.
  5 lbs. Crystal Sugar.
  3 lbs. Barcelona Nuts.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  2 quarts Water.
  Lemon Flavoring.

Prepare the nuts by chopping them fine, boil the sugar, glucose and
water to the degree 300. Remove the pan a little from the fire add the
nuts carefully; when thoroughly boiled through and amalgamated, add a
few drops of lemon and pour out contents into frame or on pouring plate
and mark into bars.


COCOANUT TAFFY.

  6 lbs. Granulated Sugar.
  2 lbs. Desiccated Cocoanut Unsweetened.
  4 lbs. Brown Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  3 pints Water.
  Lemon Flavoring.

PROCESS.--Melt the sugars in the water, bring it to the boil, add the
glucose and continue to boil to the degree 300; lift the pan a little
way from the fire; let the desiccated cocoanut run gently in the boil;
continue to boil until the lot is well mixed through; add a few drops of
oil of lemon and pour out in frames; use the lemon cautiously, too much
spoils the flavor.

[Illustration: Fig. 14.

  Cocoanut Slicer and Shredder.
  IMPROVED STEEL GRATER.
  Pat. Aug. 30, 1887.

No. 2 we claim to be the best Hand Made Machine in the Market. It is
easily adjusted for cutting, slicing or grating, the several plates
requiring but a moment to adjust to the shaft. It is the only machine
having an outside adjustment.

  No. 2 Machine, Slicer and Shredder      $20 00
  Grater for same                           3 00
]


COCOANUT TAFFY OR STICK JAW.

  6 lbs. Granulated Sugar.
  4 lbs. Brown sugar.
  3 pints Water.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  4 Large Cocoanuts Sliced.

PROCESS.--Boil to crack 310 by the thermometer, the sugar, glucose and
water; have the cocoanut freshly peeled and sliced ready; raise the pan
two or three inches from the fire; slide in the nut, stirring gently
with spatula to keep them off the bottom till well boiled through, then
pour out in tins or frames.

N.B.--Stir gently only the one way or you may grain the boil.

[Illustration: Fig. 13.

Citron and Orange Peel Slicing Machine.

This is a useful Machine for Slicing Peel in thin and regular pieces for
the tops of Maderia Cakes, etc.

It is also made double-action i.e.--with both Slicing and Shredding
Knives, the latter being used to shred or grate Cocoanut, etc., very
fine.

Price, $13 00]

[Illustration: Fig. 202 a. Price $1 00.

New Almond Grater.

One of the Best Almond Graters in the Market.]


EGGS AND BACON.

  10 lbs. White Sugar.
  2-1/2 lbs. Glucose.
  3 pints Water.
  1 lb. Nonpareils.
  1 Cocoanut.
  Brilliant Rose Coloring.

PROCESS.--Cut a large cocoanut into slices, dry them and lay them on the
pouring plate in rows about half an inch apart; sprinkle between them
thickly some nonpareil of various colors (hundreds and thousands). Boil
to crack the sugar, glucose and water; tinge with brilliant rose, and
carefully and evenly pour the contents over the pouring plate,
disturbing the nut and nonpareil as little as possible. A good plan is
to have a small shallow ladle with an open spout, into which pour a
little of the boil, run over the plate a small stream from the ladle
first, this will bind the nut, etc., and keep them in their places while
the bulk is being poured out.


ALMOND HARDBAKE.

  10 lbs. Good Brown Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  Lemon Flavoring if desired.
  3 lbs. Almonds.
  3 pints water.

PROCESS.--Split with a sharp knife the almonds, lay them face downwards
on an oiled plate, cover the plate as closely as possible; boil the
glucose, sugar and water to the crack 305; remove the pan from the fire,
and pour the contents carefully and evenly over the almonds; the
addition of a little lemon or almond flavoring will improve it.

N.B.--See remarks re-ladle in previous recipe.


ALMOND ROCK.

  10 lbs. Brown Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  6 lbs. Sweet Almonds.
  3 pints water.

PROCESS.--Clean your almonds by blowing out all the dust and grit, pick
out the shells, dissolve the sugar water and glucose; boil the lot up to
crack; pour the contents on oiled plate. Sprinkle the almond all over
the boil, shake over the lot a few drops of oil of lemon; turn up the
edges first, then the whole boil; mix and knead it like dough until all
the almonds are well mixed in; no time must be lost in this process or
the sugar will get too hard; when firm make a long roll of the entire
boil, place it on a hard wood board, and cut it up into thin slices; it
will have to be kept in shape while cutting, by turning over and
pressing the sides as it becomes flat; a special large sharp knife is
used for this purpose. A smaller boil than the above had better be tried
by beginners, say half the quantity. This can be done by halving the
ingredients. Needless to state these remarks apply to other recipes.


FRENCH ALMOND ROCK.

  12 lbs. White Sugar.
  3 lbs. Glucose.
  6 lbs. Sweet Blanched Almonds.
  4 pints water.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, water and glucose in the usual way to the
degree of weak crack, 305 by the thermometer, then ease the pan a little
way off the fire, and let the almonds gently slide into the mass. Use
the spatula a little just to keep the almonds from sticking to the
bottom, stirring lightly only the one way, then watch the boil carefully
till it turns a light golden color; lift off the pan and pour the
contents into the frames. The almond will come to the top better in tins
than in pouring plates.

Of course a better quality is made by adding more almonds, or vice
versa. The almond after being blanched should be spread on a tin and
dried, either on the stove top or in the oven.


RASPBERRY CANDY.

  12 lbs. White Sugar.
  3 lbs. Raspberry Jam.
  2 quarts water.
  Brilliant Rose Coloring.

PROCESS.--Melt the sugar in water, and boil to ball 250; add the
raspberry jam, and stir it well in; remove the pan from the fire, add
sufficient coloring to make bright raspberry; rub part of the mixture
with spatula against side of pan until it changes a heavy opaque, then
stir the whole mass until uniform. Pour the contents carefully on a
slab, covered with greased paper; make the sheet about 1/2 inch thick,
mark into bars with a sharp knife, and break up when cold.


APRICOT CANDY.

  6 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 lbs. Apricot Jam or Pulp.
  2 pints water.
  Saffron Coloring.

PROCESS.--Melt the sugar in the water and boil to ball, 250, add the jam
or pulp. Stir well until thoroughly mixed in, remove the pan, rub part
of the contents against the side of the pan with spatula until cloudy
and opaque; color with saffron a bright yellow, then stir the whole
together until uniform cloudy; pour out in frames or on slab covered
with oiled paper. A pinch of tartaric acid would improve the flavor, but
often prevent candying, unless in the hands of an expert. In any case
the acid should be added in a fine powder after the whole has been
thoroughly grained. A pallette knife is a very useful knife for rubbing
the sugar against the sides of the pan.


BROWN COCOANUT CANDY.

  14 lbs. Brown Sugar.
  6 large Cocoanuts Sliced.
  3 pints water.

PROCESS.--Melt the sugar in the water, and boil to degree of ball, then
add the sliced cocoanut, stir them in remove the pan from the fire and
rub the sugar against the side of the pan until it becomes cloudy stir
the whole together until the whole becomes cloudy and thick; turn out
the batch into tins or on slabs; mark with a sharp knife into squares or
bars. When cold break it up at marks. Prepare the cocoanuts by cutting
them up into thin slices with a spokeshave or machine. The brown skin is
seldom skinned off for this dark candy.


WHITE COCOANUT CANDY.

  14 lbs. White Sugar.
  6 Large Cocoanuts Peeled and Sliced.
  3 pints Water.

PROCESS.--Peel off all the brown skin from the nuts with a sharp knife;
wash them and cut into thin slices. Melt the sugar in the water and
boil to ball 250, add the sliced nuts, keeping the boil well stirred.
When thoroughly mixed, remove the pan from the fire and commence to
grain with pallette knife or spatula until the whole mass turns an
opaque white. Now turn out the batch into frames, or on the slab, which
has been covered with paper; mark into convenient sized bars, break up
when set hard.


CHOCOLATE COCOANUT CANDY.

  10 lbs. Brown Sugar.
  1 lb. Pure Block Cocoa.
  4 Cocoanuts shredded.
  3 pints water.

PROCESS.--When cracking the nuts, do so over a basin and save all the
milk: peel all brown skin off and cut the nut into fine shreds with
machine; dissolve the sugar in the pan with the water and cocoanut milk,
boil up to ball, remove the pan a little off the fire, then add the nut
together with the pure block cocoa, stir the whole together, grain on
side of pan as before directed. Stir the whole well up and turn out into
frames or on pouring plates.

N.B.--The pure cocoa should have been previously melted in a saucepan or
chopped up in small pieces. In the latter case there is less waste, and
the heat of the sugar would soon melt it.


FRUIT CANDY.

  7 lbs. White or Brown Sugar.
  1 lb. Currants cleaned and dried.
  1/2 lb. Sultanas.
  1/2 lb. Sweet Almonds.
  2 pints water.
  Saffron Coloring.

PROCESS.--Mix together the fruits, which should have been freed from
grit and dust; boil the sugar and water to the degree of ball, 250;
remove the pan from the fire; gently grain the boil by rubbing a little
of the syrup against the side of the pan until cloudy, then slide in the
fruit and stir the whole together, adding a little saffron to color a
bright yellow. See that the mass has changed to an opaque, then turn the
lot out into frames or on a pouring slab.


CANDIES, VARIOUS.

Fruits green, dried or preserved, almonds and nuts of almost every
description, as well as flavors and colors of a pleasant taste and
pretty hue may be used in making candies. The process is exactly the
same: the ingredients can be arranged to suit the fancy of the maker and
the palate of his customers. The field to select variety from seems
inexhaustible, so that new goods of this class should be introduced ad.
lib. No good purpose could be served by giving a procession of these
simple instructions, when with little thought and judgment anyone could
invent a new candy for themselves. It might be as well to add that a
little glucose or cream of tartar added will make the candies softer,
and may be used, if preferred, in each formula in the proportion of 2
lbs. of glucose or a teaspoonful of cream tartar to every 10 lbs. of
sugar.

[Illustration: ROLLER PATTERNS.

  No.                   To lb.

   1 Tom Thumb Drop      1000
   2 Currant Drop         840
   3 Acid Drop            500
   4 Sour Ball            250
   5 Sour Ball            180
   6 Fish                 200
   7 Fish                 150
   8 Fish                 120
   9 Fish                  60
  10 Fish                  40
  11 Strawberry           200
  12 Raspberry            200
  15 Shell                200
  16 Motto Lump           200
  17 Motto Lump           120
  18 Motto Lump            80
  27 Seal Cough           200
  28 Waffle               180
  33 Cigar                 35
  37 Heart and Hand       100
  38 Acorn                209
  42 Batton               200
  53 Cough                120
  54 Polka                200
  55 Rifle                150
  58 Twist Loaf           200
]


BARLEY SUGAR DROPS.

  14 lbs. White Sugar.
  3 lbs. Glucose.
  4 pints water.
  1/4 oz. Oil Lemon.
  Saffron Coloring.

PROCESS.--Put the sugar and water in a pan, place it on the fire, giving
it an occasional stir until the sugar is dissolved, then add the
glucose, or 1/4 oz. cream of tartar--either will do, but do not use
both--place the cover on the pan and let it boil for ten minutes or so,
(the cover is put on to steam the sides of the pan and keep it clean and
free from granulation); take off the cover and put in the thermometer,
immersing the bottom part in the boiling liquid. Let the whole boil
until it reaches the degree of crack, 300; tinge with saffron, then pour
the contents on pouring plate, which has been previously oiled; sprinkle
a few drops of oil of lemon over it, turn the edges as it begins to
cool: then turn it over, knead it up as soon as you can handle it: if it
is on a cool slab you must be pretty smart or it will get too hard. As
soon as it gets stiff enough cut off small convenient pieces and pass
through the barley sugar machine; when cool break up, give them a good
shake in a rough sieve to free them from any machine scraps; the drops
are then ready for bottling. Powdered sugar is not usually mixed with
these drops.


PEAR DROPS.

  14 lbs. White Sugar.
  3 lbs Glucose.
  1/4 oz. Essence of Pear.
  1 oz. Tartaric Acid.
  2 quarts water.
  Paste, Red Color.

PROCESS.--Dissolve the sugar in the water, add the glucose, and bring
the whole to the degree of crack, pour the contents on the slab, rub in
a little red paste color in one corner of the boil to color light pink,
turn up the edges, add the powdered acid in a little heap, pour over the
acid the pear essence and thoroughly mix through the entire mass by
kneading: when the batch is stiff enough cut off in small pieces and
pass through the pear drop rollers; when cold sift and mix some icing
sugar amongst them, and bottle.


RASPBERRY DROPS.

  14 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 quarts water.
  3 lbs. Glucose.
  1/2 oz. Essence of Raspberry.
  1 oz. Tartaric.
  Coloring, Brilliant Rose.

PROCESS.--Melt the sugar in the water, add the glucose and boil the
whole up to crack; pour out the boil on a cold slab, rub in a little of
the cherry paste to color, turn up the edges, put in the powdered acid
in a little heap, pour over the acid the raspberry flavoring and knead
up the batch till thoroughly mixed and fit for the machine. Cut off in
pieces and pass through the raspberry rollers; sift, dust and bottle
when cold.


ALMOND TABLETS.

  14 lbs. Brown Sugar.
  3 lbs Glucose.
  Lemon Flavoring.
  2 lbs. Almonds, Chopped.
  4 pints water.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and water, as directed, to the degree
of crack; pour the boil on oiled plate, sprinkle the almond over it
with a few drops of oil of lemon, knead the whole together till stiff,
cut off small pieces and pass through tablet rollers.


PINE APPLE DROPS.

  14 lbs. White Sugar.
  3 lbs. Glucose.
  4 pints water.
  1 oz. Tartaric Acid.
  Saffron Coloring.
  1/4 oz. Essence Pine Apple.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and water, as before directed, to the
degree of crack 310; add to the boil saffron paste after it has been
poured on the slab: when on the slab put in the acid and essence of
pineapple; knead the whole together; when stiff enough, cut off in
pieces and pass through the pineapple roll.


COCOANUT TABLETS.

  14 lbs. White Sugar.
  3 lbs. Glucose.
  1 lb. Desiccated Cocoanut.
  4 pints water.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, water and glucose to the degree of crack; pour
on slab and sprinkle the desiccated cocoanut over the boil, flavor with
lemon, mix up and pass through tablet rollers.


ACID DROPS AND TABLETS.

  14 lbs. Best White Sugar.
  3/4 oz. Cream of Tartar.
  Lemon Flavoring.
  4 pints water.
  4 oz. Tartaric Acid.

PROCESS.--Put the sugar and water in clean bright pan and bring to the
boil, add cream of tartar, place the lid on the pan and boil for ten
minutes: remove the cover and put in thermometer, boiling on a sharp
fire to the degree of crack: pour out at once on clean, greased slab:
when cool enough, turn up at the edges and fold the boil over, then add
the acid which has been finely powdered, together with a few drops of
lemon; knead up the whole until stiff and pass through drop or tablet
rollers; break up when cold, and dust with powdered sugar, weigh and
bottle.

N.B.--We mean the term "white sugar" to include loaf, dutch crush,
granulated or crystal; any of these of good quality will answer the
purpose.


BROWN COUGH DROPS.

  14 lbs. Brown Sugar.
  3 lbs. Glucose.
  3 oz. Acid Tartaric.
  1/2 oz. Oil Aniseed.
  1/4 oz. Oil Cloves.
  1/4 oz. Oil Peppermint.
  2 oz. Herb Horehound.
  5 pints Water.

PROCESS.--First boil the herb horehound in the water ten minutes, then
strain; add the liquor to the sugar and the glucose, and boil as for
other drops to crack 310; pour on oiled slab; turn up the edges and fold
in the boil, then put the tartaric acid in a little heap on the boil,
and pour over it the aniseed, clove and peppermint, knead up the whole,
thoroughly mixing the flavors until stiff enough to pass through machine
cough drop rollers.

N.B.--The brown sugar should be of good boiling quality.


LIGHT COUGH DROPS.

  14 lbs. White Sugar.
  3 lbs. Glucose.
  3 oz. Acid Tartaric.
  1/2 oz. Cough Drop Essence.
  1/2 oz. Oil Aniseed.
  4 pints Water.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and water as before directed to the
degree of crack, 310; pour on greased slab; first turn up boil, then add
powdered acid, cough drop essence and oil of aniseed; mix thoroughly
until ready for machine, and pass through cough drop rollers; break up,
sift, and dust with powdered sugar.

N.B.--We have almost said enough about plain machine drops; they are all
practically made alike, the color, flavor and shape alone differing. See
_our_ list for _colors_ and _flavors_, _candy machines_ and _rollers_.


TAR COUGH DROPS.

1 oz. Dried Rose Leaves boil in 1 gallon water to half a gallon, strain
and mix with 10 pounds Sugar, 21 pounds Glucose and 1 oz. strained Tar,
boil to the crack and finish as for other drops.


IMITATION CHOCOLATE STICKS.

  8 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  Vanilla Flavoring.
  3 pints Water.
  1 oz. Tartaric Acid.

PROCESS.--Place the pan containing the sugar and water on the fire, stir
in the glucose and bring the lot to the degree of weak crack, 300; pour
on the slab, turn up the edges, fold over the boil, and add the acid and
vanilla; when thoroughly mixed and stiff enough to handle, then pull
over the hook until glossy white: remove it to the slab, and roll into
rods about half an inch thick; when cold snip off into short equal
lengths and dip them into melted chocolate paste, composed of 1/2 lb.
pure block cocoa, 1/2 lb. ground sugar and 3 oz. lard or cocoa butter
(no water). Melt these ingredients in a vessel by standing it on the hot
furnace plate (not too near the fire) stir until all is dissolved and
incorporated, then dip sticks in this mixture singly, taking them out
immediately and laying them on wire frames to dry.


CHOCOLATE COCOANUT STICKS.

  8 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  Desiccated Cocoanut.
  3 pints Water.
  4 oz. Pure Cocoanut.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, water and glucose as directed to degree of
weak crack, 300; pour on oiled slab: cut off one third for pulling; add
to the other two-thirds the pure cocoa and mix it in; pull the smaller
piece over the hook until white and glossy; spread out the solid sugar
and lay the pulled in the centre casing it round evenly then roll into
sticks 1 inch thick; when cold, snip off into lengths make a thin
solution of gum or gelatine, wet the surface of each stick, and roll in
desiccated cocoa nut; when dry they are ready for sale.


ACID STICKS.

Clear white.

  10 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 oz. Tartaric Acid.
  Lemon Flavoring.
  1/2 oz. Cream of Tartar.
  3 pints water.

PROCESS.--Put the sugar and water in a clean bright pan, add the cream
of tartar and boil up sharply to a weak crack, 300; pour the batch on
oiled slab; turn in the edges, fold the boil over, then put in powdered
acid with a few drops of lemon; knead the whole together, working one
end down to a point; draw it out the required thickness, the full length
of the plate, cut it off, then do another length likewise, repeating the
operation until the boil is worked up; keep the first piece in shape by
occasionally rolling them while the remainder of the boil is being
pulled out and shaped. When the boil is finished, and the sticks cold,
snip them off in lengths with scissors. An assistant is very useful to
keep the sticks in motion while the boil is being worked up or they may
become flat.


PEPPERMINT STICKS.

Dark brown with light stripes.

  8 lbs. Brown Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  3 pints Water.
  Peppermint Flavoring.

PROCESS.--Bring the sugar, glucose and water to the degree of crack in
the usual way; pour the batch on the slab; work in the flavors; cut off
a piece about 1-1/2 pounds from the boil and pull it over hook until
light and satiny, then roll the pulled sugar out into a long stick, cut
it into six pieces of equal length and lay them on the solid boil
longways and equal distances apart, then roll the boil into shape, bring
down one end to a point; pull out into convenient lengths, twisting
them so that the stripes form a pretty spiral round the stick.

N.B.--For the stripes in this case, white sugar is often used and looks
much better, but to do so two pans are necessary, one may be a small
saucepan to boil two pounds. The white sugar is boiled separately in the
ordinary way, otherwise, process, would be exactly as described.


LEMON STICKS.

  Pulled yellow centre with yellow case.

  8 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 lbs Glucose.
  Yellow Paste Color.
  3 pints Water.
  Lemon Essence.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and water to a weak crack; pour the
batch on oiled slab; work in color and flavor; cut off one-third and
pull over the hook until of a bright yellow satiny appearance; remove it
from the hook; spread out the plain sugar and lay the pulled in the
centre; case it nicely all round with solid, then commence to roll;
bring one end down to required thickness; pull out into sticks as long
as convenient, when cold snip into lengths required.


ORANGE STICKS.

  Pulled white body with one broad red and two narrow orange stripes.

  8 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  3 pints Water.
  Red Coloring.
  Oil of Orange.
  Tartaric Acid.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and water to the weak crack, 300; pour
batch on slab; cut off about one-third of the boil; divide this into two
pieces; color one-part a deep red and the other a deep orange; mix in
the colors quickly and stand them aside on a piece of wood in a warm
place till wanted; now put the acid and flavoring into the larger
portion of the boil and pull over the hook until white and spongey;
remove it to the slab, then take the piece of red sugar and draw it out
about 18 inches long and 2-1/2 inches wide; lay it down the centre of
the pulled sugar, then take the piece of orange sugar and pull it out
about 3 feet, half the thickness of the red, cut in two and place one on
each side of the red, about two inches from it, roll, twist and pull out
the recognized thickness; when cold, snip in lengths.


CINNAMON STICKS.

Clear pink body with four narrow white stripes.

  6 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  Cinnamon Flavor.
  3 pints water.
  Cherry Paste Color.

PROCESS.--Bring the sugar, glucose and water to the crack and pour out;
cut off piece and pull it white: color the body light pink, add the
flavor, prepare the four stripes as before directed, lay them on the
clear sugar, equal distance apart, roll out in lengths and snip off when
cold.


CLOVE STICKS.

Almost transparent with a tinge of red, striped with white and red
stripes alternately.

  8 lbs. Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  3 pints water.
  Cherry Paste Color.
  Oil of Cloves.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and water to 300; pour on the oiled
slab; cut off small portion, divide it into two, color one deep red,
pull both stripes and lay them alternately on the solid sugar, form the
boil into a roll, bring down one end, usually the left end, to a point;
pull out in long lengths and twist; when cold snip with scissors to
size.


RASPBERRY STICKS.

Pulled white centre, cased with red and striped with six narrow white
stripes.

  8 lbs. White Sugar
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  3 pints water.
  Cherry Red Paste Color.
  Raspberry Essence.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and water to crack 300; pour the batch
on plate; cut in half and color one half red, then flavor both halves
with essence, (raspberry and a little tartaric acid); pull one half over
the hook and cut off one third of it and lay it aside; put the other two
thirds in the centre of the red solid sugar and case it around; now lay
the remaining piece of pulled sugar in six lengths of equal thickness
and distances apart on the top of the cased boil; roll out the ball to
the required thickness, twist and snip off into lengths when cold.


TWISTED BARLEY SUGAR STICKS.

Hand Made.

  8 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  3 pints water.
  Lemon Flavoring.
  Saffron Color.

PROCESS.--Put the sugar and water in a clear, bright pan and bring to a
boil, then add the glucose: put on the lid for five minutes, continue
boiling in the usual way till it reaches crack 300; now add sufficient
coloring to tinge a golden color and pour the boil carefully over the
smooth slab, so that the sheet of sugar will not be more than the eighth
of an inch thick. When the sheet has partly set, cut it into strips one
inch wide and the whole length of the sheet with scissors. Let an
assistant take charge of the strips and twist them by taking hold of an
end in each hand and turn them in opposite directions, forming a spiral
column; when cold snip the required lengths and carefully weigh and
bottle. To make these goods the operators must be very quick in their
movements. The slab must be warm on which the sugar is poured, as the
thin sticks cool so fast and get brittle.


PEPPERMINT BULL'S EYES.

For cornered drops cut at angles, black with white stripes.

  8 lbs. Brown Sugar.
  2 lbs Glucose.
  3 pints water.
  Peppermint Flavor.

PROCESS.--The process is exactly the same as for peppermint stick, viz;
boil the sugar water and glucose to weak crack, 300; pour the boil on
oiled plate, flavor with peppermint and work well up; in a smaller pan
have two pounds of white sugar, with the usual proportion of cream of
tartar and water boiled to the same degree; pull this over the hook
until white and porous; remove it to the plate and work it down into
lengths about one inch thick; lay them longways on the solid boil, equal
distances apart; make the whole boil into a thick roll, bringing one end
down to a point; draw off as for one cent sticks, but thicker; then with
scissors snip them off in pieces about an inch long. Hold the scissors
in the right hand, the sugar in the left; every time you make a clip
turn the sugar half way round, so that the corners of each cushion will
be at opposite angles.


BULL'S EYES, (Various.)

The formula given for the different kinds of sugar sticks will answer
for the variety of bull's eyes. The process and ingredients are
precisely alike. The sticks may or may not be drawn out a little
thicker, according to the size of drop required. Cream of tartar may be
substituted for glucose in all recipes given for boiled goods. The sugar
is not boiled quite so high for hand goods or pulled sugar as it is for
machine drops; being a little lower it works better, keeps longer
pliable, and is less brittle when cold.


ROUND BALLS.

  8 lbs. Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  Color.
  3 pints water.
  Flavor.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, water and glucose in the usual way to weak
crack, say 300; pour the boil on the slab, color and flavor to taste;
work the batch up until stiffish, then roll the boil round, getting one
end down to a point as directed for sticks, pull it off in lengths of
about three feet and about one inch thick; cut in pieces with "JACKSON
BALL CUTTER" and roll round with the hand. An expert assistant is
necessary for this operation, as the balls must be shaped while hot and
kept on the move till cold.

[Illustration: JACKSON BALL CUTTERS.

This cut represents our Improved Ball Cutter, or Press, which cuts only
one size ball; the improvement consists of a finger bar, operated by a
cam, so that each time the handle is raised the fingers throw out the
balls from between the knives.

Fig 211 a.

  No. 1 Cuts 8 balls, 1-1/8 inch diameter (with Fingerbar)}
   "  2  "  11 balls, 13-16 in.     "             "       } $15 00
   "  3  "   9 balls, 1 inch        "             "       }
]

[Illustration: Jackson Ball Cutter.

This Machine has two steel knives, and is regulated by a gauge, so that
it will cut Balls of any size.

Fig. 210 a.

Price, $5 00 ]

This general recipe will apply to all balls. For details of pulling,
striping, casing and variety the reader is referred to the various
processes given for sticks and bulls eyes. They are all made and
finished in this way. For small sizes, pull out the lengths thinner; for
large sizes, thicker.

To make the various striped balls nicely, requires practice and a good
deal of it. No amount of book learning will teach those who are quite
ignorant of sugar boiling; but at the same time if the reader has
mastered the simpler process at the beginning of the book, he is quite
capable of understanding this and working out his own ideas in this way;
but hand-made balls should not be attempted until the learner feels
confident he can manage a boil easily and quickly, because there is no
time to think after the sugar is on the slab. The manipulation must now
have been acquired to an extent so as to enable the operator to proceed
as if by instinct.


ROSE BUDS.

  8 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 pounds glucose.
  5 or 6 drops Otto of Roses.
  3 pints water.
  Cherry Paste Color.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and water to the degree of crack 300,
pour on oiled slab, cut off about one third for pulling, color the
larger piece a deep red and flavor with otto of roses; pull the smaller
piece over the hook till white; spread out the larger piece, lay the
pulled sugar in the middle, casing carefully round, pass through small
acid drop rollers.

N.B.--Turn the boil on its edge every time you cut a piece for the
machine, in order to keep the pulled sugar as near the centre as
possible.


RIPE PEARS.

  8 lbs Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  3 pints water.
  1 oz. Tartaric Acid.
  Cherry Red.
  Yellow Paste Color.
  1/4 oz. Essence Pear.

PROCESS.--Melt the sugar in the water, add the glucose and boil to 305;
pour on slab, cut the batch into three equal parts, flavor with essence
of pear, together with a little acid, color one part deep red and one
deep yellow, pull the third portion over the hook and lay it between the
yellow and red pieces so that one side will be yellow and the other
bright red; cut off into convenient sizes and pass through large pear
drop rollers. These goods are sold either plain or crystalized.


BOILED SUGAR TOYS.

See our stock of clear toy moulds, list of which is mailed on
application. They may be had to turn out all kinds of figures, such as
dogs, cats, elephants, etc. They are very popular among the children and
sell well in certain districts, and show a handsome profit. The moulds
are generally made in two parts; they must be well oiled; the sugar
boiled as for drops. Fill the moulds full, and just before the whole
mass sets, pour as much of the sugar out as will run; this will leave
only a thin coating which cling to the sides of the shapes and will
easily come out when the mould is parted, then you have the figures
complete but hollow. Boiled sugar whistles are made exactly the same
way.


TO CRYSTALIZE BOILED SUGAR GOODS.

Several descriptions of boiled sugars are sold crystalized, which look
very pretty and stand exposure to the atmosphere better. The process is
very simple and may be done with little trouble. When the drops have
been made and set, break them up and sift them well in a coarse sieve,
now shake them over a pan which is boiling, so that they get damped by
steam, and throw them in a heap of crystal sugar; mix them well up, so
that the sugar adheres to the drops uniformly: now sift them out of the
sugar again and they will dry in a few minutes and be ready for packing.
Another method is, when the drops have been made and sifted, to have a
thin solution of gum or gelatine and shake it over them and rub them all
together till damp all over; now throw over them sufficient crystal
sugar to coat them and mix them up; when dry sift again and pack.

N.B.---When being crystalized the goods should be warm, not hot, or
they will candy. Large French pears should be crystalized by the latter
process and be almost cold during the operation; being bulky they
retain the heat a long time, and therefore have a great tendency to
grain.


IMITATION INDIAN CORN.

  8 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  Yellow Color.
  3 pints Water.
  Lemon Flavoring.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and water to weak crack, 305; pour the
boil on slab, flavor with lemon and color yellow; cut this boil in two
and pull one-half over the hook; roll the pulled half out in lengths
about the size of a corn pod; now put the plain yellow sugar through the
Tom Thumb drop rollers, loosening the screws a little, and ease the
pulled sugar with sheets from the machine; if done carefully, the result
will be a good imitation of real Indian corn.


POPCORN BALLS.

Roast the corn berries over a smokeless fire in a corn popper (get our
price for corn poppers); keep shaking until every berry has burst; boil
sufficient sugar and water to the degree of feather, 245; add to each 7
lbs. syrup, four ounces of dissolved gum arabic; wet the popped corn in
this syrup, and roll them in fine pulverized sugar until coated all
over, then lay them aside; when dry repeat the coating process in the
same manner until they have taken up the desired thickness of sugar.
Weigh or measure sufficient coated berries, according to size of ball
required, moisten them with thin syrup, partly form the ball by hand,
then put it in a pop corn ball press and press tightly into shape, then
form into balls in the usual way with pop corn ball press.

[Illustration: Pop Corn Ball Press

Makes Balls 3-1/2 inches diameter, has brass cups top and bottom, so
arranged that the ball is pushed out of the cup at each operation.

Any Size Ball made to order.

Price complete any size Ball, $35 00

Fig. 208 a.]


POPCORN BRICKS.

PROCESS.--The corn berries are prepared as for balls; boil brown sugar
in the proportion of 8 lbs. sugar and two pounds molasses to ball, 250;
pour the syrup over the corn and thoroughly mix them; press them
immediately into oiled tins. The process should be done quickly and the
seeds pressed as tightly together as possible; when cold they are ready
for sale and may be cut to size with sharp knife.

[Illustration: POP CORN HAND BALL PRESS.

  2    in. diameter      Price     $4 00
  2-1/2 "    "            "         4 00
  3     "    "            "         4 00
  3-1/2 "    "            "         5 00
  4     "    "            "         5 00
  Egg Shape 3-1/8 × 2-1/4 "         5 00

Fig. 209 a.]


POP CORN CAKES.

PROCESS.--Prepare the corn as for balls and pack them closely into
strong square tins slightly oiled with olive oil of best quality; boil
to crack, sufficient brown sugar and glucose for quantity required and
pour the hot syrup over the pop corns, just enough to make them adhere.
When cold cut them up with a sharp knife the size.

[Illustration: CORN POPPERS--Made Very Strong.

  1/2 Peck         $2 00
  1 Peck            2 75
  1/2 Bushel        3 75
  1 Bushel          4 75

Fig. 523.]


JAP NUGGETS NO. 1.

  2 lbs. White Sugar.
  4 lbs. Glucose.
  4 lbs. Desiccated Cocoanut unsweetened.
  Yellow Coloring.
  1-1/2 lbs. Farina.
  2 pints Water.

PROCESS.--Mix the ingredients in copper pan; boil on a slow fire to
stiff ball, 250, stirring all the time; add coloring to fancy; when
ready, pour carefully on an oiled plate, making the sheet about half an
inch thick; when cold, dust with pulverized sugar and cut up with sharp
knife to size.

N.B.--A few loose iron bars are useful to form a square on the pouring
plate, in proportion to size of boil; that the exact thickness of sheet
may be determined.

[Illustration: PATENT CANDY CUTTER.

For Cutting Caramels, Japanese Cocoanut, and all kind of Bar Candies.

Cuts all thicknesses up to one inch, and all widths up to one and
one-quarter inches.

Moving Bed of Machine is 32 inches long and 9 inches wide. Will cut 1500
pounds of Candy per day.

One of the handiest and most useful all round Machines a man can buy.

Price, $75 00]


JAP NUGGETS NO. 2.

  2 lbs. White Sugar.
  4 lbs. Good Brown.
  5 lbs. Desiccated Cocoanut.
  7 lbs. Glucose.
  2-1/2 lbs. Farina.
  3 pints Water.

PROCESS.--Put the sugar, glucose and water in the pan; place it on a
slow fire; stir in the cocoanut and farina and boil to stiff ball, 255,
keeping it well stirred. Pour on an oiled slab, and cut up to size; when
set, dust with powdered sugar. In large factories where this candy is
made, machinery plays an important part. In fact the manipulation is
practically all done by mechanism. There is the desiccator for preparing
the cocoanuts, the steam pans, which are fitted with beaters revolving
inside, fixed with chains and weights for lifting them out, so that the
cans may be emptied and cleaned without trouble; also plates for rolling
out sheets to size, and cutting machines which cut the nuggets any size,
the machine being so arranged that by simply altering a pawl on a
ratchet wheel the size of the nuggets is determined. Where this
elaborate arrangement exists our formula would neither be desirable nor
necessary, nor do we pretend to suggest or advise. However, many tons
are made in the ordinary boiling shop with the usual appliances and
conveniences, and it is to assist people thus situated is the principal
object of this book.


JAP NUGGETS NO. 3.

  4 lbs. Good Brown Sugar.
  3-1/2 lbs. Glucose.
  3 pints Water.
  4 lbs. Desiccated Cocoanut Unsweetened.
  2 lbs. Farina.

PROCESS.--As before, brown coloring should be used if required dark; it
makes goods look richer; when the boil is cut up the nuggets should be
thrown into pulverized sugar.


VANILLA NOUGAT (Common.)

  12 lbs. White Sugar.
  3 lbs. glucose.
  1/2 oz. Essence Vanilla.
  4 lbs. Sweet Almonds small.
  3 pints water.

PROCESS.--Put the sugar, glucose and water in a clean pan, place it on a
sharp fire and stir until dissolved; then put on the cover and let it
boil for five or six minutes; now remove the lid and continue to boil to
soft ball degree; now pour the contents on a damp slab (one over which
water has been sprinkled); when cool take a long flat spatula and work
the sugar about until it becomes white and creamy; now add the almonds
(which have been previously blanched and dried), together with the
vanilla essence; keep working up the whole until of uniform consistency;
now spread the mass on wafer paper in sheets one inch thick, cover the
sheets with wafer paper, rolling the top smooth; when set cut into bars.
Should the cream be a little thin add some icing sugar when mixing; if
boiled properly this is not required. Most cheap Nougats now in the
market are made more or less according to this formula, color and flavor
differently for variety.


ICE CREAM CONFECTIONERY.

Boil 7 lbs. of loaf sugar with three pints of water: add a small
teaspoonful of cream of tartar, allow it to boil for 10 minutes, then
add one pound of fresh butter: it will then commence to froth up, and
care must be taken that the pan is large enough, as the syrup will
occupy twice the space than if there had been no butter added; boil this
mixture to the degree of very weak crack, or 285 by the thermometer, at
which point it is done; pour it on the slab, which has been of course
previously greased. As soon as it begins to cool, turn it up and knead
it until it gets stiff enough to pull over the hook. When on the hook
pull it sharp till it gets white as snow. This white is usually flavored
with vanilla or oil of lemon. It may be either pulled out in bars or
left in the heap. It is very easily broken in small pieces for retail
purposes. In the summer or hot weather keep this candy from the air, or
it will be inclined to be sticky. This eats very rich and commands good
sale at best prices.


RASPBERRY AND STRAWBERRY ICE CREAM CONFECTIONERY.

This is made exactly as the last with the addition of a little red color
before the boil is poured out, or it may be colored on the slab; add a
little essence of raspberry or strawberry and a pinch of tartaric acid
just before pulling the boil. Color the raspberry a little deeper than
the strawberry.


CHOCOLATE ICE CREAM.

To make chocolate ice cream, boil the same quantities as before
precisely in the same way in every particular. When the sugar has been
pulled out, work well into it 1/2 lb. powdered chocolate; knead this
well up in order that the chocolate may be well mixed with the sugar.
Put in sufficient chocolate to give the boil a dark brown color,
otherwise it would be too light when pulled.


VANILLA CARAMELS.

  8 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  1 lb. Fresh Butter.
  2 Tins Condensed milk.
  2 pints water.
  Vanilla Flavoring.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and water to the degree of ball 250;
remove the pan a little from the fire, add the milk and butter, the
latter cut into little pieces and well stir in with wooden spatula until
the whole is thoroughly mixed, then gently bring the mass through the
boil and pour out on greased slab, making the sheet about 1/2 inch
thick; when set cut with caramel cutter, and when cold separate the
squares and wrap in wax paper.


COCOANUT CARAMELS.

  8 lbs. Sugar.
  2 lbs. glucose.
  1 lb. Fresh Butter.
  1-1/2 lbs. Desiccated Cocoanut, unsweetened.
  2 Tins Condensed Milk.
  2 pints water.

PROCESS.--Melt the sugar in the water, add the glucose and boil up to
ball 250; remove the pan to side, then stir in the butter, milk and
cocoanut, bring through the boil, pour on slab or in frames about 1/2
inch thick; when set mark with caramel cutter; when cold separate and
wrap in wax paper.

[Illustration: CLADS PATTERN COCOANUT GRATER.

Extra Strong, Two Graters. Clamps to Table or Bench, $1 50

Fig. 21.

Citron and Cocoanut Cutter.

No. 1 Large Price, $1 20

A very handy and useful slicer. Durable and cheap.]


RASPBERRY CARAMELS.

  8 lbs. Sugar.
  2 lbs. glucose.
  1 lb. Fresh Butter.
  Brilliant Rose Color.
  1 lb. Raspberry Pulp or Jam.
  2 Tins Condensed milk.
  2 pints water.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and water to weak crack 250; remove
the pan to side of fire, add the milk, butter (cut small) and jam; stir
the whole together, replacing the pan on the fire; add sufficient
coloring; keep stirring all the time until the whole comes through the
boil; pour out, mark with set, divide and wrap when cold.


WALNUT CARAMELS.

  8 lbs. White Sugar.
  1 lb. Shelled Walnuts broken small.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  1 lb. Fresh Butter.
  Saffron Coloring.
  2 tins Condensed Milk.
  2 pints Water.

PROCESS.--As above, caramels require careful watching and a lot of
stirring, the boil being liable to catch and flow over; fire must not be
too fierce; when too hot put an iron under one side of the pan to keep
it up a little from the fire; keep constantly on the stir after butter
and flavoring ingredients are added.


CHOCOLATE CARAMELS.

  8 lbs. Good Sugar.
  1/2 lb. Pure Chocolate unsweetened.
  2 lbs Glucose.
  1 lb. Fresh Butter.
  Vanilla Flavoring.
  2 pints Water.
  2 tins Condensed Milk.

PROCESS.--When the sugar, glucose and water have been boiled to the
degree of ball, 250, and the milk, butter and chocolate have all
dissolved and incorporated, bring gently through the boil, then pour out
on oiled slab or in frames; when set, mark deeply with caramel cutter;
when cold, separate with sharp knife and wrap in wax paper.


VANILLA CARAMELS NO. 1 Quality.

  6 lbs. Sugar.
  2 quarts Sweet Cream.
  Essence of Vanilla.
  15 lbs. Fresh Butter.
  4 lbs. Glucose.

PROCESS.--Put the sugar, glucose and cream in the pan; put it on a slow
fire and stir constantly; let it boil to a stiff ball, then add the
butter; keep stirring, when it has well boiled through, remove the pan
from the fire; flavor with vanilla extract: pour out on oiled plate;
mark when set with caramel cutter; when cold, divide with sharp knife
and wrap each caramel in wax paper.


VANILLA CARAMELS, No. 2 Quality.

  5 lbs. Sugar.
  1 lb. Fresh Butter.
  3 pints New Milk.
  1/2 oz. Cream of Tartar.
  2 pints water.
  Vanilla Flavoring.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, milk and water with the cream of tartar on a
slow fire, stir all the time till it reaches a stiff ball, add the
extract of vanilla and stir it gently; remove the pan from the fire and
pour contents on oiled slab; mark deep with caramel cutter when set;
when cold separate with sharp knife. These caramels should be cream
color.


MAPLE CARAMELS.

By using pure maple, maple caramels may be made precisely as vanilla;
the flavor of the maple sugar is sufficient without any artificial
essence. These caramels will of course be dark.


RASPBERRY AND STRAWBERRY CARAMELS.

These flavors may be used in either of the last two recipes--best
quality according to the first, second quality as to the second. Walnut,
cocoanut, etc., may be added for other flavors.


CHOCOLATE CARAMELS No. 1 Quality.

  6 lbs. Best Sugar.
  4 lbs. Glucose.
  1-1/2 lbs. Pure Chocolate, Unsweetened.
  2 quarts Sweet Cream.
  1-1/2 lbs. Fresh Butter.

PROCESS.--Put the sugar and cream in the pan, stir it well together,
then add the glucose; let it boil to a stiff ball, ease the pan off the
fire a little and put in the butter in little pieces, then the
chocolate; keep stirring together; bring the mass through the boil, then
add extract of vanilla; remove the pan and pour contents on oiled slab,
making the sheet about 1/2 inch thick; mark deep with caramel cutter
when set; divide with sharp knife when cold and wrap in paper.


CHOCOLATE CARAMEL, No. 2 Quality.

  5 lbs. Sugar.
  3/4 lb. Fresh Butter.
  1 quart of New Milk.
  3/4 lb. Pure Chocolate, Unsweetened.
  1/2 oz. Cream of Tartar.

PROCESS.--Melt the sugar in the milk, add the cream of tartar and boil
to the degree of ball; ease the pan a little off the fire and stir in
the butter and chocolate; bring the whole to a boil, add extract of
vanilla, then remove the pan and pour contents on the slab; mark and
separate as directed on last.


UNWRAPPED CARAMELS.

Caramels have usually been sold wrapped in wax paper. This is necessary
when the goods are boiled very low and contain a large proportion of
glucose. Like other caramels the ingredients vary, but the following
will answer the purpose:--

  7 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  1/2 lb. Fresh Butter.
  1 Tin Condensed Milk, or one quart Sweet Cream.
  3 pints water.
  Vanilla Flavoring.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and water to weak crack 285; remove
the pan from the fire, add the butter and milk, stir gently until
dissolved, add the flavoring just before the stirring is finished, then
pour contents on oiled slab; when cool enough cut with caramel cutter.
If required crinkly on top; run over the sheet with a corded rolling pin
just before cutting.

[Illustration: BUTTERCUP OR MIXED DROP MACHINE.

This Machine is used for Cutting Buttercups, and a large variety of
other Candies. Has saw teeth for making crimped edged buttercups. Very
quick working machine.

Price, $19 00 ]

[Illustration: LATEST THING OUT.

NEW SATINETTE PRESS.

Buttercups and Satinettes will have a very large sale this season.

Purchase one of our Machines and make your own.

The Machine will pay for itself in a short time, besides you can always
have fresh made goods.

Price      $15.00]

[Illustration: Cullums Patent Buttercup Cutter.

No. 1.

No. 2.

Fingers for Buttercup Cutters.

This is a Machine every Confectioner should have for cutting Buttercups,
Drops, &c.

No. 1 Machine is same as No. 2, but is 24 inches long, 3 inches wide,
will cut 70 pieces at one movement, and is the cheapest Machine ever put
on the market. Price, $5 00

No. 2 Machine is 34 inches long, 4 inches wide, cuts 150 pieces, giving
them a fine cushion shape and glossy appearance. Cuts three times as
fast as any roller. Comparatively no waste or cracked Buttercups with
this Machine. Cut represents Lifter, the fingers of which fit into the
knives of the Machine so that the 150 pieces of candy can be removed by
one movement. Price, $14 00

Machine with Teeth to form Buttercup with Stitched Edges. Price, $20 00]


BUTTERCUPS.

These beautiful candies are very popular; they are pleasing both to the
eye and the palate when they are well made, but they must be kept air
tight or they will soon lose all their attractiveness and become a
sticky mass, as they have a great tendency to "sweat." In order to
prevent this as much as possible it is advisable to use a little borax
in each boil. The process is simple enough, but must be worked quickly,
in fact the beauty depends upon the rapid manipulation of the sugar over
the hook; keep the eye fixed on the color; as soon as it becomes a
glossy satin with a close grain it is finished; lift it off the hook
immediately and return to the slab for casing. Do not carry on the
pulling operation until it becomes spongy, and be careful not to use too
much color; the tints should be light and delicate when finished.
Machines are made for cutting buttercups, price $6.00 and $14.00, each
machine. Crimped edge machine, $20.00 each. _Get our price list._


VANILLA BUTTERCUPS.

  7 lbs. Best White Sugar.
  2 lbs. Fondant Paste.
  1 lb. Desiccated Cocoanut, fine.
  Green color.
  1 teaspoonful Cream of Tartar.
  1 quart water.
  Borax.

PROCESS.--Put the sugar, water and cream of tartar in the boiling pan
and boil up to crack 310 in the ordinary way; while the pan is on the
fire, take the fondant paste and work into it the desiccated cocoanut,
with a little essence of vanilla, and lay aside till required. When the
boil has reached the required degree pour the sugar on the slab, color
it light green, and when partly cool, pull over the hook until it
becomes a delicate satin tint; return it to the slab, press the boil
out, lay the fondant paste in the centre and case it all around with the
pulled sugar; now carefully work the one end of the boil down to a point
as for sticks and draw it out in lengths, required thickness: lay them
on the machine and press gently until cut through; the buttercups are
then ready for packing. It is advisable to work small boils of these
goods, as the casing being boiled soon gets brittle; keep turning the
bulk round on the plate so as to keep the fondant paste exactly in the
centre.


RASPBERRY COCOANUT BUTTERCUPS.

  7 lbs. Best White Sugar.
  2 lbs. Fondant Paste.
  1 lb Desiccated Cocoanut.
  1 lb. Raspberry Jam, boiled Stiff.
  1 teaspoonful cream of Tartar.
  1 quart Water.
  Carmine Color.
  Borax.

PROCESS.--Work the jam and cocoanut into the fondant paste; boil the
sugar, water and cream tartar to crack; pour on oiled slab; color light
rose tint: when partly cool, pull and work off as in the preceding
recipe and cut with buttercup machine.


COCOANUT BUTTERCUPS.

  7 lbs. Sugar.
  2 lbs. Fondant Paste.
  1 lb. Desiccated Cocoanut.
  Yellow Color.
  1 teaspoon Cream Tartar.
  1 quart Water with Borax.
  Lemon Flavor.

PROCESS.--As usual, buttercups of any sort or flavor may be made by
following the directions given, and substituting different essences,
jams, chopped nuts or almonds, and color to fancy.


BLACK CURRANT BUTTERCUPS.

  7 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 lbs Fondant Paste.
  1 lb. Black Currant Jam.
  1/2 oz. Tartaric Acid.
  1 teaspoonful Cream Tartar.
  1 quart Water.
  Borax.
  Purple Color.

PROCESS.--Work the jam, acid and color into the fondant paste, boil the
sugar, water and cream tartar to crack, and work off as already
described.


FONDANT CREAM WORK OR BUTTERCUP FILLING.

This branch of the business has developed wonderfully during the last
few years. This cream is not only moulded and worked into every
conceivable shape, size color and flavor by itself, but is used with
chocolate, fruits, etc., to make an endless variety of pleasing and
tasty confections. The smaller goods in this work form the body, and
sometimes the whole, of many beautiful mixtures, and no window can now
be considered orthodox unless they have a good display of these goods.
For our purpose the variety is a matter of detail which we only mention
to remind the reader that he must look for the greater part of it
outside the covers of this guide. The process is practically the same
all through; the mixing, flavors, colors and shapes make whatever
distinction there is. It will only be necessary to give a fair selection
of formulas to enable the reader to imitate anything he sees in this
line, or invent something new.

[Illustration: Fig. 15. a

Asbestos Gas Batch Warmer or Spinning Furnace.--Two Sizes.

32 inches long, price $15.00. Can be used in sections if desired.]


RASPBERRY & VANILLA FONDANTS.

  10 lbs. White Sugar.
  2-1/2 lbs. Glucose.
  Raspberry and Vanilla Flavor.
  3 pints water.
  Carmine Color.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and water in the usual way to the
degree of soft ball; then remove the pan from the fire; damp the
pouring plate with cold water; pour the boil on it and let it remain
till nearly cold. With a long pallette knife or wooden spatula, commence
to work the syrup until it changes to a white glossy cream; then divide
the batch into two; put one part in the pan and remelt it, just enough
to make it a consistency to mould, add vanilla flavor and run it into
rubber moulds; now put the other portion in the pan and remelt; color it
a light pink; flavor with essence of raspberry and mould in the same
shapes; when the goods are set and cold crystalize them with cold syrup.

N.B.--Have everything very clean when making fondants; every speck will
show; a touch of blue will make the white a better color.


CHOCOLATE & VANILLA FONDANTS.

  10 lbs White Sugar.
  2-1/2 lbs. Glucose.
  Vanilla Flavoring.
  3 pints Water.
  1/2 lb. Pure Chocolate.

PROCESS.--Prepare the fondant creams as in last recipe; when the boil
has been creamed, divide into two, one part being twice the size of the
other, put the small portion in the pan to remelt, adding the chocolate
paste; stir until paste is dissolved and incorporated, but do not let
the cream boil; remove the pan from the fire; run chocolate cream in
rubber moulds filling the impressions only one-third part full; then
melt the white cream, flavor with vanilla and fill up the moulds; when
set crystalize in cold syrup; each fondant will be in two colors, white
tipped with chocolate.

[Illustration: Fig. 15. Batch Warmer or Gas Candy Heater. Price $5.00.]


COCOANUT FONDANTS.

  9 lbs. White Sugar.
  2-1/2 lbs. Glucose.
  1-1/2 lbs. Fine Desiccated Cocoanut, Unsweetened.
  Carmine Color.
  3 pints Water.
  Lemon Flavoring.

PROCESS.--Proceed to make the cream as before directed and divide the
batch into two equal parts: remelt one part and stir in half the
desiccated cocoanut with a few drops of lemon; half fill moulds; remelt
the other portion of cream; stir in the remainder of the cocoanut; color
pink, adding a few drops of essence lemon, and fill up the moulds;
crystalize the usual way in cold syrup.


STRAWBERRY FONDANTS.

  9 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  Carmine Coloring.
  2 lbs. Strawberry Jam.
  3 pints Water.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and water to a soft ball degree, pour
the batch on pouring plate, which has been previously damped with cold
water, let the boil remain till nearly cold, then with a wooden spatula
work the syrup about till it becomes cream, then mix in jam; return the
whole to the pan and remelt, add sufficient color to make a bright pink,
then run into moulds; when set, crystalize in cold syrup.


CHERRY FONDANTS.

  10 lbs. Sugar.
  2-1/2 lbs. Glucose.
  Cherry Flavor.
  3 pints Water.
  Carmine and Saffron Color.

PROCESS.--Select some large, preserved cherries, cut them in half. Boil
the sugar, glucose and water in the ordinary way to ball degree, pour
the batch on a damp pouring plate; when nearly cold work up the whole
with spatula till it becomes a white glossy cream, working the flavor in
at the same time; then divide into three equal portions, color one
portion a bright pink and another a yellow, leaving the third white;
knead each portion into stiff paste, adding a little icing sugar to make
it tough; pinch off small pieces and form them into balls about the size
of the cherry, make them a little flat on one side; on this flat part
stick a half cherry, squeezing them into shape; place them in canvas
trays and put them in the drying room for a few hours to harden;
afterwards crystalize with cold syrup. Other preserved fruits may be
used in same way.


FONDANTS FOR MIXTURES.

  10 lbs. White Sugar.
  2-1/2 lbs. Glucose.
  Flavors Various.
  3 pints Water.
  Colors Various.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and water as before directed to a
stiff ball and pour the sugar on damp slab; let it stand till nearly
cold, then work it up with spatula till glossy cream; divide the boil
into as many portions as you want colors; then remelt this cream, color
and flavor to fancy; run the batch into moulds of different shapes. When
the fondants are set, crystalize in cold syrup. Fondants for mixture are
made a trifle harder to prevent being crushed with other sweets with
which they are mixed.


TO CRYSTALIZE FONDANTS

  13 lbs. Best White Sugar.
  4 pints Water.

PROCESS.--Boil this quantity of sugar and water for a few minutes, about
220 degrees by the thermometer; stand it aside undisturbed till quite
cold. Pack the fondants in crystalizing tins, putting wire trays between
each layer of say two inches deep; let the wire trays take a bearing on
the ends of the tin; when the tin is full, cover the goods with cold
syrup, putting a damp cloth over the top; stand the tins in a cool place
in the drying room about ten hours; then remove them to a cold place;
about an hour afterwards take out the plugs and drain off the
superfluous syrup; when the fondants are dry, turn the tins on end,
giving them a slight knock and empty them on clean trays; they will be
ready for packing in an hour or so.

N.B.--If a thin skin forms over the top of the syrup, skim it off before
draining the goods; it may tend to granulate them, but the damp cloth
ought to prevent this skin forming.


CHRISTMAS FANCIES--CLEAR TOY MOULDS.

There are a great number of fancies made from grain sugars sold about
Christmas time. Their beauty and attractiveness depends upon the moulds
in which they are moulded, and the taste displayed in painting or
decorating them. The goods themselves are quite a secondary
consideration, being so simple to make.

PROCESS.--Boil 7 lbs. sugar, 1 lb. glucose, 2 pints water in the usual
way to the degree of ball 250, by thermometer; remove it from the fire
and rub the sugar against the side of the pan until thick and white;
stir it all together, then fill the moulds through the runner. Too much
sugar must not be boiled at one time, or it will set before it can be
all run into the moulds; two or three pounds will be enough for a
beginner to practice with. They will be hard enough to be taken out of
the moulds in fifteen to thirty minutes, according to size after being
run, and they will be ready for decorating.


ARTIFICIAL FIGURES.

Fruit, eggs, and any object may be taken from nature by this process, to
be transformed into sugar, afterwards glazed, colored to imitate nature
so exactly as to deceive many persons. Boil the sugar in exactly the
same way as directed in the previous recipe, grain it and fill the
moulds; in a few minutes run out as much sugar as will leave the mould;
this will cause the casting to be hollow in the centre. Allow your
articles to imitate the natural objects which they represent with liquid
colors and camel's hair pencils; if gloss is required the colors should
be mixed with a strong solution of gum arabic or isinglass to the
desired tint.


COMPOSITION CLEAR TOY MOULDS.

Made from Finest Quality of Metal.

The Moulds marked thus X we have always in stock. Any others made to
order.

     No.      Name.            No. in Mould.  No. to Lb.   Price.

  x   1 Horse and Man large           3          16        $2 60
  x   2 Horse, small                  3          48         1 30
  x   3 General on Horse              3          27         1 30
  x   4 Horse                         4          45         1 30
      5 Horse, small                  4          55         1 30
  x   6 Cow                           3          38         1 30
  x   7 Sheep                         4          30         1 30
  x   8 Dog, large                    3          43         1 30
  x   9 Dog, medium                   3          48         1 30
     10 Dog, small                    3          55         1 30
  x  11 Monkey on Horse               3          35         1 30
  x  12 Cat, large                    3          28         1 30
  x  13 Cat, small                    4          32         1 30
  x  14 Rat                           4          32         1 30
     15 Deer, small                   3          32         1 65
     16 Camel                         3          45         1 30
  x  17 Rabbit, large                 3          16         1 30
  x  18 Rabbit, medium                4          24         1 30
  x  19 Rabbit, small                 4          38         1 30
  x  20 Lady on Swan                  3          30         1 30
     21 Chicken                       3          38         1 30
  x  22 Rooster                       3          35         1 30
     23 Eagle                         3          35         1 30
  x  24 Crow                          3          40         1 65
     25 Bear                          4          35         1 30
     26 Baby, large                   3          32         1 65
     27 Baby, small                   3          30         1 30
     28 Jim Crow                      3          64         1 30
  x  29 Man and Wheelbarrow           3          55         1 65
     30 Woman and Churn               4          48         1 30
     31 Hand                          3          38         1 30
     32 Basket and Flowers            3          38         1 30
     33 Acorn                         3          30         1 30
     34 Harp                          3          31         1 30
  x  35 Fireman                       3          24         1 30
  x  36 Tom Thumb                     3          48         1 30
  x  37 Soldier                       4          48         1 30
     38 Steamboat                     3          48         1 30
  x  39 Locomotive                    3          43         1 30
  x  40 Sloop                         3          43         1 30
     41 Flat Iron                     4          48         1 30
     42 Key                           3          35         1 30
     43 Skate                         3          55         1 30
     44 Pistol                        3          48         1 30
  x  45 Shovel                        3          27         1 30
     46 Scissors                      3          43         1 30
     47 Fiddle                        4          38         1 30
     48 Bugle                         3          55         1 30
  x  49 Watch                         3          21         1 30
     50 Basket with handle            3          31         1 30
  x  51 Flower Basket, handle         3          28         1 30
  x  52 Pitcher, small                3          33         1 30
     53 Rocking Horse, small          3          35         1 30
  x  54 Three Figures                 3          48         1 30
  x  55 Rabbit and Basket             4          16         1 65
  x  56 Locomotive, large             3          14         1 30
  x  57 Church on Hill                3          18         1 30
     58 Tea Pot                       3          48         1 30
  x  59 Lion                          3          70         1 30
     60 Sword                         3          27         1 30
     61 Boy and Goat                  3          43         1 30
  x  62 Watch, small                  3          45         1 30
  x  63 Donkey                        3          55         1 30
     64 Elephant                      3          43         1 30
     65 Caught in the Act             3          48         1 30
     66 Ladders                       3          40         1 30
  x  67 Horse and Cart                3          28         1 30
  x  68 Sparrow                       3          19         1 30
     69 Small Boat                    3          43         1 30
     70 Locomotive, small             3          28         1 30
     71 Pitchers                      3          31         1 65
  x  72 Sugar Bowl                    3          21         1 65
     73 Tea Cup                       3          40         1 30
  x  74 Coffee Cup                    3          21         1 30
     75 Saucers                       3          35         1 30
  x  76 Tea Pot                       3          12         2 60
     77 Wine Glass                    3          41         1 65
     78 Wash Tub                      3          33         2 00
     79 Flower Vase                   3          23         1 65
     80 Round Table                   3          31         1 65
     81 Gun                           4          48         1 30
     82 Pistol                        4          32         2 00
     83 Pocket Knife                  4          38         1 30
     84 Dirk                          4          40         1 30
     85 Rooster, small                5          55         1 30
     86 Crucifix                      5          32         2 00
     87 Axe                           4          48         1 30
     88 Pipe                          6          21         2 00
     89 Ass                           5          48         1 30
  x  90 Deer Lying Down               3          25         1 30
     91 Mule                          3          21         1 30
  x  92 Dog, large                    3          12         2 00
  x  93 Dog with Basket               3          12         2 00
  x  94 Dog standing with Basket      3          15         1 65
  x  95 Peacock                       3          21         1 65
     96 Decanter                      3          19         1 65
  x  97 Boots                         5          27         1 65
     98 Plain Basket with Handle      3          23         1 65
     99 Wine Glass, large             3          18         2 00
  x 100 Fire Horn                     3          21         2 00
    101 Squirrel and Box              5          33         1 65
    102 Broom                         3          13         1 65
  x 103 Bust of Napoleon              4          20         2 00
    104 Ladys                         3          28         1 65
  x 105 Cupid                         3          21         1 65
    106 Rabbit                        3          10         2 60
    107 Fish on Plate                 3          19         1 65
  x 108 Rooster                       3          14         1 65
  x 109 Owl                           3          16         1 65
  x 110 Cupid and Basket              8          19         1 65
  x 111 Pony                          3          18         1 65
  x 112 Dog                           3          15         1 65
  x 113 Cat and Dog Fighting          3          18         1 65
    114 Grasshopper                   3          13         2 60
  x 115 Steamboat                     3          19         1 30
  x 116 Sea Lion                      3          12         1 65
  x 117 Rhinoceros                    3          15         1 65
  x 118 Tiger                         3          15         1 65
  x 119 Bear, small                   3          20         1 65
    120 Bear, Medium                  3          16         1 65
  x 121 Bear, large                   3           8         2 60
  x 122 Ape                           3          14         1 65
  x 123 Large Hand                    3          11         1 65
  x 124 Bear sitting up               3          16         1 65
  x 125 Camel                         3          18         1 65
  x 126 Squirrel                      3          13         1 65
    127 Horse Jumping                 3          30         1 65
  x 128 Lamb Lying Down               3          14         1 65
    129 Sugar Bowl                    3          21         1 65
    130 Double Pointed Iron           3          16         1 65
    131 Boy on Rocking Horse          3          19         2 00
    132 Elephant                      6          21         2 00
    133 Captain Jack                  3          18         1 65
    134 Frog Smoking                  3          16         1 65
    135 Swan                          3          18         1 65
    136 Trumpet                       3          16         1 65
    137 Boots                         3          19         1 30
  x 138 Elephant                      3          14         1 65
  x 139 Monkey on Camel               3          20         1 65
  x 140 Cupid on Lion                 3          18         1 65
    141 Rabbit                        4          25         1 65
    142 Monkey Dressed in Soldier
          Clothes                     3          24         1 30
    143 Pipe                          6          33         2 00
  x 144 Sloop                         3          12         2 00
  x 145 Rabbit and Wheelbarrow        3           6         2 60
  x 146 Lamb, large                   4          14         2 60
  x 147 Monkey on Camel               3           8         2 60
  x 148 Boy and Large Lamb            3          11         2 60
  x 149 Pig                           3          18         1 65
    150 Dog in Kennel                 3          15         1 65
  x 151 Fancy Clock                   3          18         1 65
    152 Small Boy                     3          30         1 65
  x 153 Mazeppa                       3          13         2 00
    154 Crane                         3          15         2 00
    155 Squirrel                      3          10         2 00
    156 Boy Riding Dog                3          18         2 00
    157 Goat Jumping                  3          16         1 65
  x 158 Cow and Calf                  3          23         1 65
    159 Organ Grinder with Monkey     3          24         1 65
    160 Chriskingle Deer and Sleigh   2          10         1 65
  x 161 Basket                        3          19         1 65
  x 162 Baby in Cradle                3          16         1 65
  x 163 Horse                         3          20         1 65
  x 164 Soldier Boy                   3          13         1 65
    165 French Lady                   4          15         2 00
    166 Fancy Bottles                 4          12         1 65
    167 Boy Stealing Apples           3          13         2 00
  x 168 Hussar                        3           9         1 65
    169 Scotchman                     3          11         1 65
    170 Rabbit Soldier                3           9         2 00
    171 Rabbit Drummer                3           9         2 00
  x 172 Rabbit Sportsman              3          16         1 65
  x 173 Railroad Car                  3          18         1 30
    174 Fancy Tea Kettle              3          11         1 65
    175 Spread Eagle                  2           7         1 65
  x 176 Chinaman and Dog              3          13         2 00
    177 Rabbit Traveller              3          16         1 65
  x 178 Frog on Bicycle               3          15         2 00
    179 Ostrich                       3          12         2 00
    180 Tramp                         3          12         1 65
    181 Fox                           2          12         1 30
  x 182 Horse and Jockey              3          19         2 00
    183 Piggyback                     3          16         1 65
    184 Fancy Pitcher, large          3          13         2 00
  x 185 Sail Boat                     3          15         2 00
  x 186 Irishman and Pig              3          15         2 00
    187 Monkey and Piggyback          3          15         2 00
    188 Policeman and Boy             3          14         2 00
    189 Dog and Deer                  3          12         2 00
  x 190 Boy and Bicycle               3          18         2 00
    191 Owl on Tree                   3          12         2 00
    192 Puss in Boots                 3          10         2 00
  x 193 Kangaroo                      3          11         2 00
  x 194 Giraffe                       3          12         2 00
  x 195 Fancy Pipe                    2          12         2 00
  x 196 Rifle                         4          38         1 30
    197 Irishman                      3          23         1 30
  x 198 Chinaman                      3          19         1 30
  x 199 Israelite                     2          10         1 30
    200 Uncle Sam                     3          23         1 30
    201 Dutchman                      3          16         1 30
  x 202 Dog Sitting Up                3          12         1 65
    203 Basket                        3          14         2 00
    204 Dog Running                   3          21         1 30
    205 Shears                        3          38         1 30
    206 Shovel                        3          21         1 30


LARGE MOULDS FOR HOLLOW OR CLEAR TOYS.

    No.     Name.                      Size.  No. in Mould.  Price.

     1 Deer                            5 × 7            1    $4 00
     2 Deer                            3 × 7            1     2 60
     3 Horse                           5-1/2 × 5-1/2    1     6 75
  *  4 Horse                           2-1/2 × 2-1/2    1     1 00
     5 Horse                           2-1/2 × 2-1/2    2     2 00
     6 Horse                           3 × 2-1/2        1     1 00
  *  7 Horse                           2 × 2-1/2        3     2 00
  *  8 Camel                           3 × 3            1     1 65
     9 Camel                           5-1/2 × 5-1/2    1     6 75
    10 Elephant                        3 × 5            1     2 00
    11 Elephant and Boy                3 × 3            1     1 30
  * 12 Goat                            3 × 2-3/4        2     2 00
  * 13 Cat                             5 × 4-1/2        1     2 60
    14 Cat                             3 × 4-1/2        1     2 00
    15 Dog                             6 × 4            1     6 75
    16 Dog Lying Down                  3-1/2 × 5-1/2    1     2 60
    17 Dog                             3-1/2 × 4-1/2    2     3 10
    18 Wm. Penn                        5-1/2 high       1     2 00
  * 19 Indian                          5-7/8 high       1     2 00
    20 Rooster                         5 × 3-1/2        1     2 00
    21 Rooster                         3-1/2 × 3        1     1 00
    22 Locomotive                      10 × 5-1/2       1    13 00
    23 Locomotive, Rabbit Engineer     3-1/2 × 3-3/4    1     2 60
    24 Basket                          2 × 6            1     9 25
    25 Basket                          4-1/2 × 4        1     2 60
    26 Priest Blessing Children        2 × 6            1     1 30
    27 Washington                      7 in. high       1     1 30
    28 U. S. Grant                     2-1/4 in. high   1     2 00
    29 Gun                             7 in. long       3     2 00
    30 Gun                             7 in. high       1     1 00
    31 Ship Full Sail                  7-1/2 × 6        1     6 75
    32 Steamboat                       6-1/2 × 4        1     6 75
    33 Rowboat                         9 in. long       1     4 00
    34 Rowboat                         6 in. long       1     1 00
  * 35 Rowboat                         2-1/2 in. long   2     2 00
    36 Whistle                                          4     2 00
    37 Whistle                                          3     1 30
    38 Spread Eagle on Half Globe      4 × 6            1     6 75
    39 Rabbit                          5 × 5            1     2 60
    40 Rabbit                          3 × 3            2     2 00
  * 41 Lamb                            4 × 6            1     2 60
    42 Lamb                            3-1/4 × 3-1/2    2     2 00
    43 Rowboat                         4-1/2 × 2-1/2    1     2 00
    44 Elephant, Jumbo                 8-1/2 × 6        1     6 75
    45 Lion                            8-1/2 × 6        1     6 75
  * 46 Knight on Horseback             3 × 5-1/2        1     1 30
    47 Fire Engine                     5 × 7            1     6 75
    48 Buffalo                         5-1/2 × 8        1     6 75


VANILLA CREAM BARS.

  7 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  3 pints Water.
  Vanilla Flavoring.

PROCESS.--Dissolve the sugar with water in a clean pan; add the glucose
and boil in the usual way to the degree of feather, 243; pour the
contents on a damp slab; let it remain a few minutes to cool; then with
a pallette knife work it up to white cream, adding a tint of blue to
bleach it; when the whole has become a smooth cream, return it to the
pan and melt it just sufficient that it may pour out smooth and level;
stir in the flavor and run on pouring plate 1/2 inch thick; when set
cut into bars.


RASPBERRY OR ROSE CREAM BARS.

  7 lbs. White Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  3 pints Water.
  Raspberry or Rose Flavor.

PROCESS.--Melt the sugar in the water, add the glucose and boil to 243;
pour contents on slab, and when cool divide the boil into three parts;
color one part red, add some pure chocolate to another, and to a third
add a pinch of blue, cream each part by rubbing on slab to a smooth
paste; in rubbing in the pure chocolate, see that you have enough to
make it a rich brown; for red portion use just sufficient to give a
light rose pink. When all finished, melt each portion separately in the
pan just sufficiently soft to run to a level surface; pour out first the
red, then the chocolate on top of red sheet, then the white on top of
chocolate; this will make a cream cake to cut up into bars. Some do not
take the trouble to melt the cream, being satisfied to spread the paste
out, smoothing it on top with a pallette knife; this answers the purpose
but does not look so well.


COCOANUT CREAM.

  7 lbs. White Sugar.
  3 lbs. Cocoanut peeled and sliced.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  Red Coloring.
  3 pints Water.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and water in the usual way to the
degree 245; pour contents on slab; divide the boil into two lots; when
cool, color one part light pink and put a small touch of blue in the
other; add the sliced cocoanut, half into each part, then commence to
cream them by rubbing. When both parts have been mixed into a smooth
paste, it is ready for sale, being usually sold by cutting from rough
block.

N.B.--Cut almonds, ground walnuts, etc., are used in the same way as
directed for cocoanuts. The boils may or may not be flavored, but a
little improves it and makes it fragrant.


MAPLE CREAM.

  8 lbs. Yellow Sugar.
  1 quart Sweet Cream.
  2 lbs. Glucose.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and cream to 242 on thermometer,
stirring all the time; when done lift off the fire and let stand till
nearly cold (placing it where it will cool quickly), then stir until it
sets; then melt over a slow fire (stirring constantly) until it becomes
a nice creamy consistency, pour on a well greased tin, lay about one
inch deep, let stand till cold, when by turning over the tin it will
fall out. After the batch is set to cool in the tin, on no account
disturb it as it will make the cream crack into pieces when turning out.
If this is too expensive a recipe use milk instead of cream and add half
a pound of butter.


CHRISTMAS PUDDING (IMITATION).

  7 lbs. White Sugar.
  1 lb. Raisins.
  1/2 lb. Sweet Almonds blanched chopped.
  1 lb. Currants.
  1 lb. Sultanas.
  1/2 lb. Mixed Peel.
  1 oz. Mixed Spice.
  2 pints Water.

PROCESS.--Prepare fruit by washing currants in cold water, afterwards
drying them; stone raisins; blanch and chop almonds; cut the peel in
stripes, then mix them together, adding the spice; boil the sugar and
water to ball degree; remove the pan from the fire: grain the boil by
rubbing the syrup against the side of the pan in the usual way; when it
becomes creamy, add the mixed fruit, carefully stirring the whole until
thoroughly incorporated; have some wet cloths ready, into which divide
the boil; tie them very tight and hang them up until set hard. The
blanched almonds are used to represent suet and should be chopped
accordingly.


BROWN CREAM PUDDING.

  7 lbs. Brown Sugar.
  2 lbs. Glucose.
  1 lb. Currants.
  1/2 lb. Sultanas.
  1/2 lb. Raisins.
  1/2 lb. Mixed Peel.
  1/2 oz. Mixed Spice.
  2 pints Water.

PROCESS.--Dissolve the sugar in the water and put the pan on the fire
and add the glucose; let the whole boil to a stiff ball, then pour the
contents on a damp pouring plate; when nearly cold commence to cream by
rubbing and working it about the slab with pallette knife until it
becomes opaque, stiff and creamy, have the fruit prepared and mix as in
previous recipe, then work them into the boil with spatula; now divide
the boil into small basins, holding about one pound each; press the
cream well down and let them remain till set. Take them out, brush over
them a thin solution of gum and dust them with powdered sugar to
represent frosting. Before putting the cream in the basins, shake a
little icing sugar over the basins, it will keep them from sticking.


RASPBERRY NOYEAU.

  5 lbs. White Sugar.
  1 lb. Glucose.
  2 lbs. Raspberry Jam.
  1 lb. Almonds, blanched and Dried.
  3 pints Water.
  Liquid Brilliant Rose Color.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and water to the ball degree, 250;
ease the pan off the fire, add the jam and almonds, with sufficient
color to make the whole a bright red; let the batch boil through,
keeping it stirred gently until thoroughly mixed; now remove the pan
from the fire and see if the batch has turned opaque; if not rub some of
the syrup against the side of the pan and stir until whole boil shows a
little creamy, then pour out on wafer paper, keeping the sheet about
three-quarters of an inch thick; level the top down with pallette knife
and cover with wafer paper; when set remove to a clean board and cut
into bars with a sharp knife. In running sheets to thickness, arrange
the loose bars on the pouring plate to form a square in proportion to
the size of the boil. Almost any kind of jam can be substituted for
flavoring Noyeau.


WHAT TO DO WITH SCRAPS AND SIFTINGS.

It is necessary to know how to use up the scraps, siftings, spoiled boil
candies and otherwise unsaleable goods. People who make jam or
liquorice goods know of course what to do with them; but small makers
often accumulate lots of waste which seems always in the way. This
should be avoided as much as possible, not only on the ground of
economy, but for the good order and general appearance of the workshop.
Keep the acid scraps separate from the others; have two pans
(earthenware will do) and make it a rule, when sweeping down the plates,
to throw the acid scraps into one pan and the others into the second
pan; keep them well covered with water, and, as the syrup then gets too
thick, put in more water in order that the scraps may dissolve. When
making dark goods such as cough candy, cough drops, cocoanut candy,
stick jaw, etc., use a proportion of this syrup in each boil, dipping it
out with a ladle. As a rule a careful workman would use up his scraps
every day. Some use the machine scraps by putting them in the next boil
when sugar is on the slab. The writer's experience is that that method
is objectionable, as it not only causes the boil to be cloudy, but very
often grains it. Melt the acid scraps in water enough to form a thin
syrup; put in some whiting, powdered chalk or lime; put the pan on the
fire and stir until whole boils; see that all the scraps are dissolved;
remove the pan and let it stand for an hour, then strain through
flannel. Use this syrup in the same way as the other for making common
goods.


CREAM FOR CHOCOLATE CREAMS OR BARS.

  10 lbs. White Sugar.
  3 pints Water.
  2-1/2 lbs. Glucose.

PROCESS.--Put the sugar, glucose and water in a clean pan and boil in
the usual way until the batch reaches the degree of feather 245; (keep
the sides of the pan free from sugar); pour out on damp pouring plate
and let it remain till nearly cold; then with long pallette knife
commence to rub the sugar against the plate and work it about until it
changes from a clear syrup to snow white creamy substance; then knead it
with the hand until of uniform softness and no lumps left in the mass;
it is now ready for use and may be kept covered in stoneware jars until
required for various purposes. In winter the sugar need not be boiled so
high; in hot weather, a little higher. When packing the cream away in
jars it is better to keep the top moist by laying on a damp cloth before
putting in the cork. Seeing that cream keeps so well, of course it is
saving to make much larger batches at a time. This can be easily
arranged by multiplying the proportions according to size of pan and
convenience. These proportions are a guide, but the writer knows of no
absolute must be this or that, although he has made as many cream goods
as most people and with as much success. He has seen as fine a sample
made in the same workshop when the boil was made up a little different.
However, in submitting his own formula, it may be taken for granted he
is not a mile from the bull's eye.

[Illustration: Fig. 17.

Chocolate Melter or Warmer.

  No. 1 Size, 12-1/2 × 14 × 6, price      $2 00
  No. 2 Size, 14-1/4 × 16-1/2 × 6, "       2 25

Made from best quality of Tin Plate.]


CHOCOLATE CREAM BUNS AND CAKES.

  10 lbs. Sugar.
  2-1/2 lbs. Glucose.
  3 pints Water.
  1/2 oz. Vanilla Essence.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, glucose and water in the ordinary way to the
strong feather 245, then pour on damp slab, let it remain until nearly
cold, add the flavor, and with pallette knife work up the boil till
white and creamy; shape it with the hands or press into tin moulds;
stand it in a warm place to harden a little on the outside. Melt some
chocolate paste and cover the goods smoothly with it, using either knife
or brush; when dry glaze them by brushing on a solution of shellac
dissolved in alcohol.

N.B.--In this recipe the sugar is boiled higher than the "Cream for
Chocolate Cream," because the goods are so large the soft cream would
not keep in shape. In melting pure chocolate simply put it in a tin
together with a piece of lard or cocoa butter, stand it near the fire,
give it an occasional stir; it will soon dissolve; use no water or it
will run to powder and be spoiled.

  TAFFY PANS.
  Per dozen, $1.25, $1.50, $1.75, $2.

  SWINGING PANS.
  We make any size to order.

  CRYSTALIZING PANS AND WIRE TRAYS.
  Extra Quality.
  14 × 10 × 2-1/2, complete $5.50.

  COPPER CANDY LADLE.
  No. 1, Fig. 7,      Price, $1.50.

[Illustration: Fig. 7.]

[Illustration: Fig. 8.]


CHOCOLATE CREAM BARS No. 1.

  10 lbs. White Sugar.
  2-1/2 lbs. Glucose.
  Melted Chocolate.
  3 pints Water.
  Vanilla Flavor.

PROCESS.--Prepare the cream as directed in Cream for Chocolate Cream, or
use some of that cream. Have some tins with edges one and one-half
inches deep; grease some paper and fit it neatly round the sides and
bottom. Melt some of the cream on a slow fire; flavor with Vanilla as
soon as cream is sufficiently melted; remove the pan and pour contents
into the tins to make a sheet about one inch thick or less. When set
carefully empty, so as not to break the cake; have some melted chocolate
and with a soft brush coat the cream on both sides; lay them on wires
till cold and set; cut up into bars the required size. The knife for
cutting bars of cream should be good, having a thin polished blade with
a good edge. An old worn-out thing breaks the cream and makes it
irregular.

[Illustration: COPPER CANDY DROP LADLE.

No. 2, Fig. 8,      Price, $2.25.

MINT DROPPERS.

Made from Copper.

  No. 1 Dropper, 1 Lip,      $2 25.
  "   2    "     2  "         3 25.
  "   3    "     3  "         3 75.
]


CHOCOLATE CREAM BARS NO. 2.

  10 lbs. White Sugar.
  2-1/2 lbs. Glucose.
  Melted Chocolate.
  3 pints Water.
  1/2 oz. Essence Vanilla.

PROCESS.--Prepare the tins by lining with greased paper, fitting them
smoothly; melt some sweet chocolate paste and pour it about a quarter of
an inch thick on the bottom of the tins; when set prepare some cream as
directed for "Cream for Chocolate Cream," or use some of that cream,
melting it over a slow fire (do not allow it to boil); stir in the
extract of vanilla and pour the batch in tins about one inch deep: when
set, coat on top with melted sweet chocolate; when this lot is cold and
quite set, cut up into bars with a sharp knife.

[Illustration: BATCH PANS.

     Made of Heavy Copper with Sheet Iron Rim to allow them to set in
     furnace.

     No. 1, diam. at rims 12 inch, bottom 11 in., $7 50.

     No 2, diam. at rims 13 inch, bottom 12 in., $8 50.
]


CHOCOLATE DROPS, PLAIN.

Warm some sweet chocolate; when it is just sufficiently heated to be
pliable, pinch off little pieces, roll them in the hands to size of a
small marble; place them in rows on sheets of white paper, each row
about an inch apart; when the sheet is covered, take it by the corners
and lift it up and down, letting it touch the slab each time; this will
flatten the balls into drop shapes; they should be about the size of a
ten cent piece on the bottom; when cold they will slip off the paper
without any trouble.

[Illustration: TOY (or Turned Sugar) PANS.

Made of Copper.

  No. 1, 1/2 Gallon,       $3 00
   "  2, 1     "            4 00
   "  3, 1-1/2 "            5 00
]


CHOCOLATE DROPS (NONPAREIL.)

Process exactly as for plain drops. When the drops have been flattened,
cover the sheets of paper entirely over with white nonpareil (hundreds
and thousands); when the drops are dry shake off the surplus ones.


CHOCOLATE CREAMS.

Melt some cream (see "Cream for Chocolate Cream") use the runner and
fill the moulds; in an hour the cream will be set hard enough to be
taken out of the moulds; they are then ready for coating. Warm some
sweet chocolate paste until melted, then drop the creams into the melted
chocolate, two or three at a time; lift them out with a long fork and
place them on glazed paper or sheets of tin to dry; put them in a cool
place to harden; pack carefully in paper lined boxes in such a manner
that they hardly touch each other; if packed roughly like most other
candies, they become spotted and rough, spoiling the appearance
altogether.

Rubber moulds are now largely used for making these goods; being much
cleaner and very much easier used than starch moulds, and for new
beginners are very much better than starch. These moulds are now to be
bought much cheaper than they were a few years ago, the price now being
about $1.40 per lb. These moulds weigh about two pounds each and hold
ninety chocolate drops and can be refilled every half hour. We would
strongly advise the purchase of rubber moulds, as besides the saving of
time, neither starch boards, starch, plaster moulds or bellows are
required. Fletcher Manfg Co., carry a full line of moulds for chocolates
and creams.


CHOCOLATE FOR DIPPING.

This mixing is so often required by confectioners for so many purposes
that a good general recipe will not be out of place. If the instructions
are followed and a little discretion used with the colors, a light
glossy chocolate coating will be the result.

  1 lb. Pure Chocolate.
  3 oz. White Wax.
  Chocolate Brown Color.
  Cochineal.

PROCESS.--Put the chocolate in a saucepan; stand on the furnace plate or
near a fire; break up the wax into little pieces and stir it in until
all is melted; then add the brown color, with a little liquid cochineal,
stirring the whole until thoroughly mixed; it is then ready for use. For
cheap common goods, more wax may be used. When mixing in the color try a
little on a piece of white paper until satisfied with the blend.


GELATINE COCOANUT BARS (YELLOW).

  8 lbs. White Sugar.
  6 lbs. Glucose.
  2-1/2 lbs. Gelatine.
  3 lbs. Cocoanut sliced.
  1 oz. Acid Tartaric.
  3 pints Water.
  Saffron Color.
  Lemon Flavor.

PROCESS.--Soak the gelatine in cold water for twelve hours, boil the
sugar, glucose and water to a stiff ball, 255; remove the pan from the
fire; stir in the gelatine till dissolved; let it stand for a few
minutes and remove the scum from the top, then add the acid, flavor and
cocoanut; gently stir the whole until well mixed; tinge a bright yellow
with saffron; pour into oiled tins, making the sheet 1/2 inch thick;
when set, cut up in sticks to sell two or four for a cent.

N.B.--This boil may be divided into two lots, one half colored red and
flavored, raspberry, or a second boil may be made precisely as this one
altering the color and flavor only.


PATENT RUBBER CANDY MOULDS

  New Patterns.

  The best process in the world for making moulded Bon-bons or French
  Creams and grained work, is by using Patent Rubber Candy Moulds. They
  will entirely supplant the use of starch as a mould for manufacturing
  such candies for the following reasons.

  I.--Not alone can all the patterns at present made in starch be
  reproduced in these moulds but also a large variety of others with a
  perfection not before known, and which it would be impossible to use
  in starch.

  II.--A much superior quality of goods is produced, in as much as the
  candies show as perfect a pattern as the moulds themselves.

  III.--A saving at least 33 per cent is accomplished in labor.

  IV.--No starch boards or starch is required, consequently the filling,
  printing, sifting and blowing off are dispensed with--six items of
  expense.

  V.--The moulds specially facilitate the making of cream walnuts, cream
  almonds and cream jellies and other combinations, because the nuts,
  etc., can be pressed on the candy as soon as it has been poured into
  the moulds. This cannot be done with starch moulds, as any pressure on
  those will destroy the pattern.

  VI.--Casting into starch moulds requires considerable experience and
  skill in order to do work well, while any workman can turn out the
  most perfect work with the rubber moulds, without any previous
  experience in such work.

  VII.--A saving of room is effected, as a starch room is not required
  and the capacity of the rubber moulds is so much greater than starch
  boards of equal size that a comparatively less number of moulds are
  required to produce an equal quantity of goods.

  VIII.--No starch being used, the shop will remain much cleaner.

  These moulds are made of Pure Para Rubber and will, with proper usage
  last from twelve to fifteen years, judging from those which have been
  in use for the past four years.

  An objection which naturally suggests itself to a person who has never
  tried these moulds, is that the candies might possibly have some taste
  of the rubber. This is not the case, however.

    NOT THE SLIGHTEST TASTE OF RUBBER

  is discernable. Not one of our many customers, either in this city or
  throughout the country, has made a single complaint. This proves that
  there is absolutely no difference between candies made in rubber
  moulds and candies made in starch moulds.

  The demand for these moulds increases every year.

  WRITE FOR PRICES AND PARTICULARS.

  Cream to be run in these moulds should be cooked one degree lower than
  usual for starch.

  Crystal 1/2 degree lower than usual for starch.

  Before using New Moulds for first time, soak for half an hour in
  strong common washing soda and water.


CHEAP JELLY GOODS.

  14 lbs. White Sugar.
  12 lbs. Glucose.
  3 lbs. Gelatine.
  Flavor.
  2 oz. Tartaric Acid.
  2 pints water.
  Color.

PROCESS.--Soak the gelatine in cold water for twelve hours; bring the
sugar, and water to a boil, then add the glucose and continue boiling
till it reaches the degree of stiff ball; remove the pan from the fire
and stir in the gelatine and acid till dissolved; color and flavor to
fancy; remove the scum and run the batch into tins. Set the goods aside
for twelve hours, then cut up into jubes and crystalize with fine
powdered sugar. This is a cheap line; there is not much body in them,
but they sell at a price and give satisfaction.

[Illustration: Funnel Droppers.

             Tin.  Copper.
  No.   0     40      75
   "    1     60    1.25
   "    2     90    1.50
]

[Illustration: Candy Tongs.

  Tin per thousand,       $4.00
  Brass     "              5.50
  Silvered  "              7.00
]


JELLY FANCIES.

  12 lbs. Sugar.
  7 lbs. Glucose.
  3 pints Water.
  3 lbs. Gelatine.
  2 oz. Tartaric Acid.

PROCESS.--Soak gelatine in cold water for twelve hours. Boil the sugar,
glucose and water in the usual way to the degree of ball; remove the pan
from the fire and stir in the gelatine gradually until dissolved; let
it stand for a few minutes; take off the scum as it rises, then divide
the boil, if required in more than one, color and flavor each portion to
fancy, then run the boil in the moulds; when set put them on clean slab,
sprinkle some cold water over them and roll them about until all are
damped, then cover them with fine crystal sugar and mix them up till
crystalized all over, and spread them out on trays to dry.

The different recipes already given will give the reader a general idea
how gelatine goods are made. By using different colors, flavors and
shapes an infinite variety can be produced. It would serve no good
purpose to further multiply these formulas for small goods.


JAM ROLEY POLEY.

  10 lbs. White Sugar.
  5 lbs. Glucose.
  2 lbs Gelatine.
  Carmine Color.
  1 lb. Raspberry Jam.
  1 lb. Desiccated Cocoanut.
  3 pints Water.

PROCESS.--Soak the gelatine in cold water for twelve hours; boil the
sugar, glucose and water sharply to stiff ball; remove the pan from the
fire, stir in the gelatine, stand aside till scum rises and skim it off;
divide the boil into two portions, (mix together 1 oz. tartaric acid, 1
oz. carbonate of soda, 2 oz. icing sugar); drop this powder and the
desiccated cocoanut into one half of the boil and stir briskly until the
whole rises in a white foam, then run out into tins, on sheet about 1/4
inch thick; now take the other half, color bright red, adding the
raspberry jam; stir till thoroughly mixed and run this on top of the
white sheet about the same thickness; when cold and hard, take out the
sheets and make a roll of each.

N.B.--Let the red portion be cool when run over the white, as the white
being lighter will come to the top if disturbed by the mixture being too
hot.


RASPBERRY JELLIES.

  9 lbs. White Sugar.
  6 lbs. Glucose.
  2 lbs. Apple Jelly.
  2-1/4 lbs. Gelatine.
  3 pints Water.
  2 oz. Tartaric Acid.
  1/2 oz. Essence Raspberry.
  Carmine Color.

PROCESS.--Soak the gelatine as usual; boil the sugar, glucose and water
to a stiff ball; remove the pan from the fire; stir in the gelatine and
let it remain till scum rises; skim it off, then add jelly, acid and
flavor and sufficient color to make a bright red: now mould the batch
into Raspberry shapes and put them in a cold place. When set stiff, put
the goods in thin layers in a crystalizing tin and cover them with cold
syrup. Let them remain undisturbed for twelve hours, then drain off all
the surplus syrup and turn the raspberries on clean trays; when dry,
pack.

N.B.--When putting jelly goods in tins, be careful that the layers are
not thick, as they lay so close that the syrup cannot get in between
them. A good plan is to have wire trays and fix three or four loosely in
each tin, taking their bearings on the ends of the crystalizing tin. By
this means you will get more in a tin with better result. Boil the syrup
in the proportion of six pounds best white sugar to each quart water, to
the degree of smooth 215. It must be quite cold when used for gelatine
work or the goods will come out of the tins in a solid block.


BLACK CURRANT JELLIES.

  9 lbs. White Sugar.
  6 lbs. Glucose.
  2-1/4 lbs. Gelatine.
  Purple Coloring.
  3 pints Water.
  2 oz. Tartaric Acid.
  2 lbs. Black Currant Jelly.

PROCESS.--Soak gelatine as usual, smooth off and mould fondant shapes.
Boil the sugar, glucose and water, as already directed, to a stiff ball;
remove the pan from the fire, drop in the gelatine, a few pieces at a
time, stir till dissolved. Let it remain a short time till the scum
rises; skim it off, then stir in the tartaric acid, jelly and sufficient
color to make the mixture a bright color, then mould the batch. When the
goods are firmly set, place them in layers on wire frames fitted for
crystalizing pan; arrange the frames in the tins and cover with cold
syrup; let them stand for twelve or fourteen hours undisturbed, then
drain off the surplus syrup; take them carefully out of the tins, pack
them on clean trays; when dry they are ready for boxing. These goods
require handling gently; they are very delicate and easily crushed.

[Illustration: Daisy Peanut Warmer.

The most complete Peanut Warmer in the market.

The Nuts are kept warm by a water jacket which surrounds the Pan, and is
heated by a Gas or Oil Stove as desired, has steam whistle which
attracts attention.

Strongly made and nicely ornamented and lettered.

Price complete with either Gas or Oil Stove, f.o.b. Toronto, $10 00.

Size, 29 in. high, 18 in. wide, 12 in. deep.

State when ordering if for Oil or Gas Stove.]


PINEAPPLE JELLIES.

  8 lbs. White Sugar.
  8 lbs. Glucose.
  2-1/4 lbs. Gelatine.
  Pineapple Flavor.
  3 oz. Tartaric Acid.
  3 pints Water.
  Saffron Color.

PROCESS.--Soak the gelatine in sufficient cold water to cover it. Boil
the sugar, glucose and water as usual to stiff ball and remove the pan
from the fire; stir in the gelatine, wait till scum rises and remove it;
then add the acid, flavor and sufficient color to make bright yellow;
pour the mixing into pineapple moulds; keep them in a cold place till
set; pack them in layers in wire frames; put them in the crystalizing
tins and cover with cold syrup; stand aside where they will not be
shaken or disturbed for twelve or fourteen hours; then draw off the
surplus syrup and put them in clean trays to dry. In flavoring these
goods, use the pineapple gently, only a few drops, too much spoils them.

[Illustration: Fig. 213 a.

"Daisy" Peanut Roaster.

Price, $5 00

We make this to fit ordinary Cook Stoves if so ordered at same price.

This Roaster fits your Candy Furnace.]

[Illustration: Fletcher's "UNCLE SAM" Dry Air Peanut Warmer.

Japanned and Ornamented Glass Front.

Size--1 foot 7 in. × 1 foot 5 in., 1 foot 10 in. high.

Price complete $6 50]

[Illustration: Kingery's Perfection Steam Power Coffee and Peanut
Roaster and Warmer.

Size and Style of Machine we carry in stock marked thus*

                                             With Steam
                                              Whistle.
   1 Peck Size, Tin Warmer          $100 00   $104 00
  *1 Peck Size, Copper Warmer        108 00    112 00
   2 Peck Size, Tin Warmer           115 00    119 00
   2 Peck Size, Copper Warmer        124 00    128 00
   1 Bushel Size, Tin Warmer         135 00    139 00
   1 Bushel Size, Copper Warmer      148 00    152 00
]


BEST WAY TO CRYSTALIZE GUM GOODS.

  13 lbs. Best White Sugar.
  2 quarts Water.

PROCESS.--Have the goods cleaned and put in crystalizing tins; bring the
above quantity of sugar and water just to the boil and stand aside until
only milk warm; then pour it gently over the goods until covered; then
slip the hands into the middle of the goods, and with the fingers just
ease this bulk so that the syrup will flow freely between them; withdraw
the hands carefully and cover the tin; do not again disturb it for the
next twelve hours, when the goods will be ready to drain and dry. To an
experienced man, this method may seem a little dangerous and likely to
spoil the crystal; but it will not do so if done carefully. Of course,
it is understood the goods are not to be roughly stirred up, but simply
loosened.


Concentrated Flower and Essence Flavors for Confectioners.

ESPECIALLY ADAPTED FOR FINEST WORK.

Essence Maraschino.
   "    Pistachio.
   "    Ratafia.
   "    Lilly of the Valley.
   "    Dainty.
   "    French Rose.
   "    Ylang Ylang.
   "    Patchouli.
   "    Tuberose.
   "    Carnation.
   "    Heliotrope.
   "    Crabapple.
   "    Jasmine.
   "    Millifleurs.
   "    Hyacinth.
   "    Cachou.
   "    Bon-Tons.
   "    Mirabells.
   "    Sweet Briar.
   "    Locust Flower.
   "    Lilac Blossoms.
   "    Fleur de Raisin.
   "    Apple Blossom.
   "    Violet (True).
   "    Wood Violet.
   "    Orange Blossom.
   "    Hawthorne.
   "    Wild Olive.
   "    Musk.


Flavoring Extracts.

Extract Currant.
   "    Jamaica Ginger.
   "    Gooseberry.
   "    Grape.
   "    Lemon.
   "    Mead.
   "    Nectar.
   "    Orris.
   "    Cinnamon.
   "    Quince.
   "    Rose.
   "    Strawberry.
   "    Anisette.
   "    Apple.
   "    Apricot.
   "    Banana.
   "    Bitter Almonds.
   "    Blackberry.
   "    Catawba.
   "    Cherry.
   "    Plum.
   "    Raspberry.
   "    Sarsaparilla.
   "    Wintergreen.


Essential Oils.

Best Qualities.

     Our Essential Oils will be found equal to anything obtainable.
     Write us for prices on anything you require. We cater especially to
     the candy makers and confectioners.

  FLETCHER MNF'G. CO.
      440 & 442 Yonge Street,
          Toronto, Ont.




FLETCHER MNF'G. CO.

_Importers and Dealers in_

Confectioners Colors, Flavoring Extracts, Concentrated Fruit Oils,
Flower Essences, Fine Essential Oils, Soluble Extracts, etc., for Bakers
and Confectioners.


PURE FRUIT JUICES

prepared by newly discovered process, keep any length of time corked or
uncorked in any temperature.

  FLETCHER Mnf'g Co.
      440 & 442 Yonge St,
          Toronto.




PURE MALT EXTRACT.

Largely used by Bakers to prevent Bread from becoming dry, and to give
it a sweet and nutty Flavor. It ensures shorter and sounder
Fermentation.

BREAD made with it is easily digested, makes larger loaves, golden
tinged crust, general satisfaction to the Consumer and profit to the
Baker.


  AGENTS,

  FLETCHER Mnf'g. Co.
      440 & 442 Yonge St,
          Toronto.




FLETCHER MNF'G. CO.

TORONTO

CANADIAN AGENTS FOR

THE CELEBRATED XXXX BRAND OF GLUCOSE

Guaranteed Equal, if not Superior, to any on the Market.


Its uniform high quality, good color and great specific gravity, has
created for it such a reputation that orders could not be filled, this
season, as fast as required; is now largely used by the best wholesale
and retail confectioners of Canada. With our repeat orders we have some
very flattering testimonials as to its high quality. Our Prices are
Right. The goods when once tried need no other recommendation.

Sold in barrels, half, quarters and pails.

Samples and prices on application.


  FLETCHER MNF'G. CO.
          Toronto.
PREFACE.


I ask every one who may become possessed of this book to read the
recipes herein contained carefully and thoughtfully before attempting
the making of any of them, and also to observe the following
instructions:

Weigh and measure all ingredients exactly, and have everything ready to
mix before you commence.

If you measure your ingredients by means of a cup be sure you use one
which holds half a pint.

Use neither more nor less of anything than the recipe instructs you, and
be sure to have your fire just right, as also instructed by the recipe.

If at first success does not come to you do not despair, but persist in
following the advice of the old adage: “Try, try again.”

You should always bear in mind that honest work is never lost and that
reward must come in the end.




Desserts and Salads.


SAUCES.

1. +Wine Chaudeau.+-- Into a lined saucepan put ½ bottle Rhine wine,
4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 teaspoonful cornstarch, the peel of ½
lemon and the yolks of 6 eggs; place the saucepan over a medium hot
fire and beat the contents with an egg beater until just at boiling
point; then instantly remove from the fire, beat a minute longer,
pour into a sauce bowl and serve with boiled or baked pudding.

2. +White Wine Sauce.+-- Over the fire place a saucepan containing 2
cups white wine, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 3 whole eggs, the yolks of
4 eggs and the peel and juice of 1 lemon; beat the contents of
saucepan with an egg beater until nearly boiling; then instantly
remove and serve.

3. +Wine Cream Sauce.+-- ½ bottle white wine, ½ teaspoonful
cornstarch, 3 eggs (yolks and whites beaten separately), 4
tablespoonfuls sugar and the peel and juice of ½ lemon; put all the
ingredients except the whites of eggs in saucepan; beat with an egg
beater until just about to boil; then remove from fire; have the
whites beaten to a stiff froth; add them to the sauce, beat for a
minute longer and then serve.

4. +Claret Sauce.+-- Over the fire place a lined saucepan containing
½ bottle claret, 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 lemon cut into
slices and freed of the pits, a piece of cinnamon and 1 small
tablespoonful cornstarch mixed with water or wine; stir constantly
until it comes to a boil; then strain and serve. Or boil 1
tablespoonful cornstarch in 1½ cups water, with piece of cinnamon
and a few slices of lemon, for a few minutes; then remove from the
fire; add ½ pint claret and sugar to taste.

5. +Bishop Sauce.+-- Boil 2 ounces of sago in 2 cups water, with 1
tablespoonful fine minced or ground bitter almonds, a piece of
cinnamon and the peel of 1 lemon; when sago is done strain it
through a sieve, add 1½ cups claret, ¼ pound sugar and 1 teaspoonful
of bishop essence.

6. +Madeira Sauce, No. 1.+-- Set a small saucepan on the stove with
the yolks of 3 eggs, 1 cup Madeira and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; stir
until it comes to a boil; then remove from fire and add by degrees 4
tablespoonfuls sweet cream, stirring constantly, and serve.

7. +Madeira Sauce, No. 2.+-- Mix 1 tablespoonful flour with 1½
spoonfuls butter; add 1½ cups boiling water; boil 3 minutes,
stirring constantly; remove from the fire, add ½ cup Madeira and 3
tablespoonfuls sugar.

8. +Butter Sauce.+-- In a small saucepan mix 1 tablespoonful flour
with a little cold water; add by degrees 1 cup of boiling water,
stirring constantly; set the saucepan over the fire, add 1 heaping
tablespoonful butter in small pieces; continue stirring and boil for
a few minutes.

9. +Sherry Wine Sauce, No. 1.+-- Add to the Butter Sauce ½ cup sugar
and ½ pint sherry wine.

10. +Sherry Wine Sauce, No. 2.+-- 1 cup sherry wine, ½ cup water,
the yolks of 3 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and the grated rind of ½
lemon; put all the ingredients in a small saucepan over the fire and
keep stirring until the sauce begins to thicken; then take it off;
if allowed to boil it will be spoiled, as it will immediately
curdle; beat the whites to a stiff froth, stir them into the sauce
and serve.

11. +Sherry Wine Sauce, No. 3.+-- Melt in a small saucepan 1
tablespoonful butter; add 1 teaspoonful flour; when well mixed add 1
cup sherry wine, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and the yolks of 4 eggs;
stir briskly until the sauce is on the point of boiling; then
instantly remove and serve with plum or bread pudding.

12. +Wine or Brandy Sauce.+-- Prepare 1 cup Butter Sauce, sweeten it
with sugar, add 1 glass brandy, port or sherry wine, a little lemon
juice and nutmeg.

13. +Arrack Sauce (Allemande).+-- Mix 2 tablespoonfuls flour with
some white wine; add in small pieces 2 tablespoonfuls butter, peel
and juice of ½ lemon and 2 cups white wine; place a saucepan
containing the ingredients over the fire and stir until it comes to
a boil; remove from the fire, add 1 cup arrack and 1 cup sugar.

14. +Arrack Sauce (English).+-- Put in a small saucepan 1
tablespoonful flour mixed with a little cold water, the yolks of 3
eggs, 1 tablespoonful butter, a piece of cinnamon, a little lemon
peel, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1½ cups water; set saucepan over
the fire, stir constantly until it commences to boil; then instantly
remove from the stove, add a little lemon juice and ½ cup arrack.
This sauce can be made with any kind of wine or brandy.

15. +Brandy Sauce (with Milk, “English Style”).+-- Put in a small
saucepan 1 cup milk, the yolks of 2 eggs, 1 tablespoonful sugar and
a little grated lemon peel; stir over the fire till the sauce is at
boiling point; instantly remove and add 3 tablespoonfuls brandy;
serve with plum pudding.

16. +Brandy Sauce (American), No. 1.+-- Stir 4 tablespoonfuls
powdered sugar with 1½ spoonfuls butter to a cream; add by degrees
the yolks of 2 eggs, ½ cup boiling water and ½ cup brandy; put all
the ingredients in a tin cup and set it in a saucepan of hot water;
stir until the sauce is boiling hot; flavor with nutmeg and vanilla.
This sauce may be made of wine in the same manner.

17. +Brandy Sauce, No. 2.+-- Beat 1 tablespoonful butter with 6
tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a cream; add by degrees 1
wine-glassful of brandy, 3 tablespoonfuls boiling water and a little
nutmeg; put the sauce into a tin cup, set in saucepan of boiling
water and stir until the sauce is hot; but do not allow it to boil.

18. +Punch Sauce.+-- Place a small vessel on the stove with 1 cup of
rum, 2 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar, the grated rind of ½ an orange
and 1 teaspoonful vanilla essence; let it remain over the fire until
the liquor catches a light flame; put on the lid for 1 minute; then
remove it from the fire, add the juice of 1 orange and serve hot.
This sauce is usually poured over the pudding.

19. +Rum Sauce.+-- Mix ½ tablespoonful flour with a piece of butter
the size of an egg; add 1 cup boiling water; when well mixed
together add ½ cup Rhine wine, the peel and juice of ½ lemon, 4
tablespoonfuls sugar, a piece of cinnamon and the yolks of 3 eggs;
place in a saucepan over the fire and beat with an egg beater till
the sauce comes to a boil; instantly remove and add ½ cup rum. In
place of rum, brandy may be used. NOTE.--The eggs may be omitted and
1 tablespoonful flour used instead of ½.

20. +Sauce à la Diaz.+-- Place a tin pan over the fire with 1 cup
rum, ½ cup Marella wine, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, the grated rind of
1 orange and 1 teaspoonful vanilla; leave the pan on the stove until
the liquor takes fire; then cover quickly; boil 1 minute; draw it
from the fire to the side of the stove; let it stand a few minutes;
then strain into a bowl; cover tightly and when cold pour it over
the pudding.

21. +Wine Chaudeau (with Rum).+-- Place a saucepan on the stove with
1 teaspoonful cornstarch mixed with a little cold water; add 2 whole
eggs, the yolks of 2 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, a little lemon
juice, some grated orange peel, ½ bottle Rhine wine and 2 glasses of
rum; stir with an egg beater until just about to boil; then
instantly remove from the fire, stir for a few minutes longer and
serve. Any other kind of liquor may be used instead of rum.

22. +Wine Sauce (with Almonds and Raisins).+-- Put a small vessel
over the fire with ½ bottle claret, 3 tablespoonfuls ground almonds,
3 tablespoonfuls raisins, a piece of cinnamon, 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar and the peel of 1 lemon; stir until it boils; then remove from
the fire, take out cinnamon and lemon peel and serve.

23. +Hard Sauce.+-- Stir ¼ pound butter with 8 tablespoonfuls
powdered sugar to a cream until it looks white; add by degrees 1
small glass of brandy (and, if liked, a little nutmeg); the yolks of
2 eggs may also be beaten through the sauce.

24. +Hard Sauce (with Cherries).+-- Make a hard sauce with the yolks
of 2 eggs and put some nice, ripe cherries (without the pits) into
it; stir the whole well together and serve with suet pudding or
dumplings. Blackberries, peaches or plums may be used instead of
cherries.

25. +Strawberry Sauce.+-- Boil in a saucepan 2 teaspoonfuls
cornstarch in 1½ cups water with the rind of 1 lemon; take it from
the fire, add 1 cup strawberry juice, a little Rhine wine or claret
and sweeten with sugar.

26. +Sauce of Apricots.+-- Boil 3 tablespoonfuls apricot marmalade
with 1 tablespoonful butter and ½ cup water 5 minutes; add 2
tablespoonfuls brandy and serve with boiled suet, batter pudding or
apple dumplings.

27. +Sauce of Cherries, No. 1.+-- Place in a saucepan 1 cup sugar,
1 cup water and ½ cup claret; when this boils add 1 pint of ripe
cherries (without the pits); boil them 10 minutes; then take out the
cherries and mix 1 teaspoonful cornstarch with a little water; add
it to the sauce, boil a minute, strain and put cherries back into
the sauce; serve cold.

28. +Sauce of Cherries, No. 2.+-- Remove the pits from ½ pound ripe
cherries; put the stones into a mortar and pound them fine; put
them, with the cherries, 1 pint water and a piece of cinnamon, in a
saucepan; add ¾ cup sugar and boil slowly ½ hour; strain and thicken
the sauce with 2 teaspoonfuls cornstarch; boil a minute, add ½ cup
claret and serve.

29. +Strawberry Hard Sauce.+-- Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter to a
cream with 1 cup powdered sugar; add the yolks of 2 eggs; beat until
very light and stir 1 cup nice, ripe strawberries through it; put
the sauce in a glass dish, cover with the beaten whites of 2 eggs
and put some nice strawberries on top of the sauce. Any other kind
of fruit may be used instead of strawberries. Or stir ½ cup butter
with 1 cup powdered sugar to a cream; add the beaten white of 1 egg
and 1 cup thoroughly mashed strawberries.

30. +Raspberry Sauce, No. 1.+-- Put in a small saucepan the peel of 1
lemon, a little piece of cinnamon, 1 cup water and 1 spoonful sugar;
boil 5 minutes; mix 2 teaspoonfuls cornstarch with some cold water;
add it to the contents of saucepan; boil a minute; add 1 cup
raspberry juice or syrup and serve either hot or cold.

31. +Raspberry Sauce, No. 2.+-- Set a saucepan on the stove with 1½
cups raspberry juice, ½ cup water, the juice and peel of 1 lemon,
sugar to taste, 1 teaspoonful cornstarch and the yolks of 3 eggs;
beat constantly with an egg beater until it comes to a boil; quickly
remove it from the fire; beat for a few minutes longer; beat the
whites of the 3 eggs to a stiff froth and stir them into the sauce.

32. +Huckleberry Sauce.+-- Put the huckleberries with a little water
in a saucepan over the fire; boil slowly for ½ hour; then strain
through a sieve, sweeten with sugar and thicken with a little
cornstarch; add a few tablespoonfuls port wine or a little lemon
juice and claret; serve cold.

33. +Sauce of Dried Cherries.+-- Wash 1 pound dried cherries; put
them into a mortar and pound fine; place them in a saucepan with 3
or 4 cups water over the fire; add a few zwiebacks, a piece of
cinnamon and boil 1 hour; strain through a sieve, add a little
claret and lemon juice and sweeten with sugar.

34. +Nut Sauce.+-- Stir 1 tablespoonful butter with 5 tablespoonfuls
powdered sugar to a cream; add the yolks of 2 eggs and a few
spoonfuls of water; put it in a tin pail; set in a vessel of hot
water; stir until hot; remove the sauce from the fire, add ½ cup
fine, minced almonds and flavor with vanilla. Fine, chopped, stoned
raisins may be used instead of almonds.

35. +Hard Sauce (with Nuts).+-- Prepare a hard sauce of 1
tablespoonful butter and 5 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar; beat this
until white; add by degrees the yolks of 2 eggs; beat the whites of
2 eggs to a stiff froth; add the sauce gradually to the whites; beat
constantly with an egg beater; and lastly add 1 cup pounded or
ground nuts, almonds, walnuts, hazel or hickory nuts. The nuts may
be finely chopped if more convenient. This sauce may be prepared in
the same manner with peaches, apricots (peeled and cut into pieces)
or preserved pineapple.

36. +Strawberry Custard Sauce.+-- Place a small saucepan on the stove
with 1 pint milk, the yolks of 2 eggs and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar;
stir constantly until it comes to a boil; instantly remove from the
fire, flavor with vanilla and set it away to cool; then stir 1 cup
strawberries into it; beat the whites of the 2 eggs to a stiff froth
and put it on top of the sauce. This sauce is excellent with
strawberry shortcake. NOTE.--Any kind of fruit may be substituted
for strawberries.

37. +Fruit Sauce (not boiled).+-- Stir 1 cup raspberry juice and 1 of
currants with 8 tablespoonfuls sugar for 20 minutes; serve with cold
puddings. Or boil 2 teaspoonfuls cornstarch in water for a few
minutes; sweeten with sugar; thin it with raspberry, currant or
cherry juice; add a little Rhine wine and serve with cold pudding.
This sauce is exceedingly nice when made of strawberries with the
addition of the juice of 1 orange and a little grated skin.

38. +Peach Sauce, No. 1.+-- To be served cold. Pare and cut in halves
½ dozen peaches; stew them in sugar syrup; press them through a
sieve; thicken them with a little arrowroot or cornstarch; boil a
minute, add a little white wine and serve. Or boil the peaches
(after they are peeled and free from the stones) in sugar syrup
until tender; then take them out, put in a dish, cut each half into
4 pieces and pour the liquor over them; then serve with tapioca
pudding.

39. +Peach Sauce, No. 2.+-- Beat 1 tablespoonful butter with 4
tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a cream; add the yolks of 2 eggs;
beat until very light and creamy; then beat the whites of the 2 eggs
to a stiff froth; add the sauce to them by degrees; keep on beating
with an egg beater until all is well mixed together and stir 1 cup
of fine, cut peaches through it; serve with boiled pudding.

40. +Sauce of Currants and Raspberries.+-- Wash ½ pound red currants
and raspberries; sprinkle with sugar and let them stand ½ hour;
prepare a sauce the same as for Peach Sauce and stir the fruit
through it.

41. +Cream Sauce (with Jelly), No. 1.+-- Stir 1 cup currant jelly
until smooth; add 1 cup rich, sweet cream and beat with an egg
beater to a froth; add a little arrack rum or Cognac and serve with
cold pudding.

42. +Cream Sauce (with Jelly), No. 2.+-- Beat ½ cup fruit jelly and
the whites of 2 eggs to a stiff froth and serve with cold pudding.

43. +Lemon Sauce, No. 1.+-- Stir 1 tablespoonful butter with 4
tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a cream; add by degrees 1 beaten
egg, the juice and grated rind of ½ lemon, a little nutmeg and 4
tablespoonfuls boiling water; beat the sauce thoroughly for 5
minutes; put in a tin pail and set in saucepan of hot water; stir
constantly until very hot, but do not allow it to boil.

44. +Lemon Custard Sauce.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 pint milk,
3 whole eggs and 3 tablespoonfuls sugar over the fire and stir until
it just comes to the boiling point; quickly remove, pour sauce into
a dish, flavor with lemon essence and serve cold with cold pudding.

45. +Lemon Sauce (with Liquor).+-- Melt in a saucepan 1 tablespoonful
butter; add ½ tablespoonful flour; when well mixed pour in 1 cup
boiling water; boil 2 minutes; remove from the fire, pour sauce into
a bowl; add the juice of ½ lemon, a little nutmeg and a glass of
brandy; sweeten with sugar and serve hot. Very nice with rolly-poly
pudding or apple dumplings. Sherry or Madeira wine may be used
instead of brandy.

46. +Sauce à l’Orange.+-- Stir the yolks of 4 eggs with 2
tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a cream; add by degrees 1 cup sweet
cream and stir constantly; add the grated rind of 1 orange; put the
whole in a tin cup or pail, set in a vessel of hot water and stir
all the time until it is on the point of boiling; then instantly
remove from the fire, strain through a sieve over the pudding and
serve hot.

47. +Sauce au Kirsch.+-- Boil 1 teaspoonful cornstarch in 1 cup
water; sweeten with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; add 2 tablespoonfuls
kirsch and serve.

48. +Lemon Sauce, No. 2.+-- Mix 2 teaspoonfuls flour with a little
cold water; put it in a saucepan; add 1 pint boiling water, 1
tablespoonful butter and ½ cup sugar; stir until the sauce boils;
then remove from the fire, add the juice of 1 lemon and a little of
the grated rind and nutmeg.

49. +Lemon Cream Sauce.+-- Put in a tin pail or cup 1½ cups milk, the
yolks of 2 eggs and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; set in a vessel of hot
water; beat with an egg beater until the sauce comes to a boil;
remove from the fire; add ½ teaspoonful lemon essence; beat the
whites to a stiff froth and stir them into the sauce.

50. +Almond Sauce.+-- Remove the brown skin of 2 ounces of almonds,
ground or chopped fine; put them in a saucepan with 2 cups milk,
2 tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 3 eggs and 1 teaspoonful of
arrowroot; put the saucepan in a vessel of hot water; keep stirring
until the sauce comes to a boil. Instead of almonds almond essence
may be used; a little brandy may also be added if liked.

51. +Chocolate Sauce.+-- Boil ¼ pound grated chocolate with 1 cup
water and 3 tablespoonfuls sugar for 5 minutes; beat up the yolks of
3 eggs with 1½ cups cold milk; add it to the chocolate; keep
stirring until the sauce comes to a boil; instantly take it from the
fire, beat for a few minutes longer and pour it into a sauce bowl;
serve cold with cold pudding.

52. +Chocolate Cream Sauce.+-- Boil ¼ pound grated chocolate with 1
cup water for 5 minutes; add sugar to taste; beat up the yolks of 3
eggs with 1½ cups sweet cream; add it to the chocolate; keep
stirring until nearly boiling; remove from fire, add some vanilla
essence and the beaten whites of the 3 eggs.

53. +Vanilla Cream Sauce.+-- Put in a saucepan 2 cups sweet cream, 2
or 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, 2 whole eggs and the yolks of 2 eggs; set
the saucepan in a vessel of hot water; beat with an egg beater till
the sauce just comes to the boiling point; then instantly remove
from the fire; do not allow the sauce to boil; flavor with vanilla
extract and serve cold.

54. +Vanilla Sauce.+-- Put in a tin cup or pail 2 cups milk and 1
teaspoonful cornstarch; add the yolks of 3 eggs and 2 tablespoonfuls
sugar; place the cup in a vessel of hot water; beat with an egg
beater until it comes to a boil; instantly remove; pour the sauce
into a saucière; flavor with 1 teaspoonful vanilla and serve cold.
Do not allow the sauce to boil or it will curdle.

55. +Sauce à la Cream (sweet).+-- Put in a tin pail 2 cups milk, the
yolks of 2 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1 teaspoonful
cornstarch; set in a vessel of hot water; stir constantly until it
comes to a boil; instantly remove; flavor with vanilla; beat the
whites of the eggs to a stiff froth; pour the sauce into a glass
dish, spread the beaten whites over it and dust some powdered sugar
over all.

56. +White Sauce.+-- Boil 2 teaspoonfuls arrowroot in 1 pint milk;
add 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1 teaspoonful lemon essence; beat the
white of 1 egg to a froth and stir it through the sauce when cold.

57. +Cream Sauce (plain).+-- Stir ½ tablespoonful butter with 4
tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a cream; boil 1 tablespoonful flour
in 1 cup of water; pour it slowly into the creamed butter; keep on
beating until the whole is well mixed; flavor with 1 teaspoonful
lemon essence and serve hot.

58. +Vanilla Sauce (plain).+-- Put in a saucepan 1 pint milk, 1½
teaspoonfuls cornstarch, sugar to taste and stir over the fire until
it boils; flavor with 1 teaspoonful vanilla essence and serve when
cold.

59. +Vanilla Sauce (with Cognac).+-- Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter
with 6 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a cream; add by degrees 3
tablespoonfuls Cognac, sherry or Madeira wine and ½ cup boiling
water; keep beating all the time; put this in a tin pail and set in
a vessel of hot water; keep stirring until hot, but do not allow it
to boil; remove from the fire and add 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla
essence.

60. +Caramel Sauce.+-- Put 2 tablespoonfuls sugar in a saucepan over
the fire; let it get light brown; add a little water; boil for a
minute or two; then pour it into a small saucepan; add 1½ cups of
milk or cream and the yolks of 2 eggs; set the saucepan in a vessel
of hot water; stir until it comes to a boil; remove from the fire
and flavor with 1 teaspoonful vanilla.

61. +Coffee Cream Sauce.+-- Pour 2 cups boiling hot cream over 2
tablespoonfuls freshly ground coffee; cover tightly and let it stand
10 minutes; then strain the cream through a fine sieve; put the
cream in a small saucepan; add the yolks of 2 eggs, 1 teaspoonful
cornstarch and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; put this over a moderate fire
and stir until it comes to a boil; remove from the stove, pour it
into a sauce bowl and stir the beaten whites of the eggs through it;
serve cold.

62. +Nutmeg Sauce.+-- Mix 1 tablespoonful butter with 1 tablespoonful
flour; add 2 cups boiling water and boil 5 minutes; sweeten with
sugar and flavor with grated nutmeg.

63. +Orange Cream Sauce.+-- Stir the yolks of 4 eggs with 1½
tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream; add 1 teaspoonful butter, a little
grated orange peel and ½ pint sweet cream or milk; put the
ingredients in a small saucepan over the fire and stir till boiling
hot; when cold mix it with a few spoonfuls whipped cream. Lemon
Sauce is made in the same manner. This sauce may also be flavored
with vanilla or lemon extract.

64. +Sabayon Sauce.+-- Put the yolks of 4 eggs and 1 whole egg in a
lined saucepan and beat them with an egg beater to a froth; add 4
tablespoonfuls sugar, a small piece of lemon peel, the juice of 1
lemon and ½ bottle of Rhine wine; 5 minutes before serving put the
saucepan over the fire and beat constantly till boiling hot; but do
not allow it to boil; serve at once. Sabayon of Madeira or Malaga
wine without lemon juice is made the same way. If rum is added in
place of wine it is then called Rum Sabayon Sauce.

65. +Strawberry Chaudeau Sauce.+-- Put 1 cup strawberry juice or
syrup in a saucepan; sweeten to taste; add ½ cup white wine and the
yolks of 2 eggs; beat this over the fire with an egg beater till it
foams and rises up; remove from the fire and mix it with the beaten
whites of 2 eggs; serve with vanilla koch or souflée.

66. +Pineapple Chaudeau Sauce.+-- Put 1 cup pineapple juice or syrup
in a saucepan; sweeten to taste; add ½ cup white wine and the yolks
of 2 eggs; beat this over the fire with an egg beater till it foams
and rises up; remove from the fire and mix it with the beaten whites
of 2 eggs; serve with vanilla koch or souflée.

67. +Raspberry Chaudeau Sauce+ is made the same as Strawberry
Chaudeau Sauce.

68. +Cocoanut Snow Sauce.+-- Beat the whites of 3 eggs to a stiff
froth and boil 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water till it forms a thread
between 2 fingers; then gradually pour it into the beaten whites,
stirring constantly; next add 1 cup freshly grated cocoanut.

69. +Cocoanut Sauce (another way).+-- Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter
with 1 cup powdered sugar to a cream; add by degrees the yolks of 2
eggs; then beat the whites to a stiff froth; mix them with the
sauce; add ¾ cup freshly grated cocoanut and serve with boiled
pudding.

70. +Snow Sauce (with orange flavor).+-- Beat the whites of 2 eggs to
a stiff froth; boil a small cup of sugar with ½ cup water till it
forms a thread between two fingers; remove it from the fire; add the
juice of 1 orange and gradually pour it while hot into the beaten
whites, stirring constantly; add last a little grated rind of orange
and serve. Snow Sauce with lemon flavor is made the same way.

71. +Pistachio Sauce.+-- Stir the yolks of 4 eggs with 1 pint sweet
cream and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar over the fire till nearly boiling;
remove from fire; add 2 ounces finely pounded pistachio nuts; serve
when ice cold with frozen pudding.

72. +Cold Pineapple Sauce.+-- Pare and grate a small, ripe pineapple;
press it through a sieve; add 1 cup sugar and a glass of Rhine wine;
let it stand on ice for 1 hour and serve with frozen pudding.


SYRUPS.

73. +Plain or Sugar Syrup.+-- Dissolve 4 pounds white sugar, 1 quart
cold water and the beaten white of 1 egg; stir until sugar is
dissolved; simmer for 3 minutes; skim well, strain through a fine
flannel bag and bottle in well corked bottles.

74. +Pineapple Syrup.+-- Pare and cut some large, ripe pineapples
into small pieces; put them in a stone jar or large bowl; sprinkle a
little sugar between and let the pineapples stand covered with a
cloth in cellar for 36 hours, or until they have bubbles on top;
then strain through a sieve or coarse bag, and if not clear enough
strain again through a flannel bag; add to each pint of juice 1
pound of sugar; stir until the sugar is melted; then put it over the
fire and simmer 3 minutes; skim and put the syrup in bottles; cork
well and keep them in cool place. This syrup may be thinned with 2
parts plain syrup.

75. +Strawberry Syrup.+-- Choose none but fine, ripe berries if you
wish your syrup to be good; mash the strawberries in a stone jar or
bowl; cover with a thin white cloth and let them stand 24 hours at a
temperature of 70° to 80° F.; then inclose in a flannel bag and
press them; add to each pint of juice 1 pound sugar; stir until the
sugar is dissolved; then put it over the fire, let it boil up, skim
well, remove from fire and bottle while hot.

75a. +Raspberry Syrup+ is made the same as strawberry.

76. +Raspberry and Currant Syrup.+-- Take equal quantities of
raspberries and currants; free the latter from stems; put the fruit
together into a stone jar or bowl, mash it up, cover with a cloth
and let stand for 24 hours; then inclose the fruit in a coarse bag,
press out the juice and to each pint add 1 pound sugar; let it boil
up and bottle.

77. +Raspberry Syrup (without fruit).+-- To make 8 gallons of syrup
prepare a plain syrup of 18 pounds sugar with 5 gallons of water and
put it in a clean mixing barrel; next dissolve 2 ounces tataric acid
in 1 pint cold water and add it to the syrup; then pour 1 quart
boiling water over 4 ounces powdered orrisroot; let it get cold;
then filter; add it also to the syrup and stir up well. Color it
with the following mixture: Take ½ pound mallow or malva flowers and
soak them in ½ gallon water for 6 hours; then mash in a mortar 2
ounces cochineal and 2 ounces alum and pour over these 2 quarts
boiling water, and when cold filter; next mix both colors together,
add them to the syrup and stir for 15-20 minutes. This is an
excellent recipe for imitation of raspberry syrup.

78. +Raspberry Syrup (without boiling).+-- Mash some ripe berries in
a stone jar or bowl and set the paste for 3 days (covered with a
linen cloth) in a cool cellar; then press out the juice through a
coarse bag; let it stand for 6 hours; drain off the clear juice and
leave the sediment; add to 1 pint juice 1 pound sugar, stir for 1
hour and bottle; cork bottles loosely and set them for 4 days in the
sun; then filter through a fine flannel bag; re-bottle the syrup in
small bottles, cork well and cover corks with beeswax. Syrup made in
this way is excellent for sauces. Strawberry and Currant Syrup
without boiling is made in the same manner.

79. +Blackberry Syrup.+-- Mash the blackberries in a stone jar, cover
and let them stand for 48 hours; then strain them through a bag; add
to each pint of juice 1 pound sugar; stir until dissolved; put it
over the fire to boil 3 minutes; skim well; add to each quart of
syrup ½ gill of French brandy and bottle. Or take nice, ripe
berries, mash and strain them; add to each pint of juice 1 pound
sugar, ½ teaspoonful ground cloves and the same of cinnamon and
mace; boil 5 minutes; add to 1 gallon of syrup ½ pint brandy and
bottle.

80. +Peach Syrup.+-- Pare and cut the peaches into small pieces; put
them in a preserving kettle with a little water; crack some of the
peach stones, add them to the peaches and let boil slowly for 15
minutes; then strain through a flannel bag; add to 1 pint juice 1
pound sugar and boil a few minutes; skim well and bottle.

81. +Apricot Syrup+ the same way. Or pare and cut the peaches into
pieces, crack a few of the stones, add them to the fruit and let it
stand 24 hours; then strain; allow for 1 pint juice 1 pound sugar;
let it come to a boil; skim well and bottle.

82. +Cherry Syrup.+-- Pound a sufficient quantity of ripe cherries
(with the pits) in a porcelain or stone mortar; let it stand for 3
days; inclose them in a bag, press out the juice, add to each pint 1
pound sugar; let it boil up once, skim and put the syrup in bottles;
cork and set away for use.

83. +Wild Cherry Syrup+ is made in the same manner as the above.

84. +Wild Cherry Bark Syrup.+-- Pour 1 pint cold water over 4 ounces
well bruised wild cherry bark; let it stand for 36 hours; press out
and let the liquid stand till clear; add 1½ pounds white sugar; stir
until dissolved and strain through fine flannel bag; set away in
well corked bottles.

85. +Vanilla Syrup.+-- Add ½ ounce fluid extract of vanilla to 1
gallon plain syrup. Another recipe: Rub ½ ounce citric acid with a
little plain syrup; add 1 fluid ounce extract of vanilla and 1
gallon plain syrup.

86. +Vanilla Cream Syrup.+-- Add to 3 pints plain syrup 1 ounce
extract of vanilla, 1 quart rich, sweet cream or condensed milk.

87. +Cream Syrup.+-- 1 cup sweet cream, 1 cup milk and 1 pound sugar
are well mixed together, and if it is to be kept for several days
add a little bicarbonate of sodium.

88. +Lemon Syrup.+-- Grate the rind of 16 large, fresh lemons over 8
pounds granulated sugar; add 2 quarts cold water and the juice of
the lemons; stir until the sugar is melted; then strain through a
fine flannel bag and put the syrup in well corked pint bottles. Be
careful to grate off only the yellow part of the rind of the lemons;
the white part will give the syrup a bitter taste. There is no
better lemon syrup made than this. 2 to 3 tablespoonfuls of this
syrup in a glass of cold water makes fine lemonade and is also
excellent for mineral waters and sauces.

89. +Lemon Syrup (with Oil of Lemon).+-- Add to 1 gallon plain syrup
25 drops oil of lemon and 10 drams citric acid; mix the oil and acid
together gradually; then add the syrup slowly, and when well mixed
bottle syrup and keep in a cool place for use.

90. +Another Recipe+:--Add to 1 gallon plain syrup 6 drams tartaric
acid dissolved in a little warm water, 1 ounce gumarabic dissolved
in 1 ounce warm water and ½ dram of the best lemon oil, or a
sufficient quantity of lemon extract to flavor the syrup.

91. +Lemon Syrup (plain).+-- Make of 8 pounds sugar and 2 quarts
water a plain syrup; when nearly cold add 1 quart pure lemon juice;
filter through a Canton flannel filter and bottle.

92. +Orange Syrup.+-- Grate the rind of 12 oranges over 7 pounds
granulated sugar; squeeze out the juice, strain and pour it over the
sugar; add ½ gallon cold water; stir until sugar is dissolved; then
strain through a fine flannel bag and bottle. Care should be taken
to grate only the yellow part of the rind of the oranges, as the
least particle of white will make the syrup bitter.

93. +Orange Flower Syrup.+-- Add to 1 pint orange flower water 1¾
pounds sugar; stir until the sugar is dissolved; then bottle.




EXTRACTS AND ESSENCES.


94. +Essence of Lemon.+-- Grate the rind of 12 lemons; put this in a
bottle with 1 pint alcohol and 1 teaspoonful lemon oil; cork bottle
tightly; set in a warm place; shake every day and after 2 weeks it
will be ready for use.

95. +Essence of Vanilla.+-- Take 1 ounce vanilla beans; split each
bean in two (lengthwise); then cut into small pieces; put these into
a large bottle with 1 pint alcohol and 1 pint water; cork the
bottle, not too tightly; set in a warm place for 3 weeks and shake
it once every day; it will them be ready for use.

96. +Bischof Essence.+-- Pare off the peel of 12 green oranges; put
them with 1 bottle of good rum in a glass jar that is used for
preserving fruit; let it stand 24 hours; then pour the essence
into small bottles and set in a cool place for further use; 2
tablespoonfuls to 1 bottle of claret are sufficient.

97. +Essence of Oranges.+-- Pare off the peel of 8 yellow and 4 green
oranges; put them in a large bottle or glass jar with 1 quart
arrack; set in a warm place for 2 weeks; then strain through
filtering paper, put into small bottles and set them in a cool place
for further use; 2 tablespoonfuls essence are sufficient for 1
bottle wine.

98. +Peach Essence.+-- Dissolve 1 fluid dram oil of bitter almonds in
7 pints rectified spirits of 90 per cent.; allow the solution to
stand for a few days and then filter it; put away in well corked
bottles.

99. +Bitter Almond Essence.+-- Dissolve 1 fluid dram oil of bitter
almonds in 3 quarts rectified spirits of 90 per cent. and store the
fluid for some time before using it.

100. +Coffee Essence.+-- Pour 3 pints rectified spirits of 90 per
cent. over 5¼ ounces finely roasted and ground coffee; let it stand
for several days, draw off the fluid and filter.

101. +Cherry Essence.+-- Press out the flesh of ripe cherries; let
the mass stand quietly in a moderately warm room until the pure
juice has separated from the pulp; then place the mass in a bag,
press the juice out, let it stand for a few hours longer and add an
equal quantity of rectified spirits of 90 per cent.

102. +Strawberry Essence.+-- Bruise 4½ pounds wild strawberries; pour
3 quarts spirits of 90 per cent, over the mass; let it stand for
some time and filter. The product will be about 1 gallon of
strawberry essence.

103. +Raspberry Essence.+-- Crush 2 pounds ripe raspberries; press
them out and add 2 quarts rectified spirits of 90 per cent.

104. +Rose Essence.+-- Dissolve 2 fluid drams rose oil in 1⅓ quarts
rectified spirits of 90 per cent. and filter the solution.

105. +Orange Blossom Extract.+-- Pour 1¼ pints boiling milk over 10½
ounces fresh orange blossoms; place same over the fire and let it
boil up; then add 3 quarts rectified spirits of 90 per cent.; mix it
thoroughly, add 2½ pints champagne and filter.

106. +Orange Peel Extract.+-- Crush in a stone mortar the rind of 12
oranges with some sugar; place the mass into a glass jar; add ⅓
gallon of rectified spirits of 90 per cent.; let it stand for 4
days; then decant the clear liquid and filter it; put away in well
corked bottles.

107. +Italian Meringue.+-- Whites of 5 eggs beaten to a stiff froth,
1 pound sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract, ¾ cup water; put sugar
and water over the fire in a saucepan (one of agateware is best);
stir until sugar is dissolved; next put saucepan over the fire and
boil till the sugar begins to foam; then take some of the boiling
sugar in a spoon and blow it; if it flows off the spoon in large
bubbles it is ready to use; wipe the rim of saucepan clean with a
damp cloth and remove the sugar from fire; let it cool for 2
minutes; then pour it slowly into the beaten whites, stirring
constantly.

108. +Meringue.+-- ½ pound powdered sugar and the whites of 5 eggs;
carefully separate the whites from the yolks; put the whites in a
deep kettle for 15 minutes on ice; then whip it with an egg beater
to a stiff froth; mix in slowly the sugar and use at once. This
meringue is used for ornamenting puddings and cakes.

109. +Spinach Green (for coloring).+-- Wash a few handfuls spinach,
press it out and pound in a mortar to a pulp; then press out the
juice in a cloth; put the spinach liquid in a small saucepan; put it
for a few minutes over the fire; as soon as the liquid curdles pour
it on a fine sieve; let the water run off and the green which
remains press through a fine sieve and put it in a well covered
glass till wanted. Spinach green is used for coloring creams or
puddings.

110. +Sugar Color.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 pound sugar and ½ pint
water over the fire and boil till the sugar is dark brown and nearly
black; then add 1 pint boiling water; stir until all the sugar is
well dissolved; boil it for a few minutes; then remove from fire and
put it into a well corked bottle. This color is used for coloring
soups, sauces and sometimes jellies.

111. +Lemon Sugar.+-- Grate the rind of 12 lemons; mix the grated
lemon peel with 1 pound powdered sugar; put into well closed jars
and set in a cool place; is used for cake sauces and puddings
instead of freshly grated lemon peel.

112. +Vanilla Sugar.+-- Split the vanilla bean, lengthwise, in two;
put some granulated sugar on a plate and scrape the seed out of the
vanilla bean; mix it with the sugar and put away in a well closed
jar.

113. +Red Sugar.+-- Sift out all the fine part of ½ pound granulated
sugar; put the sugar on a piece of thick brown paper, drop a few
drops of cochineal over the sugar and rub it with the hands till the
sugar becomes a red color.

114. +Green Sugar+ is prepared in the same manner as the foregoing,
but care must be taken to use only green vegetable coloring.




FRENCH CREAMS.


115. +Creme Française à la Vanille.+-- Put 1 quart sweet cream with
the yolks of 8 eggs into a saucepan; add ¾ cup sugar and stir the
whole over the fire with an egg beater till nearly boiling; remove
from fire, add 2 teaspoonfuls essence of vanilla and 1½ ounces
clarified gelatine (see Gelatine); continue stirring until the cream
has cooled off; then set a plain form with tube in center into
cracked ice, pour in the cream, cover and let it remain for 2 hours.
If the form is oiled with fine almond oil the cream will turn out
without dipping the form into hot water; the oiling is best done
with a fine brush; the form is then turned upside down, so that all
superfluous oil has a chance to run out.

116. +Creme Française au Chocolat.+-- Melt ¼ pound grated chocolate
in the oven; then put it with 1 quart cream, ¾ cup sugar and the
yolks of 8 eggs over the fire; stir until nearly boiling; remove it
from fire, add 1 teaspoonful essence of vanilla and 1 ounce
clarified gelatine and finish same as in foregoing recipe.

117. +Creme Française aux Amandes.+-- 1 quart cream, ¼ pound blanched
and finely pounded almonds, the yolks of 8 eggs, ½ cup sugar and ½
vanilla bean; boil the cream and pour it over the pounded almonds;
cover and let it stand till cold; then strain the cream through a
sieve; place a saucepan with the cream, yolks, vanilla and sugar
over the fire; stir with an egg beater till nearly boiling; remove
it from the fire and finish the same as Crême Française à la
Vanille.

118. +Creme Française au Café.+-- Pour 1 quart boiling cream over 4
tablespoonfuls fresh, ground coffee; cover and let it stand for 5
minutes; then strain through a fine sieve of cloth; place a saucepan
over the fire with the coffee cream, yolks of 8 eggs and 5
tablespoonfuls sugar and stir till nearly boiling; finish the same
as Crême Française à la Vanille.

119. +Creme Française au Thé.+-- Pour 1 quart boiling cream over 2
tablespoonfuls of the best black tea; let it stand, well covered,
for 5 minutes; then strain; put the tea cream with the yolks of 8
eggs and 5 tablespoonfuls sugar in saucepan over the fire and stir
till nearly boiling; finish the same as Crême Française à la
Vanille.

120. +Creme Française au Marasquin.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 quart
cream, the yolks of 8 eggs, ½ cup sugar and 1 teaspoonful vanilla
over the fire and stir till nearly boiling; remove it from the fire
and add 16 sheets of gelatine which has been soaked in cold water
for 10 minutes and pressed out; add lastly ½ pint maraschino and
finish the same as Crême Française à la Vanille.

121. +Creme Française au Rhum+ is made the same as the foregoing,
substituting rum for maraschino.

122. +Petits Pots Creme à la Vanille.+-- Mix well together 1 quart
cream, yolks of 8 eggs, 4 whole eggs and 5 tablespoonfuls sugar;
fill the cream into buttered custard cups, set them in a pan of hot
water on top of the stove, cover with a pan or paper and boil till
contents are firm; remove from fire and set aside to cool; in
serving turn the cream onto a dish and send whipped cream to table
with it.

123. +Creme au Bain-Marie au Caramel.+-- Boil ¾ cup sugar to a
caramel (see Boiling Sugar), add a little boiling water, remove from
fire and stir for a few minutes; then place a saucepan with 1 quart
cream or milk, 4 whole eggs and the yolks of 8 eggs over the fire;
add the caramel sugar and stir till nearly boiling; fill the cream
into a buttered form, cover it tightly and place the form into a
vessel of hot water; let it stand for 1½ hours on the hot stove; the
water should be boiling hot, but must not boil; when done take it
from the fire, set in cool place; when cold and ready to serve turn
the cream onto a round dish and send to table without sauce.

124. +Creme au Bain-Marie au Chocolat.+-- Melt 4 tablespoonfuls
Baker’s chocolate in the oven; mix it with 1 quart cream or milk, 5
tablespoonfuls sugar and boil 5 minutes, stirring constantly; remove
it from the fire and when cold add 4 whole eggs, the yolks of 8 and
1 teaspoonful vanilla; beat these well together with an egg beater;
butter a form with a tube in the center and sprinkle with fine
zwieback crumbs; pour in the cream, cover the form and set in a
vessel of hot water; let it boil slowly for an hour; remove it from
the fire and set aside to cool; when ready to serve turn the cream
onto a dish, garnish with fancy cake and send whipped cream à la
vanilla to table with it.

125. +Vienna Orange Cream.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in ½ cup cold
water 15 minutes, add ½ cup boiling water and stir over the fire
till dissolved; stir the yolks of 12 eggs with 12 tablespoonfuls
sugar to a cream; add by degrees the juice of 8 oranges and 3
lemons, and lastly the gelatine; continue stirring until it begins
to thicken; then add the whites, beaten to a stiff froth; rinse out
a mould with cold water and sprinkle with sugar, pour in the cream
and set it on ice for 2 hours.

126. +Vienna Lemon Cream.+-- Stir the yolks of 10 eggs with 1 cup
sugar to a cream; add the juice of 4 lemons and the grated rind of ½
a one; lay 12 sheets of gelatine in cold water for 10 minutes, press
out and dissolve it in ½ cup boiling water; add it by degrees to the
cream and continue stirring till it begins to thicken; then add the
whites, beaten to a stiff froth; rinse out a form with cold water
and sprinkle with sugar, turn in the cream and set on ice till firm.

127. +Milk Cream.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup of milk; place a
saucepan with 3 cups milk, ¾ cup sugar, 1½ teaspoonfuls vanilla and
the yolks of 6 eggs in a vessel of boiling water and stir with an
egg beater till nearly boiling; remove from the fire, add the
gelatine and stir till it becomes cold and begins to thicken; then
add the whites, beaten to a stiff froth, turn the cream into a form
and set on ice till firm; serve with cold pineapple or strawberry
sauce; the form should be rinsed with cold water and sprinkled with
sugar before the cream is put in.

128. +Russian Cream.+-- Stir the yolks of 9 eggs with 9
tablespoonfuls sugar for ½ hour; add the juice and grated rind of 1
lemon and ½ pint best rum; lay 5 sheets of gelatine for 5 minutes in
cold water, press out and put it in ½ cup boiling water; stir until
dissolved; then mix it by degrees, stirring constantly, with the
above mixture; when it begins to thicken add the whites, beaten to a
stiff froth, rinse out a mould with cold water, sprinkle with sugar,
fill in the cream and set in a cool place till firm.

129. +Sabayon of Oranges.+-- Soak 12 sheets of gelatine in cold water
for 10 minutes; in the meantime put the juice of 4 oranges, the thin
peel of 1, ¾ cup sugar, ½ bottle wine (white is best), 2 whole eggs
and the yolks of 6 in a saucepan over the fire; beat this with an
egg beater till nearly boiling; remove it from the fire and take out
the peel, press out the gelatine, add it to the cream and continue
the beating till cold; fill it into a cream form and place for 2
hours on ice.

130. +Sabayon of Lemon.+-- Soak 12 sheets of gelatine in cold water;
put in a saucepan 2 whole eggs and the yolks of 10; add 1 cup sugar,
the juice of 3 lemons, the thin peel of 1 and ½ bottle Rhine wine;
beat this with an egg beater till nearly boiling; remove at once,
press out the gelatine, add it to the cream and continue beating
till cold and beginning to thicken; fill it into a cream form and
set on ice till wanted.

131. +Whipped Cream.+-- Put 1 quart of rich, sweet cream into a deep
vessel or stone jar and let it stand on ice for an hour; then beat
it with an egg beater until stiff; then add sufficient powdered
sugar to sweeten and any kind of flavor that may be liked.

132. +Whipped Cream (with Strawberries).+-- Put 1 quart ripe
strawberries in a colander and rinse with cold water; when well
drained put the berries into a glass dish, sprinkle over them 1 cup
powdered sugar and set for ½ hour on ice; whip 1 pint sweet cream to
a froth, sweeten with powdered sugar and set on ice until wanted;
when ready for use pour the cream over berries and serve at once, or
send each in a separate dish to the table.

133. +Cream (with Pineapple).+-- Prepare the cream in the same manner
as the foregoing; pare a ripe sugar-loaf pineapple and break it from
the stalk into pieces with a silver fork; put the fruit into a glass
dish and sprinkle 1 cup sugar over it; set the dish on ice for 1
hour; when ready to serve pour the cream over pineapple and send to
table at once.

134. +Whipped Cream (with Chocolate).+-- Boil ¼ pound grated
chocolate in ½ cup water with ½ cup sugar and a little vanilla; when
cold mix it with 1 pint whipped cream and set on ice till wanted.

135. +Whipped Cream (with Oranges).+-- Pare 6 large oranges, cut them
into pieces, remove the pits, put the fruit into a glass dish and
sprinkle over it ½ cup powdered sugar; have 1 pint cream, beaten to
a stiff froth, mixed with 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar and
set fruit and cream on ice till wanted; when ready to serve pour
cream over the oranges and send to table at once, or serve each in a
separate dish.

136. +Creme Fouettée à la Cobby.+-- Mix with whipped cream some fruit
marmalade and put it in layers in a glass dish with some preserved
cherries and macaroons between each layer; arrange the cream high up
in the dish and garnish with lady fingers or fancy cake.

137. +Whipped Cream (with Peaches).+-- Pare and cut 6 large, ripe
peaches into quarters; put the fruit into a glass dish, sprinkle
over it ½ cup powdered sugar and set the dish on ice for 1 hour;
also have 1 pint of whipped and sweetened cream standing on ice; in
serving cover the peaches with cream; break some lady fingers apart,
stand them around the dish and serve at once. Or serve cream and
fruit in separate dishes. Instead of fresh fruit preserved fruit may
be used.

138. +Whipped Cream (with Cherries).+-- Remove the pits from 1 pound
of large cherries; put the fruit in a glass dish with ½ cup sugar;
set the dish for an hour or two on ice; also have 1 pint of whipped
cream on ice; when ready to serve spread the cream over the
cherries, or serve each in a separate dish, and send sponge or fancy
cake to the table with it. Canned cherries, apricots or peaches may
be substituted for fresh fruit.




BOILED CREAMS.


139. +Vanilla Cream.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 pint cream or milk
over the fire, add 2 tablespoonfuls flour, the yolks of 4 eggs, 1
tablespoonful butter, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla
extract and a sprinkle of salt; stir this until it comes to a boil;
when cold mix cream with the yolk of 1 egg and a little sweet cream.

140. +Chocolate Cream.+-- Mix 2 tablespoonfuls flour with 1 pint of
milk or cream; add ½ teaspoonful vanilla extract, ¼ pound grated
chocolate, 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, ½ tablespoonful butter,
a sprinkle of salt and the yolks of 4 eggs; place this in a saucepan
over the fire and stir till it boils; then remove and set aside to
cool.

141. +Orange Cream.+-- Mix 2 tablespoonfuls flour with 1 pint milk or
cream, add ½ tablespoonful butter, 3½ tablespoonfuls sugar, the
yolks of 3 or 4 eggs and the grated rind of ½ an orange and stir the
cream over the fire till it boils; then set aside to cool.

142. +Almond Cream.+-- Pound 6 ounces of blanched almonds with a
little cream to a paste; mix them with 1 pint of sweet cream or
milk, add 2 tablespoonfuls flour, 3½ tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks
of 4 eggs, a little salt, ½ teaspoonful vanilla extract and ½
tablespoonful butter; stir this over the fire till it boils; then
remove and set the cream aside to cool.

143. +Coffee Cream.+-- Put 3 ounces fresh roasted Mocha coffee into 1
pint boiling cream; let it stand 15 minutes; then strain, add to the
coffee cream 2 tablespoonfuls flour, ½ tablespoonful butter, 4
tablespoonfuls sugar, a sprinkle of salt and the yolks of 6 eggs;
stir this over the fire till it boils; remove it and set the cream
aside to cool.

144. +Creme Frangipane à la Vanille.+-- Mix ½ cup flour with 2 cups
cream, add 5 well beaten eggs, a sprinkle of salt, 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar, 1 tablespoonful butter and 1 teaspoonful vanilla; stir this
over the fire till it boils; remove it, add 8 well pounded macaroons
and set aside to cool. Instead of vanilla a little orange or lemon
peel may be substituted. Blanched almonds, raisins, currants, finely
cut citron or any kind of fruit such as pineapples, strawberries or
peaches may also be used.




JELLIES.


145. +Jellies+ should be as clear as crystal, not too sweet and just
firm enough to hold together. Jellies that have to stand any length
of time on the buffets must, of course, be firmer. A good plan is to
make a trial by putting a little in a tin cup and setting it on ice
before the jelly is put into a form.

146. +To Clarify Gelatine.+-- Put 2 ounces gelatine in a saucepan,
add ½ pint cold water and let it stand 10 minutes; then add ½ pint
boiling water, set the saucepan in a vessel of boiling water and
stir until gelatine is dissolved; beat the whites of 2 eggs to a
froth, add the juice of 1 large lemon and a little cold water; stir
this into the gelatine, continue stirring until it boils, remove to
side of stove and let it stand 5 minutes without boiling; then
strain through a jelly bag and use as directed in following recipes.

147. +To Clarify Sugar.+-- Put 1 pound sugar in 1 pint cold water
and stir till sugar is dissolved; then strain through a napkin.
A quicker way is to boil the sugar and water with the juice of 1
lemon for a few minutes and strain the same way.

148. +To Clarify Fruit Juice.+-- Lay a few sheets of filtering paper
in water and let them soak for 15 minutes, changing the water twice;
then press them out, pick into small pieces, wet a little again with
water and put the paper into a small sieve; pour the fruit juice
onto the paper and let it run through into a dish. If not clear the
first time pour back again and let it run through once more.

149. +Jelly Bag.+-- Take ¾ yard of white flannel and make a bias bag;
this is done by taking the flannel on the bias, sewing the bottom
and side together to a point; cut it even on top and hem; then sew a
string on each end of hem. In using the bag lay a broom with one end
on the back of a chair and the other end on a table; tie the bag
onto the broom, in the center, so that it hangs between the table
and chair; set a bowl underneath the bag; then pour in the jelly;
pour that which runs through first back again into the bag; repeat
this once or twice more until the jelly runs through clear. When all
the jelly has run through fill it into a mould and set either on ice
or in a cool place.

150. +Orange Jelly.+-- Clarify 2 ounces of gelatine as directed (see
Clarifying Gelatine), dissolve 1 pound sugar in 1 pint water, add
the thin peel of 2 oranges and let it stand 1 hour; then remove
orange peel and strain the sugar syrup through a napkin; remove the
peel from 4 oranges, divide them into small quarters and remove the
pits without breaking the fruit; next pour the juice of 8 oranges
and 2 lemons through filtering paper (see Clarifying Fruit Juice);
as soon as the gelatine, fruit juice and sugar are clarified mix the
three together, place a jelly form into cracked ice, pour in a few
spoonfuls jelly and when firm lay in one-third of the orange
quarters, which should be wiped dry with a napkin; add sufficient
jelly to cover the fruit and when hard lay over another third; cover
again with jelly and continue until all is used up; cover the form,
lay some ice on top and let it stand till firm; when ready to serve
dip the form into hot water, wipe it dry, remove cover, turn the
jelly into a dish and serve with vanilla sauce or sweet cream.
NOTE.--If the inside of jelly mould is brushed with pure almond oil
the form need not be dipped in hot water, as the jelly will slip out
without any trouble. Fine olive oil may also be used, but care
should be taken to use only the very best, as otherwise the flavor
of the jelly will be spoiled.

151. +Plain Orange Jelly.+-- Dissolve and clarify 1 ounce gelatine in
½ pint water as directed, dissolve 1 cup sugar in ½ pint water, add
the thin peel of 1 orange and let it stand 1 hour; then strain
through a napkin; let the juice of 5 oranges and 1 lemon run through
filtering paper or a fine napkin; mix the gelatine, fruit juice and
sugar syrup together, pour it into a jelly mould and set in a cool
place to get firm; when ready to serve dip the form into hot water,
turn the jelly onto a dish and serve with the following sauce:--Beat
1 egg to a froth, add by degrees 1 cup milk, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar
and 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract.

152. +Lemon Jelly.+-- Clarify 2 ounces gelatine as directed, dissolve
1¼ pounds sugar in 1 pint water, add the grated rind of 2 lemons and
let it stand ½ hour; then strain through a napkin; let 1 pint of
lemon juice run through filtering paper (see Clarifying Fruit
Juice); when the three ingredients have been clarified mix them
together, fill the jelly into a jelly mould, set it on ice or in a
cold place to get firm and serve same as Orange Jelly.

153. +Strawberry Jelly.+-- Put 1 quart ripe strawberries in a
colander, rinse them off with cold water and when drained mash them
well in a bowl with a silver spoon; dissolve ¾ pound sugar in 1 pint
cold water, add the juice of 1 lemon and put it over the fire to
boil 5 minutes; strain through a napkin and when cold pour it over
the strawberries; let them stand 3 hours; then strain the berries,
first through a jelly bag and then through filtering paper; also let
the juice of 2 oranges run through filtering paper; clarify 2 ounces
gelatine as directed and when cold add it to the fruit juice; then
make a trial by filling a few spoonfuls in a tin cup and set it on
ice to form; if not firm enough add a little more dissolved
gelatine; fill the jelly alternately with large strawberries in a
jelly form and finish the same as Orange Jelly; serve with whipped
cream.

154. +Pineapple Jelly.+-- Pare and cut a large, ripe pineapple into
quarters, remove the hard core from the center and cut the quarters
of pineapple into fine slices; dissolve 1 pound sugar in 1 pint cold
water and juice of 1 lemon, pour it over the pineapple pieces, cover
and let it stand for 2 hours; chop the eyes and hard core of
pineapple very fine, put them with 1 pint water in a saucepan over
the fire and boil slowly ½ hour; when cold strain them and add the
liquid to the pineapple; in the meantime clarify 2 ounces gelatine
as directed; then drain the pineapple in a sieve, wipe the slices
dry with a napkin and lay them on a plate; let the pineapple syrup
run through filtering paper or napkin and mix it with the clarified
gelatine; also let the juice of 2 oranges and 1 lemon run through
filtering paper and add it to the jelly; then make a trial to see if
firm enough; place jelly form in cracked ice, pour a few spoonfuls
of jelly into the form and when hard put in a layer of pineapple;
cover them with jelly and when firm put in another layer of
pineapple; continue until all is used up; then cover the form, put
some ice on top of form and let it remain till jelly is firm; serve
with or without cream or vanilla sauce. This jelly may also be made
of preserved pineapple.

155. +Jelly of Peaches.+-- Pare 8 large, ripe peaches, cut them into
halves, remove the stones and cut each half into 3 or 4 pieces; put
the fruit into a bowl and pour over it 1 pint of sugar syrup; let
them stand well covered for 2 hours; scald the pits, remove the
brown skin and put them with the peaches; then let the syrup run
through filtering paper, mix it with 2 ounces clarified gelatine,
fill the jelly with the peaches and pits in alternate layers in a
form and finish the same as Orange Jelly.

156. +Raspberry Jelly.+-- Press the juice from 1 quart ripe
raspberries, add the juice of 1 lemon and filter it through
filtering paper (see Clarifying Fruit Juice); dissolve ¾ pound sugar
in 1 pint water, strain through a napkin and add it to the raspberry
juice; add 2 ounces clarified gelatine; set a jelly form into
cracked ice and fill the jelly alternately with large, ripe
raspberries into the form and finish the same as Orange Jelly.

157. +Wine Jelly.+-- Soak 2 ounces gelatine in ½ pint cold water for
10 minutes; then add ½ pint boiling water and stir the whole over
the fire till gelatine is dissolved; add the rind and juice of 1
lemon, 2 whole cloves, a small piece of cinnamon and the well beaten
whites of 2 eggs; stir this with an egg beater till it boils; then
remove the saucepan with its contents to side of stove and let it
remain for 5 minutes without boiling; then strain it through a
flannel jelly bag; dissolve ¾ pound sugar in 1 pint cold water,
strain it through a napkin and add it with 1 pint Madeira to the
gelatine; rinse out a jelly mould with cold water, pour in the jelly
and set it on ice or in a cool place till firm. Instead of Madeira
wine any other kind may be used.

158. +Rhine Wine Jelly.+-- Dissolve and clarify 2 ounces gelatine and
dissolve 1 pound sugar in 1 pint water; add the rind of 2 lemons and
the juice of 1; let it stand 1 hour; then strain through a napkin;
let the juice of 2 lemons run through filtering paper, add it with 1
pint Rhine wine and the sugar syrup to the clarified gelatine, fill
the jelly in a form and set it on ice or in a cool place.

159. +Champagne Jelly.+-- Dissolve and clarify 2 ounces gelatine (see
Gelatine), dissolve ¾ pound sugar in 1 pint cold water, strain it
through a napkin, add to the gelatine with ½ bottle champagne and
the filtered juice of 4 lemons, fill into a form and set it in a
cool place or on ice.

160. +Apple Jelly.+-- Grate 1 quart tart apples, put them in a bag
and press out the juice, add the juice of 1 orange and let both run
through a filtering paper; clarify 2 ounces gelatine, dissolve ¾
pound sugar in 1 pint cold water, strain through a napkin and add it
with the apple juice to the clarified gelatine; rinse a mould with
cold water, pour in the jelly and set it in a cool place or on ice
till firm. Another way is:--Pare, core and quarter some tart apples
and boil them in sugar syrup to which the juice of 1 lemon has been
added; when the apples are done remove carefully, so as not to break
them, lay on a sieve to drain and when cold lay into the mould
alternately with the jelly and finish like Orange Jelly.

161. +Cider Jelly.+-- Soak 2 ounces gelatine in ½ pint cold water for
15 minutes; then add ½ pint boiling water, put it over the fire and
stir till gelatine is dissolved; add the juice of 1 lemon and the
beaten whites of 2 eggs; stir with an egg beater until it boils;
then draw to side of stove and let it stand 5 minutes; then strain
through a flannel jelly bag; dissolve ¾ pound sugar in 1 quart sweet
cider, strain through a jelly bag and add it to the gelatine; pour
it into a jelly mould and set in a cool place until firm.

162. +Rose Jelly.+-- Put 1 quart of freshly gathered rose leaves in a
glass jar, squeeze the juice of 1 lemon over them, pour over the
whole 1 cup boiling water, close the jar tightly and set aside till
next day; then press out the juice (by putting the rose leaves in a
coarse bag), let the liquid run through filtering paper (see
Clarifying Fruit Juice), add 1 pint cold clarified sugar syrup, ½
pint white wine and 2 ounces clarified gelatine; next pour the jelly
into a mould and set aside to cool.

163. +Gelée Russe.+-- Clarify 1 ounce gelatine and dissolve ½ pound
sugar in ½ pint water; add the grated peel of 2 lemons; let it stand
15 minutes; then strain through a napkin; let ½ pint lemon juice run
through filtering paper; mix the clarified gelatine, sugar syrup and
lemon juice together; put it in a deep kettle, set into cracked ice
and whip the contents until it foams and begins to thicken; then
fill it into a form and cover and pack with cracked ice till firm,
which will take about 2 hours. Orange and Wine Jelly may be made in
the same manner.

164. +Macédoine de Fruit à la Russe.+-- Prepare a Rhine Wine Jelly,
set a form into cracked ice, pour in a few spoonfuls jelly and let
it get hard; lay over it a layer of fruit, such as strawberries,
slices of pineapple or peaches, and pour over sufficient jelly to
cover the fruit; put the remaining jelly into a deep kettle, set
into cracked ice and beat with an egg beater till it foams and
begins to thicken; then mix with 3 or 4 different kinds of fruit,
either fresh or preserved, fill into the jelly form, cover closely
and let it stand 2 hours; when ready to serve dip the form in hot
water, wipe it dry, remove the cover, turn the jelly onto a dish and
garnish with sugared fruit.

165. +Calvesfoot Jelly.+-- Choose 4 calves’ feet with the skin on (if
without the skin 6 must be taken), crack and wash them well, put
over the fire, cover with cold water and boil till they fall apart;
strain the liquor through a fine sieve and let it stand in a cool
place; next day skim off every particle of fat and remove the
sediment; put the jelly over the fire and reduce it down to 2 quarts
by boiling; beat up the whites of 4 eggs, add a little cold water,
the juice of 2 lemons and the thin peel of one, 6 cloves and a piece
of cinnamon; add this to the contents of saucepan, stirring
constantly; boil for a few minutes; then move the saucepan to side
of stove and let it stand for 5 minutes without boiling; then strain
it through a double flannel bag; dissolve 2 cups sugar in 1 pint
sherry or Madeira wine, strain through a napkin and add it to the
strained jelly; rinse out the moulds with cold water, put in the
jelly and set in a cool place. This jelly may be put into tightly
corked bottles, and will keep for a long time. When wanted for use
set the bottle in hot water until the jelly melts; then pour it into
moulds and set in a cool place till firm.

166. +Macédoine de Fruits au vin du Rhine.+-- Prepare a Rhine wine
jelly a little stiffer than the ordinary jellies; take large, ripe
raspberries, strawberries, currants, peaches (pared and cut into
eighths) and pineapples cut into small slices; put them in a dish
on ice; next set a form into cracked ice, pour in a few spoonfuls
jelly and when hard lay in some of the fruit, either each kind by
itself in small clusters or mixed one with the other; pour over this
sufficient jelly to cover the fruit; let it get hard and again lay
over some fruit; continue alternately with fruit and jelly till form
is full; cover and let it remain in ice till firm; in serving dip
the form into hot water, wipe it dry and turn the macédoine onto a
round dish. In winter preserved fruit and apples and pears may be
used. The apples and pears are to be cut into quarters and boiled
for a few minutes in sugar syrup. The latter should be colored with
a little cochineal.

167. +Gelée à la Moscovite.+-- Any kind of fruit jelly may be used
for this, using only half the quantity of gelatine as for jelly; put
into a form, cover it, paste a strip of buttered paper around the
edge of cover and pack the form in ice and rock salt for 2 hours;
only freeze about an inch all around, leaving it soft in the center;
preserved fruit may be mixed with the jelly before it is put into
the form; serve the moscovite in a glass dish and garnish with fruit
or fancy cake.

168. +Orange Baskets (with Jelly).+-- Choose 1 dozen large oranges
and cut them into the shape of small baskets with handles; this is
done by holding the orange in the left hand and cutting with a
penknife a small quarter from each side of the orange toward the
top, so as to leave the skin for the handle ½ inch wide; then cut
the skin evenly all around; next separate the inside from the
outside skin with the penknife and completely hollow the orange out,
so that only little more than half of the skin with the handle is
left; cut the edges into small scallops with a scizzors and lay the
baskets in cold water; press out the juice from the oranges and with
it make a jelly (see Orange Jelly); take the baskets from the water,
wipe dry and with a napkin under them set on a tray; have the jelly
on ice and when it begins to thicken fill up the baskets and place
them on ice; if there should be any small holes in the baskets paste
them up from the outside with butter, which must be removed before
serving; serve on a napkin and garnish with green leaves. These
baskets may also be filled with Gelée Russe.

169. +Orange Quarters Used for Garnishing Jellies and Other
Dishes.+-- Take 6 large oranges, cut out a round piece on the side of
stem and hollow out so that nothing is left but the outside skin;
care must be taken to leave none of the white coating on the inside
of skin; after preparing this way put them in a saucepan over the
fire with boiling water and boil 5 minutes; rinse with cold water,
wipe them dry and fill each one either with clear jelly of different
colors or blanc-mange; set them on ice until hard; cut them into
quarters and use for garnishing different dishes. Small patty forms
filled with jelly are also used for the same purpose.

170. +Almond Blanc-Mange.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup cold milk
for 15 minutes; then add 3 cups boiling milk, 6 tablespoonfuls
sugar, ¼ pound blanched almonds (among the latter there should be a
few bitter ones) and pound them in a mortar with a little water to a
paste; set the saucepan with its contents into a vessel of boiling
water and stir till it boils; remove from the fire and let it stand
for 5 minutes; then strain through a muslin bag, add 1 teaspoonful
extract of vanilla and set aside to cool; rinse out a quart mould
with cold water and sprinkle with sugar; pour in the cold
blanc-mange and set in a cool place till it becomes firm; when ready
to serve loosen the blanc-mange around the edge on top and turn it
over onto a dish; it may then be served either with or without fruit
or vanilla sauce. Instead of almonds any other kind of flavoring may
be used.

171. +Chocolate Blanc-Mange.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup cold
milk for 15 minutes; then add 2½ cups boiling milk; mix ¼ pound
grated Baker’s chocolate with ½ cup cold milk; add it to the
gelatine with 6 tablespoonfuls sugar; place this in a saucepan over
the fire and stir till it boils; remove from fire, add 1 teaspoonful
vanilla extract and when cold pour it into the moulds, which have
been rinsed out with cold water and sprinkled with sugar; set in a
cool place till firm; this may be served with or without vanilla
sauce.

172. +Blanc-Mange Marbre au Chocolat.+-- Make half the quantity of
both the Almond and Chocolate Blanc-Mange; rinse out a mould with
cold water, sprinkle with sugar and place into cracked ice; pour in
a few spoonfuls almond blanc-mange and let it get firm; then put in
a few spoonfuls chocolate blanc-mange; when the latter is firm again
put in some of the almond blanc-mange; continue in this way until
all is used; let the form remain for 2 hours on ice and then serve
with vanilla sauce.

173. +Cream Blanc-Mange.+-- Soak in a small tin ½ ounce gelatine in ½
cup cold water for 15 minutes; set the tin in a saucepan of boiling
water and stir until gelatine is dissolved; beat 1 pint rich, sweet
cream to a stiff froth; add 4 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar and 1
teaspoonful vanilla or lemon flavoring; when this is well mixed add
the gelatine by degrees, beating constantly; rinse out a mould with
cold water, sprinkle with sugar, fill in the blanc-mange and set on
ice an hour or two before serving.

174. +Plain Blanc-Mange.+-- Boil 1 quart milk with 6 tablespoonfuls
sugar; add 1 ounce gelatine which has been soaked in a little cold
water for 15 minutes; stir this over the fire until gelatine is
dissolved; remove it from fire and when cold add 2 teaspoonfuls
vanilla; rinse out a form with cold water, sprinkle with sugar, pour
in the blanc-mange and set it on ice; serve with vanilla sauce.

175. +Cocoanut Blanc-Mange.+-- Stir into the plain blanc-mange when
it begins to thicken 2 cups freshly grated cocoanut.

176. +Neapolitan Blanc-Mange.+-- Prepare an almond blanc-mange,
strain and divide it into 4 equal parts; add to first part 1
tablespoonful grated chocolate and let it boil for a few minutes;
mix second part with the yolks of 2 eggs and stir it over the fire
till just about to boil; add to third part a few drops of cochineal,
to color it pink; leave fourth part uncolored; rinse out a mould
with cold water, sprinkle with sugar and place it into cracked ice;
as soon as the blanc-mange becomes cold and begins to thicken put in
first the white; after 5 minutes put in the pink; again waiting 5
minutes, put in the yellow and after a few minutes put in the
chocolate; let it remain on ice till firm; when ready to serve work
top free from the edge with a few light touches of your finger and
turn the blanc-mange onto a dish.

177. +Nest with Eggs.+-- Prepare 1 quart almond blanc-mange; take
12 fresh eggs, make a small hole in one end of each and let the
contents flow out; rinse each shell well with cold water; then fill
them with blanc-mange and set in a pan of sugar or flour, the open
end up; place them in a cool place till hard; boil 1 pound sugar to
a crack and spin it into quite long threads (see Spinning Sugar);
with these threads form a nest a little smaller than the dish it is
to be served in; dip each egg into warm water, wipe dry, break
shells from about the blanc-mange and lay the artificial eggs in the
nest. Another way is to make 1½ quarts orange or wine jelly; cut the
rind of 3 oranges into long narrow strips and boil them for 20
minutes in water, changing the water 3 times; drain them on a sieve;
put 1½ cups sugar with 1 pint water over the fire and when it boils
add the orange peel; boil 15 minutes; remove and drain them on a
sieve; put half of the jelly into a glass dish and when firm lay the
artificial eggs upon it; arrange them the same way that natural eggs
are generally found in a nest; lay orange peel, which represents the
straw, over and around the eggs; when the remaining jelly is cold
and thick pour it over the eggs and set in a cool place to form.

178. +Fromage Bavarois à la Vanille.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1
cup cold water 20 minutes; place a saucepan with 1 pint cream, the
yolks of 6 eggs, ½ cup sugar and 1 teaspoonful vanilla over the fire
and stir till nearly boiling; remove it from the fire, add gelatine
and stir till dissolved; set saucepan with its contents in a vessel
of cold water and stir till it becomes cold and begins to thicken;
then mix it with 1 pint whipped cream; rinse a form with cold water,
sprinkle the inside with sugar, fill in the bavarois and set for 2
hours on ice; serve on a round dish garnished with fancy cakes.

179. +Fromage Bavarois à la Vanille, No. 2.+-- Boil 6 tablespoonfuls
sugar in 1 cup water 5 minutes and flavor with 1½ teaspoonfuls
vanilla; soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup cold water 15 minutes, add
it to the boiling sugar syrup and stir till melted; then set aside;
when cold and beginning to thicken mix it with 1 pint whipped cream
and finish the same as in foregoing recipe.

180. +Fromage Bavarois aux Pistache.+-- Chop or pound 6 ounces
pistachio nuts and ¼ pound almonds as finely as possible, mix with 1
pint cold sugar syrup and let them stand 2 hours; then strain
through a fine sieve, add a little spinach green (see Color) and 1
ounce dissolved gelatine; stir until it begins to thicken; then mix
with 1 pint whipped cream; put this into a form and place on ice for
2 hours. This cream should have a delicate green color; it is served
on a round dish.

181. +Fromage Bavarois aux Amandes.+-- Scald ½ pound sweet and 10
bitter almonds with boiling water, remove the brown skin and pound
or chop them fine; place a saucepan over the fire with 1 pint milk,
6 tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 6 eggs, 1½ teaspoonfuls vanilla
and the pounded almonds; stir until nearly boiling; soak 1¼ ounces
gelatine in 1 cup cold milk, add it to the hot milk and stir till
dissolved; then strain through a sieve; when cold and beginning to
thicken stir in 1 pint whipped cream, turn into a form and set for 2
hours in cracked ice.

182. +Fromage Bavarois au Café.+-- Pour 1 pint boiling milk over 4
tablespoonfuls freshly ground coffee, cover and let it stand 5
minutes; strain through a fine cloth; soak 1 ounce gelatine in a
little cold water 15 minutes and add it to the coffee milk with 6
tablespoonfuls sugar and the yolks of 6 eggs; stir this over the
fire till it nearly boils; remove from the fire and when cold and
beginning to thicken stir in 1 pint whipped cream, turn into a form
and pack in cracked ice 2 hours.

183. +Fromage Bavarois au Thé.+-- Pour 1 pint boiling milk over 2
tablespoonfuls of the best black or green tea, cover and let it
stand 5 minutes; then strain and finish the same as Fromage Bavarois
au Café.

184. +Fromage Bavarois au Chocolat.+-- Boil 4 tablespoonfuls grated
chocolate in ½ pint water, add ½ cup sugar and 1 teaspoonful
vanilla; soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup cold water 15 minutes, add
it to the chocolate and boil a few minutes; remove from the fire and
when cold mix it with 1 pint whipped cream, turn into a form and
pack in cracked ice for 2 hours; then serve on a round dish with
vanilla sauce.

185. +Lemon Fromage.+-- Dissolve 1 cup sugar in ½ pint water, add the
thin peel of 1 lemon, the juice of 3 and boil 5 minutes; add 1 ounce
gelatine which has been soaked in ½ pint cold water and stir it
until dissolved; then strain and when cold and beginning to thicken
add 1 pint whipped cream; fill this into a form and place it on ice
for 2 hours.

186. +Orange Fromage.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup cold water 15
minutes; dissolve 1 cup sugar in 1 cup water, add the thin peel of 1
orange and boil 5 minutes; add gelatine and stir till melted; mix it
with the juice of 6 oranges, strain and when cold and beginning to
thicken add 1 pint whipped cream; turn into a form and pack in ice
for 2 hours.

187. +Pineapple Fromage.+-- Soak 1½ ounces gelatine in 1 cup cold
water 15 minutes and stir it over the fire till dissolved; take 1
can preserved pineapple, drain off the liquor and add it to the
gelatine; when cold and beginning to thicken cut the pineapple into
small dice; stir the fruit with 1 pint whipped cream into the
gelatine, turn into a form and pack it in cracked ice for 2 hours.
Or peel a large, ripe pineapple, remove the eyes and hard core, cut
into small square pieces, put them in a dish, sprinkle over with 1
cup sugar and let them stand for 2 hours; chop the eyes and core
fine and put them in a dish; boil ½ cup sugar with 1 cup water, pour
it boiling hot over the chopped pineapple and let it stand till
cold; soak 1½ ounces gelatine in ½ pint cold water, put it over the
fire and stir till dissolved; strain the chopped pineapple through a
fine sieve, drain off liquid from the pieces and add them together
to the gelatine; set in ice and stir till it begins to thicken; then
stir in the pineapple pieces and 1 pint whipped cream; fill it into
a plain form with tube in center and pack in cracked ice and a
little rock salt for 2 hours.

188. +Peach Fromage.+-- Pare and cut into quarters 1½ dozen ripe
peaches, put with 1 cup powdered sugar into a dish and let them
stand 2 hours; also add the peach pits (after they have been scalded
and freed from their brown skin); soak 1½ ounces gelatine in ¾ cup
cold water for 15 minutes, add ¾ cup boiling water and stir over the
fire till melted; strain and set aside to cool; press the peaches
through a sieve, add gelatine and pits and stir till it begins to
thicken; then carefully stir in 1 pint whipped cream, turn into a
form and place for 2 hours on ice.

189. +Strawberry Fromage.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in ½ pint cold
water 15 minutes; then stir it over the fire till dissolved; wash
and press 1 quart fresh strawberries through a sieve, add 1 cup
powdered sugar, the gelatine and a few drops cochineal; stir until
it begins to thicken; then add 1 pint whipped cream, turn into a
form and pack for 2 hours in cracked ice and rock salt.

190. +Rum Bavarois.+-- Soak 1¼ ounces gelatine in ¾ cup cold water 15
minutes, add ¾ cup boiling water, stir over the fire till dissolved,
strain and set aside; place a saucepan with the yolks of 6 eggs, ¾
cup sugar and 1 pint milk over the fire and stir till nearly
boiling; remove from the fire, add ½ pint rum and the gelatine and
continue stirring until it begins to thicken; then stir in carefully
1 pint whipped cream, turn into a form and pack in cracked ice for 2
hours.

191. +Fromage Bavarois Cardinal.+-- Soak ¾ ounce gelatine in ½ cup
water 15 minutes; boil ¼ pound unsweetened grated chocolate in 1 cup
water with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; add the gelatine and stir till
dissolved; lay a plain form into cracked ice, pour the chocolate in
by degrees and keep turning so that chocolate may form a complete
lining inside of form; then set the form straight and pour in the
bottom the remaining chocolate; as soon as this is hard fill the
form with Bavarois of Vanilla, No. 2, and let it remain buried in
ice for 2 hours.

192. +Bavarois+ may be made of different colors--such as pistachio
cream outside and bavarois of almonds inside; or strawberries
outside and vanilla bavarois inside.

193. +Fromage Bavarois au Pain Noir.+-- Cut a small pumpernickel into
slices, lay on a tin in the oven to dry and roll them fine; take 1
cup of these crumbs and stir them into a bavarois of almond or
vanilla; after the cream has been added turn into a form and pack in
ice for 2 hours. For all bavarois the forms may be lined first with
jelly and decorated with fruits, nuts, currants, etc. In order to do
this place a form into cracked ice and pour in a few spoonfuls fruit
jelly; when firm take whatever is going to be used onto a larding
needle, dip each piece into jelly and lay them into the form in
fancy patterns; pour in a little more jelly and when firm lay the
form over on its side; pour in a little jelly at a time; keep
turning form, so that the whole inside may be covered with jelly;
then decorate the same as bottom and fill with Fromage Bavarois à la
Vanille or any other kind.

194. +Snow Pudding.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 pint cold water 20
minutes, add 1 pint boiling water, 1 cup sugar, the juice of 2
lemons and the thin peel of 1; set it over the fire, stir and boil a
few minutes, strain through a sieve and when it begins to thicken
add the beaten whites of 6 eggs; rinse out a form with cold water,
sprinkle with granulated sugar, fill in the mixture and set in a
cool place; when ready to serve turn the pudding onto a dish and
serve with vanilla sauce made of the yolks of 6 eggs (see Sauce).
Milk or cream may be substituted for water; then the lemon juice is
omitted and lemon extract used for flavoring.

195. +Wine Pudding.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine for 10 minutes in 1 pint
cold water, add ¼ pound sugar, ½ pint red wine and ½ pint raspberry
juice; stir over the fire till boiling hot, strain through a jelly
bag and put in a form to cool; when firm turn out on a flat dish and
serve with vanilla sauce or whipped cream.

196. +Apple Jelly Pudding.+-- Boil 1½ pounds peeled apples with 1
quart water, stir through a sieve, add ½ pound sugar and the juice
of 2 lemons; soak 15 sheets of white and 3 of red gelatine for 5
minutes in cold water, press out and mix with the apple sauce; stir
over the fire until the gelatine is all dissolved; then pour into a
form and set on ice to get firm; serve with vanilla sauce.

197. +Maraschino Pudding.+-- Take 10 eggs, 10 tablespoonfuls sugar,
14 sheets gelatine (soaked in cold water), ¼ pint rum (or
maraschino) and the peel and juice of 1 lemon; stir the yolks and
sugar to a cream and add by degrees rum and lemon; press out the
gelatine and dissolve in 1 cup boiling water; add it, stirring
constantly, to the other mixture; add lastly the whites of the eggs,
which have been beaten to a stiff froth; next pour into a mould and
set aside to cool; the mould should be rinsed with cold water and
sprinkled with granulated sugar before pouring the pudding into it.

198. +Manilla Pudding.+-- Place a saucepan over the fire with 1 pint
milk, the yolks of 5 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and the peel of 1
lemon; stir this over the fire until just about to boil; then
instantly remove; have 1 ounce gelatine soaked in 1 cup milk, which
stir into the hot mixture and set aside to cool; as soon as it
begins to thicken add the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff
froth, pour into a mould and set on ice to get firm; serve with
fruit or claret sauce; the mould should be rinsed with cold water
and sprinkled with coarse sugar previous to being used.

199. +Rum Pudding.+-- Take 10 eggs (yolks and whites beaten
separately), 1 pint sweet cream, ½ pound sugar, ½ pint rum and 1½
ounces gelatine; stir the yolks of the eggs and sugar to a cream,
add the cream and rum, put this in a tin pail and set in a vessel of
hot water; keep stirring with an egg beater until just about to
boil; then quickly remove from the fire; have gelatine soaked in a
little cold water, add it to the cream and mix well; when cold add
the beaten whites of the eggs, pour into a mould and set on ice; in
serving turn out and send fruit sauce to table with it.

200. +Fine Chocolate Pudding.+-- ¼ pound Baker’s grated chocolate, 3
cups milk, 1 cup water, 1½ ounces gelatine, 5 tablespoonfuls sugar
and 6 eggs; boil chocolate with the water until well dissolved; soak
gelatine in a little cold water about 5 minutes; place a saucepan
with the milk, sugar, 6 yolks of the eggs and the boiled chocolate
over the fire; beat the whole with an egg beater until just about to
boil; add the gelatine, remove from fire, continue beating for a
little while longer and set aside to cool; when it begins to thicken
add whites of the eggs, previously beaten to a stiff froth, and pour
it into a jelly mould which has been well rinsed with cold water and
sprinkled with sugar; set either on ice or in cold water to get
firm. In serving turn pudding onto a glass dish and serve with the
following sauce:--Place a saucepan over the fire with 2 eggs, 1 pint
milk, 1 teaspoonful cornstarch and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; stir with
an egg beater until nearly boiling; quickly remove from fire, flavor
with 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract and serve cold. This will make a
sufficient quantity for a family of 10 persons.

201. +Fine Claret Pudding.+-- 1 pint claret, ½ pint water, ½
tablespoonful cornstarch, the thin peel of ½ lemon, 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar, 4 eggs and 8 sheets of red gelatine; lay gelatine in cold
water and let it remain until the pudding is prepared; put the wine,
water, cornstarch, sugar, lemon peel and yolks of the 4 eggs in a
saucepan and beat it up well with an egg beater for 5 minutes; then
place saucepan with its contents over the fire and continue beating
till just before boiling; remove from the fire, squeeze the water
from gelatine, put it into the saucepan and mix with its contents;
then set aside to cool; as soon as it begins to thicken add the
whites of the 4 eggs, previously beaten to a very stiff froth; when
this is well blended together rinse a jelly mould with cold water,
sprinkle with sugar, pour in the mixture and set it either in cold
water or on ice to get firm; serve with vanilla or cream sauce or
turn the pudding onto a glass dish and lay a border of whipped cream
around it. This pudding if made according to above recipe is very
fine and sufficient for a family of 6 persons.

202. +White Wine Pudding.+-- ½ bottle white wine, 2 of red and 6
sheets of white gelatine, the grated rind and juice of 1 lemon,
a little vanilla, 5 eggs and 6 tablespoonfuls sugar; lay the gelatine
in cold water; place a saucepan with yolks of the 5 eggs, lemon,
sugar, vanilla and wine over the fire and stir constantly until just
about to boil; then remove from fire, press gelatine out, add to the
hot mixture and set aside to cool; as soon as it begins to set whip
whites of the 5 eggs to a stiff froth and stir them through it; fill
a jelly mould with the mixture and set it on ice to get firm; serve
with vanilla sauce. The mould should be rinsed with cold water and
dusted with coarse sugar previous to pouring the pudding into it.

203. +Cold Apple Pudding.+-- Put 1½ pounds peeled and sliced apples
in a saucepan with 1½ quarts water; stew till tender, strain through
a colander, return it to saucepan and add 1 pound sugar; soak 2
ounces gelatine in a little cold water, add to the apples, let the
whole boil for a few minutes and pour it into a form to cool; serve
with vanilla sauce.




FINE COLD PUDDINGS.


204. +Pudding à la Polonaise.+-- Beat the yolks of 10 eggs and 2
whole eggs with an egg beater with 1½ pints Rhine wine (or white
wine), 1 cup sugar and the grated rind of 1 lemon and the juice of
4; strain this into a large kettle and beat over a slow fire till
nearly boiling; remove the kettle, place it into cracked ice or cold
water and continue beating till cold; in the meantime soak 1½ ounces
gelatine in ½ cup cold water for 15 minutes, add ½ cup boiling water
and stir over the fire till dissolved; then stir it slowly into the
cream, beating constantly; add lastly ½ cup rum; next place a cream
form into cracked ice, put in a few spoonfuls cream and put over
this a layer of vanilla wafers which have been soaked in sugar syrup
with a little rum; after 5 minutes add more cream and wafers;
continue until the cream is used up; leave on ice for 2 hours; when
ready to serve dip the form into hot water, turn the pudding onto a
round dish and serve; sufficient for 12 persons. If this pudding is
too large half the quantities may be used.

205. +Peach Pudding (with Champagne).+-- Pare and cut into halves 1½
dozen large, ripe peaches; put them into a dish with the blanched
pits, add 1 cup sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla, or put ½ stick vanilla
between the fruit; cover and let them stand about 2 hours; then
divide the peaches into 2 parts: press one part through a hair sieve
and add the peach juice and 1½ ounces gelatine previously soaked in
cold water and dissolved in boiling water; when this is well mixed
set it aside; cut some small sponge cakes into slices, put on a
plate and pour a little champagne over them; set a plain tin form
into cracked ice and pour in some champagne jelly (see Jelly); let
it get firm and lay in the center one of the peach pits; lay around
this some of the peach halves, pour a few spoonfuls more jelly over
them and then a thin layer of whipped champagne jelly which has been
colored with cochineal to a delicate pink; add to the peaches which
have been pressed through a sieve 1 pint whipped cream and ½ bottle
champagne; fill the cream in alternate layers with peaches and
sponge cake into the form; let the last layer be cream; let the form
remain 2 hours longer in the ice; in serving dip the form in hot
water, turn the pudding onto a handsome dish and garnish the edge
with small croutons of champagne jelly which has been colored to a
delicate pink with cochineal. White wine may be substituted for
champagne.

206. +Pineapple Pudding à la Royale.+-- Pare and cut in half a nice,
ripe pineapple; remove the hard part from the center and cut the
pineapple into fine slices; put into a bowl and sprinkle 8
tablespoonfuls sugar over them, cover and let stand 2 hours; in the
meantime prepare 1 pint white wine jelly; set a plain tin form into
cracked ice, pour some jelly into it and let stand till firm; then
put a wreath or a star of pineapple over the jelly, sprinkle a few
blanched almonds between them and pour some more jelly over it; when
this is firm turn form on its side, pour a little jelly in and keep
turning in the cracked ice till jelly is firm; lay slices of
pineapple on the sides, sprinkle blanched almonds cut into strips
between, pour over a little more jelly and turn the form till all is
firm; in the meantime boil 1 pound sugar with 1 cup water 10 minutes
and add 1 ounce gelatine which has been previously soaked in ½ cup
cold water and dissolved in ½ cup boiling water; remove the slices
of pineapple, add the juice from pineapple to the boiled syrup, set
this into cracked ice and stir till it begins to thicken; then add 1
pint whipped cream and fill the cream into the form alternately with
layers of lady fingers and macaroons which have been previously
dipped into the syrup; cover the form and pack it in ice for 2
hours; cut the remaining slices of pineapple into dice, mix with
some of the cold jelly, put in small tin forms and garnish the
pudding, when turned out, with them.

207. +Orange Pudding à la Maltaise.+-- Boil 1½ cups sugar with 1 cup
water 5 minutes; add the juice of 6 oranges, the grated rind of 2
and 1½ ounces gelatine which has been soaked for ½ hour in cold
water; stir until gelatine is melted, strain through a fine sieve,
place on ice and stir till it begins to thicken; then add 1 pint
whipped cream; mix the juice of 6 oranges and 1 lemon with 1 cup
sugar syrup and strain through a sieve; cut the crust off a sponge
cake which has been baked in a deep pan the day before, cut the cake
into slices about ½ inch in thickness and dip each slice in the
orange liquor; set a plain tin form into cracked ice and pour in ½
pint plain orange jelly (see Jelly); let this get firm; decorate the
bottom with a wreath of green pistachio nuts or blanched almonds and
currants, or any kind of fruit, such as strawberries, cherries or
plums; pour over some jelly; as soon as firm add a few spoonfuls
jelly, then a layer of the orange cream and over this the sponge
cake; continue with layers of cream and sponge cake till all is
used; let the last layer be cream; let the form remain in ice for 2
hours; in serving turn the pudding onto a handsome round dish and
garnish with orange quarters glazed with sugar.

208. +Pudding de Savoie à l’Orange.+-- Remove the skin from 3
oranges, divide them into quarters and remove pits without
disfiguring the fruit; boil 1½ cups sugar with 1 cup water 5
minutes, remove it from the fire, add ½ pint Rhine wine, the juice
of 6 large oranges and the grated rind of one: when cold add 2
ounces dissolved gelatine (see Gelatine), set on ice and stir till
it begins to thicken; then add the orange quarters; place a tin form
in cracked ice and cover the bottom with some clear orange or lemon
jelly to the depth of about ½ inch; as soon as jelly is firm
decorate the bottom with orange quarters and blanched nuts; add to
the juice of 6 oranges ½ bottle Rhine wine and sweeten with sugar;
cut a medium sized sponge cake into slices, dip in the orange juice
and put them in alternate layers with orange and jelly into the
form; let it remain on ice 2 hours; when ready to serve dip the form
into hot water, turn onto a round dish and decorate the edge with
orange quarters and finely chopped orange jelly.

209. +Chestnut Pudding à la Dauphine.+-- Boil 1 pound chestnuts for a
few minutes, throw them into cold water and remove outside and
inside brown skin; then boil the chestnuts in milk till soft and
press them through a sieve; add to purée the yolks of 6 eggs, 1 pint
cream, 1 teaspoonful vanilla and 6 tablespoonfuls sugar; stir this
over the fire till nearly boiling, add 1½ ounces dissolved gelatine,
set the cream into cracked ice and stir till it begins to thicken;
cut some sponge cake into slices and pour a little rum over them;
then place a tin form in cracked ice (if a form is not handy use a
tin kettle), pour a few spoonfuls of the cream into it and let stand
till firm; lay over this some preserved apricots or pineapples with
¼ pound citron cut into dice and the sponge cake; continue this in
alternate layers till all is used; let the pudding remain for 2
hours in ice; when ready to serve dip the form into hot water, turn
pudding onto a dish and pour ½ pint vanilla syrup over it.

210. +Pudding à la Girot.+-- Place a saucepan on the stove with 1½
pints sweet cream, the yolks of 6 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1
teaspoonful vanilla essence; stir this over the fire till nearly
boiling, remove the cream and set aside to cool; then add 1½ ounces
dissolved gelatine; soak ¼ pound lady fingers and ¼ pound macaroons
in cherry wine; then place a tin pudding form with tube in the
center into cracked ice, put in a few spoonfuls cream and let it get
firm; put over this some of the soaked lady fingers and macaroons
and over them some preserved pineapple or cherries; over this put
cream, fruit and cake; continue in this way until all is used; let
the last layer be cream; close the form and pack it in cracked ice,
where it should remain 2 hours; when ready to serve turn the pudding
onto a round dish, fill the opening in center with whipped cream
flavored with vanilla and garnish the edge of dish with preserved
fruit.

211. +Chocolate Pudding à la Hollandaise.+-- Boil ¼ pound Baker’s
grated chocolate in ½ pint water, add ½ pint sugar and 1 teaspoonful
extract of vanilla; when cold add 1½ ounces gelatine which has been
soaked in ½ pint cold water and dissolved in ½ pint hot water; set
the chocolate mixture into cracked ice and stir till it begins to
thicken; then add 1 pint whipped cream; if not sweet enough add a
little more sugar; set a tin pudding form with a tube in the center
into cracked ice, pour in some clear fruit or wine jelly (see Jelly)
and let it get firm; decorate the bottom with blanched almonds; take
pieces of almonds up with a larding needle, dip them into jelly and
lay in a pointed border close to the edge; pour over a little more
jelly; in the meantime soak 20 vanilla wafers and macaroons in sweet
cream; when the jelly in form is firm put in a layer of wafers and
macaroons; put over this a layer of the chocolate cream; as soon as
the cream is firm put in the remaining wafers and macaroons and
lastly the remaining cream; let the pudding remain on ice for about
3 hours; when ready to serve dip the form into hot water, turn the
pudding onto a round dish and lay a border of whipped cream flavored
with extract of vanilla around it; fill the opening in center with
whipped cream.

212. +Pudding à la Reine.+-- Set a border form into cracked ice and
pour in to the depth of about ½ inch some white wine jelly; when the
jelly is firm put in some fruit, such as strawberries, cherries,
plums or peaches, and pour over a few spoonfuls jelly; after the
lapse of 5 minutes pour in more jelly; when firm put in another
layer of fruit and then fill the form with jelly; let it remain on
the ice till ready to serve; pare and cut into slices 12 large, ripe
peaches, sprinkle thickly with sugar and let them stand 1 hour;
press them with the juice through a sieve, add 1½ ounces gelatine
dissolved in water, set on ice and stir till it begins to thicken;
then add 1 pint whipped cream, 1 glass sherry wine and a few lady
fingers broken into pieces; fill the cream into a highly pointed
form and set it into cracked ice for 2 hours; when ready to serve
turn out the jelly from the border form onto a round dish; then turn
out the cream from the highly pointed form; place the latter in the
center of the jelly border and serve.

213. +Pudding à l’Allemande.+-- Boil 1½ pints milk with 4
tablespoonfuls sugar, ¼ teaspoonful salt and the thin peel of 1
lemon; mix 1 cup flour with 1 cup milk to a smooth paste and add it
to the boiling milk, stirring constantly; boil a few minutes, remove
from the fire, add the beaten yolks of 6 eggs and stir until nearly
cold; then add the whites of the 6 eggs, beaten to a stiff froth;
rinse a jelly form with cold water, sprinkle with sugar, pour in the
mixture and place on ice for 3 or 4 hours; in serving turn the
pudding onto a dish, garnish with strawberries and serve with the
following sauce:--Boil 2 teaspoonfuls cornstarch in 1½ cups water,
sweeten with sugar, remove from the fire, add the juice of 1 lemon,
½ pint strawberry juice, 1 glass Rhine wine and serve when cold with
the pudding.

214. +Strawberry Pudding.+-- Place a round tin form into cracked ice
and pour in some orange jelly; when firm lay the form over on its
side, pour in more jelly, turn the form around and pour in more
jelly; continue in this way until the whole inside of form is glazed
with the jelly; mix 1 pint bruised strawberries with 1 pint sugar
syrup flavored with vanilla and add 1½ ounces dissolved gelatine;
put this on ice and stir till it begins to thicken; pour some
Madeira wine over some lady fingers and let them soak about 10
minutes; put a layer of the strawberry pureé in the form, over this
some lady fingers and continue with cream and cake in alternate
layers till all is used; let the form remain on ice for 2 hours;
then turn the pudding onto a dish, garnish with chopped orange jelly
and nice, large strawberries which have been dipped into the jelly
and serve with strawberry syrup.

215. +Imperial Pudding.+-- Place a cream form into cracked ice and
pour in some white wine jelly colored to a delicate pink with
cochineal; when the jelly is firm decorate the bottom with preserved
pineapple cut into the shape of dice and blanched almonds cut into
strips; pour over a few spoonfuls jelly and let it remain till firm;
place a saucepan with 1 pint cream, the yolks of 6 eggs and 5
tablespoonfuls sugar over the fire and stir until nearly boiling;
when cold add 1½ ounces dissolved gelatine and ½ pint best arrac;
soak 1 dozen vanilla wafers and the same quantity of macaroons in
sugar syrup mixed with champagne and arrac for 10 minutes; stir the
cream on ice until it begins to thicken; then add 1 pint whipped
cream and lastly ½ pint champagne; fill the cream in alternate
layers with wafers and macaroons in the form; let the pudding remain
for 2 hours on ice; pour into tartlet forms some orange jelly with
small dice of pineapple; in serving dip the form into hot water and
turn the pudding onto a round dish; also turn out the jelly from the
small moulds and lay them around the dish.

216. +Suédoise of Apples.+-- Pare 1 dozen large apples, bore pegs
therefrom with an apple corer and lay them in water with lemon
juice; prepare 1 dozen large Bartlet pears the same way; boil the
apple pegs in sugar syrup with lemon juice, to keep them white, and
boil the pears in sugar syrup with cochineal; care must be taken not
to boil them too long, so that they will not fall apart; transfer
them to a dish and set aside to cool; wash the apple and pear peels,
also the cores; put them in a saucepan with sufficient water to
cover and boil till done; strain through a jelly bag; measure the
liquor and take for 1 quart 1½ ounces gelatine, the thin peel and
juice of 1 lemon, 1 cup sugar and the whites of 2 eggs; soak the
gelatine in a little cold water 15 minutes; put the liquor with
lemon, sugar and well beaten whites over the fire; when hot add the
gelatine, stir constantly and boil 5 minutes; remove to side of
stove, add ½ pint white wine and strain through a jelly bag; place a
plain form with tube in the center into cracked ice and pour a few
spoonfuls jelly in the bottom of it; when firm lay the form over on
its side, pour in more jelly, keep turning and add by degrees more
jelly; continue this process until the jelly has formed a complete
lining inside of form; lay the pegs of apples and pears in slanting
rows onto a napkin and cut them all the same length; then take each
one separately onto a larding or knitting needle and dip into cold
jelly; first lay a row of red on the side of form, then a row of
white in an opposite direction; continue until the form is covered,
pour over some thick jelly and when firm fill the inside with apple
bavarois made as follows:--Prepare 1 pint apple sauce, press it
through a sieve, add 1 teaspoonful vanilla and sweeten to taste;
soak 16 sheets gelatine in cold water for 10 minutes, press out, put
in a bowl and pour ½ cup boiling water over it; stir until
dissolved, add to the apples and stir until it begins to thicken;
then mix in 1 pint whipped cream or the beaten whites of 6 eggs;
fill this into the form, cover and let it remain on ice till firm;
in serving dip the form into hot water, dry it quickly, turn the
suédoise onto a round dish and garnish with fruit; the apple may be
bored out into rounds like marbles and boiled the same way--half red
and half white; they are then laid in rows on the side of form over
one another, alternately with white and red till the form is lined
with them; then place a small form inside, pour sufficient jelly
around to cover the fruit and fill up the space between the inside
form and fruit; let it remain on ice till firm; then pour in the
inside form some hot water, draw it out and fill the inside with any
kind of frozen cream; serve at once.

217. +Suédoise of Pears.+-- Pare and quarter 12 large Bartlet or
duchess pears and cut each quarter lengthwise into 4 slices; boil
half the slices in sugar syrup with lemon juice and the other half
in sugar syrup with cochineal; lay them on a napkin to dry; pour a
little wine jelly into a plain form and lay on the bottom some of
the slices in the shape of a star; when firm turn the form over on
its side and lay in first a row of white slices, then a row of red;
dip each piece into cold wine jelly before laying it in the form;
continue in this way until the sides of form are covered; then pour
in a few spoonfuls jelly and keep turning the form, in order that
the jelly may be evenly distributed over the fruit; pare and cut
into small pieces ½ dozen large pears, put them over the fire with a
little water and boil till soft; press them through a sieve and set
aside to cool; boil 1 cup sugar in 1 cup water with the juice of ½
lemon for a few minutes; soak 16 sheets gelatine in cold water 5
minutes, press out, add it to the sugar and boil a little longer;
remove from fire, mix with the pear pureé and stir till it begins to
thicken; whip 1 pint sweet cream to a froth, add 2 tablespoonfuls
powdered sugar and 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract; add it to the
above pear mixture and fill into the form; place it on ice for 2
hours; when ready to serve turn the suédoise onto a round dish and
garnish with croutons of wine jelly.

218. +Timbale de Pêche à la Condé.+-- Line a deep round form with
rich pie crust, lay buttered paper over it, fill the form with dry
peas and put in oven to bake; when baked take it from the oven,
remove the peas, return form to oven and let the crust dry for a few
minutes; place 1 cup rice with cold water over the fire and boil a
few minutes; drain in colander, rinse with water and boil in milk
till soft and thick; add ½ cup sugar, ½ tablespoonful butter and set
it in a warm place; pare and cut into halves 1 dozen large, ripe
peaches and boil a few minutes in sugar syrup; draw them to side of
stove to keep warm; also have the form with crust (or timbale)
setting in a warm place; mix ½ cup whipped cream with the rice and
fill it alternately with the peaches in the form inside of timbale;
let the last layer be rice; put a round dish over the form and turn
the timbale onto it; cut a round hole in the center, put in a few
peaches and pour the peach syrup all over the timbale. Timbale of
cherries, apricots, pineapples, pears and apples are made in the
same manner.

219. +Timbale de Riz à la Napolitaine.+-- Put ¾ pound parboiled rice
with 1 quart milk, ½ teaspoonful salt, 1½ tablespoonfuls butter and
a little vanilla over the fire and boil till rice is tender; when
done add some seedless raisins, currants and fine citron (1 cupful
in all) and set aside to cool; stir 4 tablespoonfuls sugar with 1
whole egg and the yolks of 4 to a cream; add 2 tablespoonfuls
Madeira wine and mix it with the rice; line a deep round form with
thin neapolitan paste, fill it with the rice, put on a cover of the
same dough and bake 1 hour; when baked turn the timbale onto a dish,
pour over it a fruit sauce mixed with Madeira wine and send some in
a saucere to table with it.

220. +Pear Timbale.+-- Pare, quarter and stew 1 dozen Bartlet pears
with 1 bottle claret, 1 cup sugar, a small piece of cinnamon and ½
cup seedless raisins; when done pour them on a sieve to drain and
cool; line a buttered, deep round form or tin pan with about 1 inch
of biroche dough (see Biroche), fill with the pears, put on a cover
of the same dough and let it stand in a warm place for ½ hour; then
bake in a medium hot oven; when baked turn the timbale onto a round
dish, pour some of the pear syrup over and serve the rest in a
saucere with it.

221. +Timbale à la Sicilienne.+-- Butter a deep round form, line it
with neapolitan paste, cover the latter with buttered paper, fill
the form with dry peas and bake in a hot oven; when done and cold
remove peas and paper, take the timbale from the form, brush over
the inside and outside with peach or apricot marmalade and decorate
it around and on top with blanched half almonds and currants; take a
form 1 inch wider than the one above, place it into cracked ice and
pour in, to the depth of about ¾ inch, some clear lemon jelly; as
soon as cold place timbale into the form and fill space between the
timbale and form with lukewarm lemon jelly; let it remain on ice
till needed; when ready to serve fill the timbale with peach,
pineapple or strawberry plombiere or any kind of frozen cream; dip
the form into warm water, dry quickly, turn it onto a round dish and
decorate with sugared orange quarters.

222. +Timbale of Mixed Fruit.+-- Take some preserved peaches,
pineapples, cherries and pears and put them on a sieve to drain;
then put them in a dish with ½ cup currants or apple jelly and 1
teaspoonful vanilla sugar; mix all together and fill it into a form
lined with biroche dough; cover with the same dough and finish same
as Pear Timbale.

223. +Chocolate Plombiere.+-- Dissolve ½ pound grated chocolate in ½
cup water, add the yolks of 8 eggs, 1 pint cream, 1 teaspoonful
vanilla extract, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar and stir this over the fire
till nearly boiling; strain through a hair sieve and when cold put
it in a freezer; finish the same as Orange Plombiere.

224. +Orange Plombiere.+-- Strain the juice of 6 oranges and rub the
skin from 2 with loaf sugar; dissolve ¾ pound sugar in 1 cup cold
water and mix it with the orange juice and orange sugar; put into a
freezer and turn and work it till it thickens; then add 1 pint
whipped cream and work it for 10 minutes longer; then fill the
mixture into a form, cover tightly and paste a strip of buttered
paper around the edge of cover; then pack the form into cracked ice
and salt; lay plenty of ice on top and let it remain from 1 to 2
hours.

225. +Rum Plombiere.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 pint cream, the yolks
of 10 eggs and 1 cup sugar over the fire and stir till nearly
boiling; remove from the fire and set aside to cool; cut 6 ounces
candied orange peel into small dice and boil them for a few minutes
in a little water; drain on a sieve, add them to the cream and put
the mixture into a freezer; let it freeze till it begins to thicken;
then add ½ cup best rum and 1 pint whipped cream; fill the mixture
into a form, paste a strip of buttered paper around the edge of
cover and pack in ice and salt for 2 hours.

226. +Plombiere of Maraschino Curaçoa+ is made the same way.

227. +Pistache Plombiere.+-- Pound ¼ pound blanched almonds and ¼
pound blanched pistachio nuts with a little cream to a paste; place
a saucepan with the paste, 1½ pints cream, 1 cup sugar, 1
teaspoonful vanilla and the yolks of 8 eggs over the fire and stir
until nearly boiling; remove cream from fire, set it in cold water
and stir till cold; add a little spinach color and strain through a
hair sieve; then finish the same as Strawberry Plombiere.

228. +Plombiere aux Café.+-- Pour 1½ pints boiling cream over 3
tablespoonfuls freshly ground coffee and let it stand well covered
for 10 minutes; strain through a napkin; put the coffee cream in a
saucepan over the fire with 1 cup sugar and the yolks of 8 eggs and
stir till nearly boiling; remove the cream from fire, set saucepan
in cold water and stir till cold; then finish the same as Strawberry
Plombiere.

229. +Tea Plombiere.+-- Pour 1½ pints boiling cream over 1 ounce tea
and let it stand 5 minutes; strain and finish the same as Coffee
Plombiere.

230. +Peach Plombiere.+-- Pare, quarter and press through a sieve 15
large, ripe peaches; dissolve ¾ pound sugar in 1 cup water and add
it to the peach pureé; put this mixture into the freezer and finish
the same as Strawberry Plombiere.

231. +Vanilla Plombiere.+-- Place a saucepan with 3 cups milk over
the fire, add the yolks of 8 eggs, 1 cup sugar and 2 teaspoonfuls
vanilla extract and stir till nearly boiling; remove from the fire,
set the saucepan into cold water and stir till cool; then put into a
freezer and let it freeze till it begins to thicken; then add 1 pint
whipped cream and finish the same as Strawberry Plombiere.

232. +Strawberry Plombiere.+-- Wash 1 quart strawberries and press
them through a sieve; dissolve ¾ pound sugar in ¾ cup water and add
this syrup to the strawberry pureé; 2 hours before serving pour it
into a freezer and turn it about 20 minutes, or till it begins to
thicken; then mix with 1 pint whipped cream and let it remain a
little while longer in the freezer; fill into a form, cover tightly,
paste a strip of buttered paper around the edge of cover and pack in
ice and salt for 2 hours; in serving dip form into hot water,
quickly wipe it dry, turn the plombiere onto a round dish and
garnish with fancy cake.

233. +Pineapple Plombiere.+-- Pare and cut into small dice 1 ripe
pineapple, put them into a dish and pour 1 pint cold sugar syrup
over it; let it stand 4 hours; 2 hours before serving put the fruit
into a freezer and freeze till it begins to thicken; then add 1 pint
whipped cream and finish the same as in foregoing recipe.
NOTE.--This plombiere may also be served in a glass dish directly
from the freezer; it must then, of course, be worked until firm. If
preserved fruit is used less sugar must be taken, and color and
taste should be freshened up with lemon juice and a few drops of
cochineal. Plombiere of raspberries, currants or cherries is made in
a similar manner.




FROZEN PUDDINGS.


234. +Frozen Strawberry Pudding.+-- Whip 1 quart rich, sweet cream
until thick, add 2 cups powdered sugar and lastly stir 1 quart
mashed strawberries through the cream; fill this into a pudding form
with a tube in the center, cover tightly and put a strip of buttered
paper around the edge of cover, so that no water can enter; have
ready a large pail or a butter tub, put some cracked ice on the
bottom, sprinkle over some rock salt, set onto this the form, fill
up the sides with cracked ice and sprinkle salt between; cover the
top of form with ice, the whole with a piece of carpet or a cloth
and set in a cool place for 4 hours; when ready to serve lift from
the ice, remove the paper, wipe off the form, dip it in hot water,
turn the pudding onto a dish and serve at once.

235. +Rich Ice Cream Pudding.+-- Beat the yolks of 9 eggs with ¾
pound sugar to a cream and add 1 quart whipped cream; fill this into
a tin pudding form with a tube in the center, paste over the edge of
cover a strip of buttered paper and bury in cracked ice and rock
salt for 4 hours, the same as Strawberry Pudding.

236. +Pudding à la Pückler Muskau.+-- Stir into 1 quart whipped cream
6 tablespoonfuls sugar and 6 ounces finely pounded macaroons; fill
the cream into a form and bury it in ice and rock salt for 4 hours,
the same as Strawberry Pudding.

237. +Ice Pudding à la Prince Pückler.+-- Whip 1 quart cream till
stiff and divide it into 3 parts; boil 6 ounces grated chocolate in
½ pint water with ½ cup sugar smooth and thick; remove the chocolate
from the fire and when cold mix with it ⅓ of the whipped cream; mix
1 pint bruised raspberries with another ⅓ of the whipped cream and
add sufficient sugar to sweeten (or take raspberry jelly); add to
the last ⅓ of whipped cream 5 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1 teaspoonful
vanilla extract; place a form into cracked ice, fill in the cream in
finger thick layers alternately--first the chocolate, then the
raspberry, then the white; continue until all is used; cover the
form tightly, paste around the edge of cover a strip of buttered
paper and bury the whole form in rock salt and ice for 4 hours; if
the ice melts more must be put around the form and some of the water
drawn off; when ready to serve dip the form into hot water, turn the
pudding onto a dish and serve at once.

238. +Frozen Chocolate Pudding.+-- Boil 6 ounces grated chocolate in
½ pint water with 4 tablespoonfuls sugar until thick and smooth;
when cold mix it with 1½ pints whipped cream; if not sweet enough
add more sugar; fill this into a tin pudding form, paste a strip of
buttered paper around the edge of cover and bury the form in cracked
ice and rock salt for 4 hours the same way as Strawberry Pudding.

239. +Bombe à la Altenberg.+-- Boil 1½ cups sugar with 1 cup water 10
minutes; remove and when cold add the yolks of 6 eggs: stir this
over the fire till nearly boiling; when cold mix it with 1 pint
whipped cream and 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract; fill this into a
form, cover tightly and place into cracked ice; boil 6 ounces
chocolate in 1 cup water with ½ cup sugar and 1 teaspoonful vanilla
until smooth; put this into another form, also standing in ice and
rock salt; when it begins to freeze spread the chocolate evenly
around the inside of form, so as to form a complete lining; then
cover the form and let it remain in ice until hard; next fill in the
above vanilla cream, cover tightly, paste a strip of buttered paper
around the edge of cover and bury the form in plenty of ice and rock
salt for 4 hours; in serving dip the form in hot water, quickly turn
the bombe out onto a round dish, decorate with kisses and serve at
once.

240. +Bombe à la Parisienne.+-- Press 1 quart ripe strawberries
through a sieve, add 1 pound sugar dissolved in ½ pint cold water
and a little Rhine wine; pack a plain ice cream form into cracked
ice and salt, pour in the strawberries and let freeze till it begins
to thicken; then spread the half frozen strawberry ice onto the
sides and bottom of form so that it forms a complete lining inside;
cover the form and let it remain in ice till hard; in the meantime
have a pineapple cream prepared as follows:--

241. +Pineapple Cream for Bombe à la Parisienne.+-- Place a saucepan
with the yolks of 6 eggs and 1 pint pineapple syrup over the fire
and stir until nearly boiling; remove from the fire and when cold
add 1 pint whipped cream; fill this inside of the strawberry ice,
cover the form tightly, paste a strip of buttered paper around the
edge of cover and bury in ice and salt for 3 hours; when ready to
serve take out the form, rinse off with cold water, remove the
paper, dip the form quickly into hot water and turn the bombe onto a
handsome dish; garnish with fruit, French candies or fancy cakes and
serve at once. NOTE.--The strawberry ice may be first frozen in a
freezer and then put into the form.

242. +Ice Pudding (with Pumpernickel).+-- Cut 6 ounces pumpernickel
into slices and dry them in the oven; roll them fine with a rolling
pin and sift the crumbs through a coarse sieve; mix them with 1
quart whipped cream, add 1 teaspoonful extract of vanilla and 1 cup
sugar; fill the cream into a tin form with a tube in the center,
cover tightly, paste a strip of buttered paper around the edge of
cover and bury in cracked ice and rock salt for 4 hours; when ready
to serve dip the form into hot water, turn the pudding onto a round
dish and serve at once.

243. +Ice Pudding (with Almonds).+-- Stir the yolks of 8 eggs with ¾
pound sugar to a cream, add 1 quart whipped cream, ½ pound ground
almonds and finish the same as Strawberry Pudding.

244. +Frozen Pudding à la Montmorency.+-- Mix 2 tablespoonfuls sugar
with 1 cup finely chopped sweet almonds and 10 bitter ones; put this
into a tin pan and roast in the oven to a light brown, stirring
often; place a saucepan with the yolks of 6 eggs, 1 cup sugar, 1
pint cream or milk and the roasted almonds over the fire and stir
constantly until nearly boiling; then strain through a sieve; when
cold add 2 tablespoonfuls caramel (see Boiling Sugar) and orange
blossom water; put this into an ice cream freezer and work till it
begins to thicken; then add ¾ pint whipped cream, ½ cup finely
chopped pistachio nuts and 3 ounces finely powdered macaroons;
continue working the freezer till the cream is frozen hard; place a
cream form in ice and salt, pour some cherry syrup around the sides
and bottom, sprinkle with pistachio fillets and some preserved red
cherries; then fill in the cream with some of the cherries laid
between, put on the cover, paste a strip of buttered paper around
its edge and completely bury the form in ice and rock salt for 1
hour; when ready to serve lift from the ice, rinse off with cold
water, remove the paper, wipe the form dry and quickly dip it into
hot water; have ready a handsome dish with a folded napkin; turn the
pudding onto the dish, garnish with small fancy cakes and serve with
whipped cream flavored with vanilla or maraschino.

245. +Pudding Glacé à la Metternich.+-- Pound 3 ounces blanched
almonds and 3 ounces blanched pistachio nuts to a paste; stir over
the fire the yolks of 6 eggs, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 pint cream
and a little vanilla till nearly boiling; add the almonds and
pistachio paste and set aside to cool; then strain through a sieve;
soak 6 ounces seedless raisins, 3 ounces finely cut preserved orange
peel and a little finely cut preserved apricots in maraschino and
cut a small sponge cake into slices; 4 hours before serving place a
high form into cracked ice and salt, put in a layer of cream and
over this some fruit and cake; continue with cream, fruit and cake
alternately till all is used; cover the form, paste a piece of
buttered paper around the edge of cover and completely bury in
plenty of cracked ice and salt; when ready to serve rinse the form
off with cold water, remove the paper, quickly dip the form into hot
water, turn the pudding onto a dish and garnish with fruit and fancy
cake; serve with pistachio sauce made as follows:--Stir the yolks of
4 eggs with 1 pint sweet cream and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar over the
fire till nearly boiling; remove from the fire, add 2 ounces finely
powdered pistachio nuts and serve when cold with the pudding.

246. +A la Duchesse de Berry.+-- Press 1 quart strawberries through a
sieve; dissolve ¾ pound sugar in 1 cup cold water and add it to the
strawberries; set a form into cracked ice and salt for 20 minutes,
put in the strawberries and freeze it until thick; then spread the
strawberry ice around the sides and bottom of a high ice form and
let it stand in ice till hard; in the meantime prepare a cream for
the inside; mix 1 pint cream with 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks
of 6 eggs and 1 cup preserved pineapple cut into small pieces; stir
this over the fire till nearly boiling; remove it and when cold put
into a freezer; freeze until it begins to thicken; then add 1 pint
whipped cream and freeze it for a few minutes longer; then fill it
into the strawberry form, cover tightly, paste a strip of buttered
paper around the edge of cover and bury in plenty of ice and rock
salt for 1 hour; in serving take out of ice, rinse off with cold
water, remove the paper, wipe the form dry, quickly dip it into hot
water, turn the pudding onto a handsome dish and serve at once.

247. +Pudding Glacé à la Allemande.+-- Put 2 dozen lady fingers on a
long plate and pour over them some Madeira wine or maraschino; set a
plain form without a tube in ice and rock salt; stir 1 pint cream
with the yolks of 6 eggs, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1 teaspoonful
vanilla extract over the fire till nearly boiling; when cold put in
a freezer and freeze till it begins to thicken; then add 1 pint
whipped cream and freeze for a few minutes longer; then put a layer
of this cream into the plain form, standing in ice, put over this a
layer of lady fingers and a few spoonfuls apricot marmalade or fruit
jelly, then a layer of cream again; continue this way until all is
used; let the last layer be cream; put on the cover, paste a piece
of buttered paper around the edge of it and bury the form completely
in ice and rock salt; let it remain 1 hour; then serve, garnished
with fancy cake. NOTE.--If a form is not handy a 3-quart tin kettle
will do.

248. +Frozen Pudding à la Richelieu.+-- Boil ¼ pound rice in water
till done and pour it onto a sieve to drain; pound ¼ pound blanched
almonds or pistachio nuts with a little cream to a paste; remove the
shells and brown skin from ¼ pound large chestnuts and boil them in
milk till soft; then strain them through a sieve and mix rice and
nuts together; boil ½ cup sugar with ½ cup water for 10 minutes, add
1 teaspoonful vanilla extract, mix (hot) with the above mixture and
let it stand for an hour; put in a porcelain-lined saucepan 1 pint
cream, the yolks of 6 eggs, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1 teaspoonful
vanilla extract; stir this over the fire till nearly boiling; remove
it and set aside to cool; spread 20 vanilla wafers on one side with
apricot marmalade and put 2 and 2 together; dip them into sherry
wine and set aside; also cut some stewed pineapple into dice; set a
form into cracked ice and salt and put in a few spoonfuls cream; lay
over the cream a layer of wafers, rice and pineapple; then cream
again; continue until all is used; put on the cover, paste a strip
of buttered paper around its edge and bury the form completely in
ice and rock salt from 3 to 4 hours; when ready to serve turn the
pudding onto a dish with a folded napkin underneath and send cold
pineapple or pistachio sauce to table with it.

249. +Frozen Chestnut Pudding.+-- Place a saucepan with ½ pound large
chestnuts over the fire, cover with water and boil a few minutes;
drain the nuts in colander, remove the outside shell and the inside
skin and boil in milk till soft; press them through a sieve and add
the yolks of 6 eggs to the pureé and 1 pint sweet cream, ½ pound
sugar and 1 teaspoonful extract of vanilla; stir this over the fire
till nearly boiling; strain through a fine sieve; boil for 15
minutes 2 ounces well washed currants, the same of seedless raisins
and finely cut citron and a little orange peel in water; drain on a
sieve and let them lay for 2 hours in Madeira wine; put a piece of
ice (large enough to cover the bottom) in a strong pail or butter
tub and sprinkle a handful of rock salt over it; put onto this an
ice cream freezer and fill up the sides with cracked ice and salt;
put in the chestnut cream and work till it begins to thicken; then
pour in not quite 1 pint whipped cream and work until it is frozen
quite hard; then add the fruit with the wine; let it freeze a little
longer; transfer the cream to a pudding form with a tube in the
center (or an ice form), put on the cover, paste a strip of buttered
paper around its edge and bury the form in ice and salt for 1 hour;
when ready to serve rinse off the form with cold water, remove the
paper and wipe dry; then dip it quickly into hot water and turn the
pudding onto a dish; garnish with fancy cake and serve with whipped
cream.

250. +Frozen Apple Pudding.+-- Pare and core 8 nice greening apples,
cut them into quarters and stew with ½ cup water till tender; boil 1
cup sugar with 1 cup water for 5 minutes and add it to the apples
with 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract and ½ cup apricot marmalade;
press the whole through a sieve; when cold put it into an ice cream
freezer and work till it begins to get thick; then add 1 pint
whipped cream, 3 ounces currants and the same of seedless raisins
and finely cut citron; the last 3 ingredients should be boiled for
20 minutes in a little water and laid for ½ hour in vanilla syrup;
let the whole freeze until hard; fill the cream into a form, put on
the cover, paste a strip of buttered paper around the edge of the
latter and bury in salt and ice for 1 hour; serve with whipped cream
and garnish with fancy cakes.

251. +Mousse of Pineapple.+-- Line a plain form with white paper; see
that there are no creases in the paper; lay it in even and smooth;
set the form into cracked ice until following mixture is
prepared:--Pare and cut into slices 1 ripe pineapple; dissolve 1
pound sugar in 1 pint water and put it over the fire to boil; add
the pineapple slices and boil 20 minutes; transfer them to a sieve
to drain; when cold cut some of the slices into halves and lay them
inside on the side of form; cut the remaining slices of pineapple
into dice and set them cold; place a saucepan with 1½ cups pineapple
syrup and the yolks of 9 eggs over the fire and stir till nearly
boiling; remove from fire, add 1 cup pineapple dice and stir till
cold; then mix it with 1 pint whipped cream; fill this into the
form, put on the cover and paste a strip of buttered paper around
its edge; then pack the form into cracked ice and salt so that it is
completely buried and let it remain 4 hours; when ready to serve dip
the form into hot water, dry quickly, turn the mousse onto a dish
and garnish with fancy cakes.

252. +Mousse à la Vanille.+-- Dissolve 1 cup sugar in 1½ cups water,
add the yolks of 6 eggs and stir over the fire till nearly boiling;
remove quickly and stir till cold; then add 1 pint whipped cream, 2
teaspoonfuls vanilla extract and finish the same as pineapple in
foregoing recipe.

253. +Mousse à l’Orange.+-- Dissolve 1 cup sugar in 1 cup water and
boil a few minutes with the juice of 1 lemon; remove the syrup from
the fire, put in the thin peel of 2 oranges and let them lay for a
few minutes; then remove; rub off the skin from 6 oranges with loaf
sugar and add the orange sugar to the sugar syrup with the juice of
6 oranges and the yolks of 9 eggs; beat this with an egg beater till
nearly boiling; remove quickly, set it in cold water and continue
beating till cold; then add 1 pint whipped cream and finish the same
as Pineapple Mousse.

254. +Mousse au Chocolat.+-- Dissolve 3 ounces grated chocolate in ½
cup water and boil for a few minutes; strain through a sieve and set
aside; put in a saucepan the yolks of 6 eggs and 1 cup sugar syrup
and stir over the fire till it begins to thicken; remove it quickly,
set saucepan in cold water, add the chocolate and stir till cold;
then mix it with 1 pint whipped cream and finish the same as
Pineapple Mousse.

255. +Mousse au Maraskino.+-- Stir the yolks of 6 eggs with ¾ cup
sugar and 1 cup water over the fire to a cream; remove it from the
fire and stir till cold; add ½ cup maraschino and 1 pint whipped
cream and finish the same as Pineapple Mousse. Rum may be
substituted for maraschino.




PAINS.


256. +Pain of Strawberries.+-- Put 1 quart ripe strawberries into a
colander, rinse off with cold water and press them through a sieve;
soak 2 ounces gelatine in ½ pint cold water for 15 minutes, add ½
pint boiling water and stir over the fire till gelatine is
dissolved; set aside to cool; then dissolve ¾ pound sugar in 1 pint
cold water, put it over the fire with the juice of 1 lemon and boil
5 minutes; when cold add it with the gelatine to the strawberries;
also add ½ cup white wine and a little cochineal; put the pain on
ice till it begins to thicken; then fill it into a form with a tube
in the center, cover and place for 2 or 3 hours on ice. Pains of
raspberries or currants are made the same way, using no lemon.

257. +Pain d’Ananas.+-- Take a jar of preserved pineapples, cut them
into small dice, add ½ pint white wine and a little more sugar if
necessary; add the juice of 1 lemon and 2 ounces gelatine dissolved
in 1 pint water; place this on ice and stir it now and then; as soon
as it begins to thicken put into a form, which set on ice for 2 or 3
hours; then serve.

258. +Pain d’Ananas à la Parisienne.+-- Chose a large, ripe pineapple
and pare and grate it; add 1½ cups sugar and stir until dissolved;
press the pineapple through a sieve and add the juice of 4 oranges
and 2 ounces gelatine dissolved in 1 pint water; place a plain form
into cracked ice and pour in a few spoonfuls orange jelly; when this
is hard lay the form over on its side, pour in more jelly and keep
turning slowly, so that the jelly may get all over the sides and
form a lining; next have some pistachio nuts or blanched almonds cut
into strips and sprinkle them over the sides and bottom of form; set
the pineapple mixture on ice and stir until it begins to thicken;
then fill into the form, cover and let it remain for 2 or 3 hours in
ice; it is then ready to serve; chop the trimmings of the pineapple
fine, pour over some cold sugar syrup and let it stand 2 hours;
strain, add a little dissolved gelatine and pour over the pain when
sent to table.

259. +Pain de Peches.+-- Take 20 large, ripe peaches and pare and
quarter them; then press them through a sieve; add to this 1 pound
sugar dissolved in 1 pint cold water and 2 ounces dissolved
gelatine; crack the stones, remove the pits, scald in boiling water
and free them from their brown skin; cut the pits in half and boil
them in a little sugar syrup; add to the peach mixture ½ cup white
wine and fill it into a tin form with a tube in the center; place
the form on ice and let it remain till its contents begin to
thicken; then stir in the peach pits and let it remain on ice 2
hours longer. Pains of apricots, cherries or plums are made the same
way.

260. +Pain à la Victoria.+-- Press 1 pint ripe raspberries through a
sieve and mix it with 1 ounce gelatine dissolved in ½ pint water;
put ¾ cup sugar into ½ pint cold water and stir until dissolved;
then add it to the raspberries with a glass of white wine; place
this on ice till it begins to thicken; prepare 1 quart almond
blanc-mange (see Blanc-Mange); set a plain form into cracked ice and
put in a layer of raspberries about an inch in thickness; let this
get hard; then put in a layer of blanc-mange; after this is firm
again put in raspberries, then blanc-mange; continue till all is
used; let it remain on ice for 2 hours; when ready to serve turn the
pain onto a round dish and garnish with fruit.

261. +Pain de Peches à la Richelieu.+-- Prepare a pain the same as
Pain de Peches and also 1 pint almond blanc-mange; set a plain form
with a tube in the center into cracked ice and put in by degrees the
blanc-mange; put it ½ inch in thickness all around on the sides and
bottom of form, so that it forms a complete lining inside; then fill
in the pain of peaches and let it remain on ice for 2 hours: in
serving dip the form into hot water, wipe dry and turn its contents
into a glass dish.

262. +Pain de Peches à la Condé.+-- Pare and cut into halves 1½ dozen
large, ripe peaches and boil them with their blanched pits in sugar
syrup for about 10 minutes; transfer the peaches to a dish or long
tin pan, wipe dry and lay them with the hollow side up; put half a
pit in the center of each and pour a spoonful of jelly over each
piece (the jelly should be previously stirred on ice till it begins
to thicken); next set a plain form into cracked ice, pour in some
plain fruit or wine jelly and keep turning the form until the inside
is lined with the jelly; cover the bottom with peaches; lay them so
that the pits are to the outside; then lay the remaining peaches in
rows on the side of form, pour over some jelly and when firm fill up
the form with bavarois aux apricots, which is prepared as
follows:--Pare and cut into pieces 1½ dozen ripe apricots, lay in a
dish, sprinkle over 1 cup sugar and let them stand for 2 hours; then
press them through a sieve; mix the pureé with 1 teaspoonful extract
of vanilla and 1½ ounces dissolved gelatine; put this on ice and
stir till it begins to thicken; then carefully stir 1 pint whipped
cream through it; fill the bavarois into form at once and let it
remain on ice for 2 or 3 hours.

263. +Pain de Pommes à la Condé.+-- Choose 15 large pippin or
greening apples and pare, quarter and stew them with a little water;
press them through a sieve, add 1 cup sugar and when cold mix it
with 2 ounces gelatine dissolved in 1 pint water and 1 pint almond
milk (prepared the same as for Blanc-Mange); place this on ice and
stir till it begins to thicken; fill it into a form which has
already been set into cracked ice and let it remain for 2 or 3
hours; boil the cores and peels of apples till soft; strain through
a bag, return the liquor to saucepan and boil 10 minutes; then add
to ½ pint of juice 1 cup sugar and boil for a few minutes; pour the
syrup into a dish and set aside to cool; in serving dip the form
into hot water, wipe it dry and turn the pain onto a round dish, or
into a large glass dish, and pour the apple syrup over it. This pain
may be made of Bartlet pears in the same manner.




ICE CREAMS.


264. +Directions for Making Ice Cream.+-- The implements needed are a
freezer, rock salt and finely cracked ice. Ice cream freezers can be
bought at any hardware store. They consist of a large wooden pail
with a faucet on the side near the bottom and a freezer with a
paddle inside. The cracking of the ice is best accomplished by
putting it into a coarse sack and pounding it fine with a hammer or
mallet. Place the freezer into the pail, put in the paddle and cover
the freezer tightly. Fill the space between the pail and freezer
with fine cracked ice to ⅓ its height, sprinkle over 2 handfuls salt
and pack down the ice with a piece of wood, so that it may be firm
all around the freezer; continue with layers of ice, salt and the
packing down till the ice reaches to the edge of cover; next pour
into the freezer the mixture that is to be frozen; but care should
be taken not to put in too much, for the cream needs plenty of room
in order to become light and smooth; cover the freezer and let it
stand for 5 minutes; then commence to turn; after 10 minutes’
turning remove the cover from freezer and cut the frozen cream with
a long bladed knife from the sides of can; repeat this every 10
minutes until the cream is frozen hard; then remove the paddle, even
off the cream in the freezer, cover and let it stand for 10 minutes;
do not draw off the water from pail until it stands above the ice
and the freezer has lost its firm hold; after drawing off the water
fill the space up again with cracked ice and salt; when the 10
minutes have elapsed fill the frozen cream into an ice form, cover
tightly and paste a strip of buttered paper around the edge of
cover; then pack the form into cracked ice and salt for 1 or 2
hours; when ready to serve take the form from the ice, rinse it off
with cold water, remove the paper and wipe the form dry; then dip it
quickly into hot water, take off the cover, turn the cream onto a
dish and serve at once.

265. +Ice Cream (large quantity).+-- 14 quarts sweet cream, 6 quarts
milk, 7 pounds sugar, 30 eggs and ¼ pound gelatine; soak gelatine
for 10 minutes in a little of the milk; put the remaining milk over
the fire and boil; then add the soaked gelatine and stir and boil
till it is dissolved; set aside to cool a little; beat eggs and
sugar to a cream and add by degrees the milk, stirring constantly;
return to fire and let it get boiling hot; but do not allow it to
boil, otherwise it will curdle; remove from fire, pass it through a
sieve and set aside to cool, stirring it occasionally; beat the
cream until quite thick, gradually add the cold custard and continue
beating for a little while longer; then put it in a freezer and
freeze as directed.

266. +Fine Vanilla Ice Cream.+-- Beat the yolks of 8 eggs to a cream
and add gradually 1 quart sweet cream which has previously been
boiled and cooled; add ¾ pound sugar, 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla extract
and stir the whole over the fire until nearly boiling; then remove
from fire and when cold strain it through a sieve and freeze as
directed.

267. +Custard Ice Cream.+-- Put 5 eggs in a saucepan and beat them to
a froth; add 1 cup sugar, 1 quart milk and set the saucepan in a
vessel of boiling water over the fire; stir constantly until the
custard nearly boils; then remove it from the fire and set the
saucepan in cold water; when cold strain it through a sieve, add 2
teaspoonfuls vanilla or lemon extract, put the custard in the
freezer and freeze as directed.

268. +Plain Ice Cream.+-- Put 2 teaspoonfuls cornstarch, 6 eggs, 2
cups sugar and 2 quarts milk in a saucepan over the fire and stir
till just about to boil; remove from the fire, flavor with lemon or
vanilla and finish as directed.

269. +Plain Ice Cream (another way).+-- Put 1 quart milk and 1 quart
rich, sweet cream with the yolks of 8 eggs and 2 cups sugar over the
fire and stir till just about to boil; remove from fire, beat the
whites of the 8 eggs to a stiff froth and add them to the custard;
add 3 teaspoonfuls vanilla and finish as directed.

270. +Pistachio Ice Cream.+-- ¼ pound blanched pistachio nuts, ¼
pound blanched almonds, 1 quart rich, sweet cream, 1½ cups sugar,
the yolks of 8 eggs and 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract; pound the
nuts with a little water very fine; place a saucepan over the fire
with the cream, the yolks of the 8 eggs, sugar and vanilla and stir
until nearly boiling; remove from the fire, stir in the nuts and
when cold press the whole through a sieve; finish as directed.
Almond ice cream is made the same way.

271. +Maraschino Ice Cream.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 quart cream, ¾
pound sugar and the yolks of 6 eggs over the fire and stir till it
nearly boils; remove from fire, strain through a sieve and when cold
add 1½ gills maraschino; finish as directed. Rum ice cream is made
in the same manner.

272. +Caramel Ice Cream.+-- 1½ cups sugar, the yolks of 7 eggs, 1
quart sweet cream and 1 tablespoonful orange blossom water; boil ½
cup sugar with ¼ cup water until it turns to a light brown color,
add ¼ cup boiling water and stir till the sugar is dissolved; put it
in a saucepan with the cream, 1 cup sugar, yolks and orange water
and stir the whole over the fire until nearly boiling; when cold
strain it through a sieve and finish as directed.

273. +Tea Ice Cream.+-- 1 ounce of the very best tea, 1 quart cream,
the yolks of 6 eggs and ¾ pound sugar; boil the cream, put in the
tea, cover and let it stand 5 minutes; strain through a sieve and
when nearly cold mix the cream, yolks and sugar together and stir
over the fire until nearly boiling; remove from fire and when cold
finish as directed.

274. +Coffee Ice Cream, No. 1.+-- 1 quart cream, 1 pint milk, 2 cups
sugar, the yolks of 6 eggs and 2 ounces freshly ground coffee; boil
the milk, put in the coffee, cover and set it aside to cool; next
put the cream, yolks and sugar in a saucepan and stir over the fire
till it nearly boils; remove from fire, add the coffee and when cold
strain through a fine sieve, finishing as directed.

275. +Coffee Ice Cream, No. 2.+-- ¾ pound sugar, 1 quart sweet cream,
the yolks of 6-8 eggs and 5 ounces unroasted Mocha coffee; roast the
coffee in a pan over the fire and put it into half of the boiling
cream; cover and let it stand till cold; put the remaining cream,
yolks and sugar in a saucepan over the fire and stir till nearly
boiling; remove from the fire, add the coffee cream with the beans
and let it stand till cold; then strain through a sieve and freeze
as directed. 2 ounces freshly ground coffee may be used instead of
the beans.

276. +Ice Cream (Simple).+-- 1 quart sweet cream, 1 cup sugar and 2
teaspoonfuls vanilla or lemon extract; mix this well together, pour
into a freezer and finish as directed. Or take equal parts of cream
and milk; to 1 quart of this add 1½ cups sugar and any flavoring
that may be desired; pour into the freezer and finish as directed.

277. +Plain Chocolate Ice Cream.+-- 2 pints cream, 1 pint milk, 2
cups sugar, ¼ pound Baker’s grated chocolate and 2 teaspoonfuls
vanilla extract; place a saucepan with the milk, chocolate and cream
over the fire, add the sugar, stir and boil for a few minutes;
remove from fire and when cold freeze as directed.

278. +Nut Ice Cream.+-- ½ pound blanched walnuts, the yolks of 6
eggs, 1½ cups sugar, 1 quart cream and 1 teaspoonful vanilla; pound
the walnuts fine; put the cream, yolks, sugar and vanilla in a
saucepan and stir over the fire till nearly boiling; remove from the
fire, add the nuts and when cold strain it through a sieve; freeze
as directed.

279. +Fine Chocolate Ice Cream.+-- ½ pound grated chocolate, ½ pound
sugar, 1 quart sweet cream, the yolks of 8 eggs and 1 teaspoonful
vanilla extract; place a saucepan with ½ pint cream and the
chocolate over the fire and stir and boil till chocolate is
dissolved; stir the yolks, sugar, the remaining cream and vanilla
together, add it slowly to the chocolate and continue stirring until
nearly boiling; remove from fire and finish as directed.

280. +Strawberry Ice Cream.+-- 1 pint ripe strawberries, 1 pint rich,
sweet cream, 1 pound sugar and 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract; wash
and drain the berries, mash them fine and mix with the sugar; cover
and let stand till sugar is melted; press them through a sieve, mix
the strawberry pulp with the cream and vanilla and put the whole
into a freezer and freeze as directed. Raspberry, peach and apricot
ice creams are made the same way.

281. +How to Make Ice Cream Without a Freezer.+-- The process is so
easy of manipulation and the expense incident thereto so small that
most anybody can prepare it without any great trouble. All that is
necessary for its preparation is a butter tub or a large pail, some
ice, rock salt, a tin form with tube in the center and a cover that
fits it closely. The ice is best broken to pieces by putting it into
a coarse bag and pounding with a hatchet. By this process no ice is
wasted and there is no muss.

282. +Vanilla Ice Cream, No. 1.+-- Set a plain tin form with tube in
the center into cracked ice and salt; place a saucepan with 1 quart
milk, the yolks of 6 eggs, 1 cup sugar and 1 tablespoonful
cornstarch over the fire and stir with an egg beater till nearly
boiling; remove from the fire, set saucepan in cold water and
continue stirring till cold; then add the whites of the 6 eggs,
beaten to a stiff froth, and 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla extract; pour
this into the form, put on the cover and paste a strip of buttered
paper around its edge, to prevent the salt water from entering; put
a thick layer of cracked ice in the bottom of a butter tub and
sprinkle over it a handful of rock salt; set the form onto the ice
and fill the space between it and tub with cracked ice and salt; lay
a thick layer of ice on top of form and sprinkle with salt; cover
the tub with a carpet or bag and let it stand in a cool place for 4
hours; when ready to serve take the form out of the ice, remove the
paper, dip the form into hot water, quickly wipe dry, turn the cream
onto a dish and serve.

283. +Vanilla Ice Cream. No. 2.+-- Place a deep kettle into cracked
ice and put into it 1 quart rich, sweet cream; beat this with an egg
beater until thick and add 1 cup powdered sugar and 2 teaspoonfuls
vanilla extract; put the cream into a tin form with a tube in the
center, cover tightly, paste a strip of buttered paper around the
edge of cover and finish the same as in foregoing recipe. NOTE.--For
chocolate cream dissolve ¼ pound grated chocolate in ½ cup water,
let it boil for a few minutes and when cold stir into the whipped
cream prepared as above. Preserved peaches cut into small pieces or
preserved pineapples cut into dice and mixed with the whipped cream
is very nice. 1 dozen macaroons pounded fine and mixed with the
whipped cream is also excellent. Pumpernickel cut in slices, dried
in an oven and rolled fine may also be used. Candied fruit cut into
pieces and fresh or preserved strawberries, as also cherries,
apricots and oranges, can be used in the same way. For a small
family 1 pint of cream will be sufficient.

284. +Fruit Ice Cream.+-- Stir 1 quart cream with the yolks of 6 eggs
and 1½ cups sugar over the fire till it nearly boils; remove from
fire and when cold put the cream into the freezer and work till half
frozen; then add any kind of fruit--either fresh strawberries or
preserved pineapple cut into dice, ripe peaches cut into quarters,
preserved pitted cherries or apricots; then finish as directed. The
fruit may also be stirred into Custard Ice Cream in the same manner.

285. +Fruit Ice.+-- The principal point in making fruit ice is to use
the exact quantity of sugar. If the mixture contains too much sugar
it will not freeze; if too little sugar the ice will be hard and
dry. The better way is to try a little of it before putting the
whole mixture into a freezer. If hard and dry add some thick sugar
syrup; if it does not freeze at all add some cold water or a very
thin syrup of sugar.

286. +Cold Sugar Syrup for Fruit Ice.+-- Dissolve 1 pound sugar in 1
pint cold water and use as directed in following recipe. This is the
ordinary syrup of 32 degrees used for fruit ice. If a thicker syrup
is wanted dissolve 1 pound sugar in ½ pint water.

287. +Strawberry Ice.+-- Wash and drain 1 quart ripe strawberries and
press them through a sieve; mix the pulp with 1 pint sugar syrup, as
in No. 286, and the juice of 2 lemons; press it through a fine hair
sieve, put it into a freezer and freeze as directed.

288. +Pineapple Ice.+-- Choose a large, ripe pineapple, pare and
grate it, or cut into pieces, and chop fine; put the pulp into a
porcelain dish and pour over it ½ pint sugar syrup; cover and let it
stand 1 hour; then add another ½ pint sugar syrup and the juice of 1
lemon; press it through a sieve and put in a freezer to freeze.

289. +Tutti Frutti Ice.+-- Pound ¾ pound blanched sweet almonds and
12 bitter ones with a little cold water very fine; pour over 1 pint
water and let them stand for ½ hour; then press them through a hair
sieve; mix this almond milk with 2 pints sugar syrup and 1
teaspoonful vanilla; put this into a freezer and freeze; when frozen
take the paddle of the freezer out and put in different kinds of
fruit cut into small dice--either fresh or preserved peaches,
pineapples, plums, cherries or apricots.

290. +Peach Ice.+-- Pare and cut 12 large, ripe peaches into pieces,
press them through a sieve, mix with a little over 1 pint sugar
syrup and freeze. Ices from egg plums and apricots are made in the
same way.

291. +Melon Ice.+-- Choose a nice, ripe musk melon, cut it in half,
remove the seeds and green portion and press the soft part through a
sieve; mix it with an equal quantity of sugar syrup, a little
vanilla extract, the juice of 1 lemon, a little orange blossom water
and freeze as directed.

292. +Orange Ice.+-- Mix 1 quart sugar syrup with the juice of 10
oranges, put in the thin peel of 2 oranges and let it stand for 6
minutes; remove the peel, pour the syrup through a sieve and freeze
as directed.

293. +Lemon Ice.+-- Mix the juice of 5 lemons with 1 quart sugar
syrup and freeze.

294. +Sorbet+ is served in Europe at balls and suppers.

295. +Champagne Sorbet.+-- Dissolve 1 pound sugar in 1½ pints cold
water, add the juice of 2 lemons and 6 oranges and a little of the
peel of each and let it stand 10 minutes; remove the peel, add ½
bottle champagne, put it into a freezer and work for ¼ hour; 10
minutes before serving add ½ bottle champagne, work it for a few
minutes longer and then serve in glasses. Sorbet should not freeze
hard; it should be a creamy liquid and ice cold.

296. +Pineapple Sorbet.+-- 1 quart pineapple syrup, the juice of 3
oranges and 1 lemon; mix all together, strain and put into a
freezer, work it for ½ hour and add by degrees during the freezing
process ½ bottle champagne; finish the same as Champagne Sorbet.
Sorbets of oranges, strawberries, peaches, cherries and apricot
syrup are made in a similar manner.

297. +Strawberry Sherbet.+-- Press 1 quart ripe strawberries through
a sieve, add ¾ pound sugar dissolved in 3 pints cold water, add the
juice of 1 lemon and 2 teaspoonfuls orange flower water, cover and
let stand for 2 hours; then strain through a fine sieve and set on
ice for 1 or 2 hours; serve ice cold in small glasses.

298. +Orange Granite.+-- Mix 1 pint orange juice with 3 pints sugar
syrup, as in No. 286, the juice of 2 lemons and the peel of 1; let
it stand a few minutes then strain through a sieve; pour the mixture
into a freezer, cover and turn for 5 minutes; then take off the
cover, cut the frozen part loose from the sides of freezer, turn for
a few minutes longer and serve. Granite must not be frozen hard; it
should have little lumps all through it. Granites of strawberries,
pineapples, raspberries, currants, peaches, apricots or cherries are
made in a similar way. In granite of currants omit the lemon juice.

299. +Spongada aux peches.+-- Pare and cut into pieces some ripe
peaches, press them through a sieve and take for 1 pint peach pulp 1
pint sugar syrup, as in No. 286, 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla extract, 1½
gills white of egg not beaten and 10 bitter almonds pounded to a
paste with a little water; mix all well together and strain twice
through a sieve; pour this into a freezer, cover and turn for 5
minutes; take off the cover, cut the frozen part loose from the
sides of freezer, cover and turn again; repeat the operation of
cutting from the sides every 5 minutes; as soon as the mixture
begins to thicken remove the paddle of freezer, work the mixture up
and down with a large spoon and press it towards the sides and
bottom of freezer; as soon as the contents of freezer have increased
to double their size add 2 tablespoonfuls maraschino and serve in
glasses.

300. +Spongada au chocolat.+-- 1 pint sweet cream, ½ pound finely
grated chocolate, ½ pound sugar, 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla extract, 1½
gills white of egg and 1 large cup water; boil the chocolate in the
water for 5 minutes; when cold mix all the ingredients together and
finish the same as in preceding recipe.

301. +Spongada au Café.+-- 1 pint cold sweet cream, ½ pint very
strong coffee, ½ pint whites of eggs (not whipped) and 1 pound
powdered sugar; mix all together and finish the same as Spongada aux
Pêches.

302. +Spongada au marasquin.+-- 1½ gills white of eggs, 2 pints rich,
sweet cream, 1½ cups sugar, 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla extract and 1½
gills maraschino; dissolve the sugar in the cream, add vanilla and
the white of egg without having been beaten and finish the same as
Spongada aux Pêches. The maraschino is to be added shortly before
serving.

303. +Orgeat of Almond Milk.+-- 1 pound sweet and 12 bitter almonds
are scalded in boiling water, freed from their brown skins and laid
for 1 hour in cold water; drain the almonds on a sieve and pound
them fine with 1 pound sugar and a few spoonfuls water; put the
pounded nuts into a porcelain dish, pour over them 4 quarts cold
water, add 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla extract and strain through a
napkin. The napkin should be well washed in cold water and wrung out
previous to being used. Put this almond milk into glass bottles and
place them on ice before serving.

304. +Thé Polonaise.+-- Place a porcelain-lined saucepan over the
fire with 1 bottle Rhine wine, 2 bottles weiss beer, the rind of 1
lemon, a piece of stick cinnamon, 2 whole eggs, the yolks of 6 and
sugar to taste; beat the whole with an egg beater over the fire till
nearly boiling; instantly remove, continue beating for a few minutes
longer and serve hot in cups. This is served at the end of a ball or
party shortly before the guests go home.

305. +Iced Tea.+-- Boil 1 quart milk with 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, add
1½ ounces tea, cover and set aside for 5 minutes; then strain and
when cold pour it into an ice form; finish with whipped cream the
same as Coffee Ice.

306. +Iced Coffee.+-- Boil 1 quart milk with 4 tablespoonfuls sugar,
add 1 cup coarsely ground coffee, cover and let it stand for 15
minutes; then strain and when cold put it into an ice form, cover
and set into cracked ice with a little rock salt sprinkled between;
let it stand for ½ hour; then thoroughly stir it with a long-handled
spoon and mix with 1 pint whipped cream; serve in small cups.

307. +Bread Crumbs.+-- Take stale bread or pieces which are left from
the table, put them in a long, shallow tin pan and place in a medium
hot oven; leave the door of oven open a little, so that the bread
may dry slowly; when it is dry and has become a delicate brown color
put the bread on a pastry board and roll it fine with a rolling pin;
sift the crumbs through a sieve, return those which remain in it
back on the board and roll and sift again; continue in this way
until all the crumbs have been rolled fine and sifted; put them into
a jar or box until wanted.

308. +How to Prepare a Pudding Form.+-- Rub the inside of a form well
with butter and thickly sprinkle it with fine bread crumbs; turn the
form upside down, in order that the loose crumbs may fall out; the
cover of the form must be treated the same way; fill form with the
pudding mixture, put on the cover and tie it firmly with a cord; set
the form in a vessel of boiling water so that ⅓ of it is immersed;
then cover the vessel and boil slowly till done; add more water
according as it diminishes through boiling. The form may be put in a
large saucepan of boiling water and the latter covered with a deep
dish or pan; but care must be taken not to have too much water in
the saucepan, otherwise it will get inside of the form.




BOILED AND BAKED PUDDINGS.


Half the quantity of any of the following recipes will be sufficient
for a small family, but care must be taken in measurement to use
only the _exact_ half.

309. +Plum Pudding.+-- Take ¾ pound finely minced suet, ½ pound
stoned raisins, ½ pound well cleansed currants, ¼ pound finely cut
citron, 5 well beaten eggs, the grated rind of 1 lemon, 1 grated
nutmeg, 2 teaspoonfuls ground cinnamon, 1 teaspoonful cloves, 1
teaspoonful salt, 2 cups bread crumbs, ½ cup sour cream or milk, 1
cup syrup, 1 cup brown sugar, 1¼ pounds sifted flour, 1 teaspoonful
baking soda dissolved in a little boiling water, 2 teaspoonfuls
cream of tartar mixed with the flour and 1 glass brandy; mix all
well together; have ready a large pudding form, rub the inside well
with butter and sprinkle with bread crumbs; fill the mixture into
the form and boil 4 hours; when done turn the pudding out onto a
dish, pour brandy or rum over it, light and bring the pudding to
table while burning; serve with hard sauce made as follows:--Stir 2
tablespoonfuls butter with 8 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a
cream, add the yolks of 2 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls brandy, a little
nutmeg and the beaten whites of 2 eggs; sufficient for 20 persons.
If any of the pudding be left put in a stone jar and it will keep
for a long time. When wanted cut off a piece sufficient for dinner,
put it in a colander over a vessel of boiling water, cover with a
plate, steam for ½ hour and serve. The quantities cited in this
recipe will make 1 large pudding or 2 medium sized ones.

310. +English Plum Pudding.+-- 1½ pounds Muscatel raisins, 1¾
pounds currants, 1 pound Sultana raisins, 2 pounds sugar, 2 pounds
bread crumbs, 16 eggs, 2 pounds finely chopped suet, 6 ounces finely
cut citron, the grated rind of 2 lemons, 1 ounce ground nutmeg,
1 ounce cinnamon, ½ ounce ground bitter almonds and ¼ pint brandy;
stone and cut up the raisins, but do not chop them; wash and dry the
currants; mix all the dry ingredients together and moisten with the
eggs, which should be well beaten; stir in the brandy and when all
is well mixed butter and flour a strong pudding cloth; put in the
mixture, tie up cloth very tightly, put into a large vessel of
boiling water and boil from 6 to 8 hours; serve with brandy sauce.
This quantity may be divided and boiled in buttered moulds. For
small families this is the most desirable way, as the above
ingredients will be found sufficient to make a pudding for 25
persons. This pudding is excellent, but any one troubled with
dyspepsia had better not eat it.

311. +Biscuit Pudding.+-- 2 cups milk, 1 cup butter, 2 cups flour, 1
cup sugar, 10 eggs, 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract and the grated
rind and juice of 1 lemon; put the milk with ½ of the butter over
the fire; as soon as it boils stir in the sifted flour and keep on
stirring until the contents of saucepan form into a smooth paste and
loosen from bottom of saucepan; then transfer it to a dish and set
aside to cool; stir the remaining butter to a cream and add
alternately the yolks of eggs, the sugar and the paste; thoroughly
stir this and add the lemon, vanilla and the 10 whites beaten to a
stiff froth; fill into a well buttered and floured form, boil 2
hours and serve with wine cream sauce. NOTE.--This pudding should be
served as soon as taken from the form. The above ingredients will
make a pudding sufficient for 10 persons.

312. +Cottage Pudding (baked).+-- Take 1½ cups milk, 3 cups prepared
flour, ½ cup sugar, ½ cup butter, 3 eggs and the grated rind of 1
lemon; stir butter and sugar to a cream, add by degrees the eggs and
lemon and lastly, alternately, the flour and milk; butter a long tin
pan, sprinkle with bread crumbs, pour in the mixture and bake ½
hour; serve with wine or nutmeg sauce; in serving cut the pudding
into squares; sufficient for 10 persons.

313. +Cottage Pudding (boiled).+-- Prepare a batter the same as in
foregoing recipe, butter a pudding form, sprinkle with bread crumbs
and pour in the mixture; the form should be about ¾ full; boil 2
hours and serve with following sauce:--Stir ½ cup butter with 1½
cups powdered sugar to a cream, add the yolk of 1 egg, some pitted
or preserved cherries and 1 tablespoonful brandy; or add bruised
strawberries, blackberries or peaches cut into small pieces.

314. +Cottage Apple Pudding.+-- Prepare a batter as for Cottage
Pudding (baked) and add 3 cups finely cut apples; in other respects
treat the same as foregoing recipe and serve with lemon sauce.

315. +Batter Fruit Pudding.+-- ¼ pound butter, 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar, 4 eggs, 2 cups milk, 4 cups prepared flour, 1 cup seedless
raisins and currants, ½ cup finely cut citron, the grated rind of 1
lemon and a little nutmeg; stir butter and sugar to a cream and add
the eggs by degrees; then add alternately the sifted flour and milk,
next the fruit, lemon and nutmeg; butter a pudding form, sprinkle
with bread crumbs, put in the mixture and boil 2 hours; serve with
hard, brandy or punch sauce. NOTE.--The fruit should be dusted with
flour before adding it to the batter; sufficient for 10 persons.

316. +Prince Regent Pudding.+-- After removing the crust off a 5 cent
loaf of stale bread grate on a grater and pour 1 pint milk over it;
then stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter with 4 tablespoonfuls sugar to a
cream, add the yolks of 7 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls finely cut citron,
¼ pound well cleansed seedless raisins, the bread and the beaten
whites of the eggs; fill this into a pudding form which has been
well buttered and sprinkled with bread crumbs, close tightly and
boil 2 hours: serve with sherry wine, cream or brandy sauce.

317. +Layer Pudding (German style).+-- Cut a 5 cent Vienna loaf of
bread (after the crust has been removed) into thin slices; butter
these on both sides, dip each slice into milk, lay them on top of
one another and set aside; mix together ½ cup stoned raisins, 3
tablespoonfuls well cleansed currants, 2 tablespoonfuls finely cut
citron and ½ teaspoonful cinnamon; beat 8 eggs to a froth and add,
stirring constantly, 1 pint milk; next butter a pudding form and
sprinkle thickly with bread crumbs; put in a layer of the slices of
bread, sprinkle over them some of the fruit mixture and 2
tablespoonfuls sugar; then put in another layer of bread, fruit and
sugar; continue until all is used; then pour over it the milk and
eggs, cover the form closely and boil 1½ hours; serve with hard or
cherry sauce; sufficient for 12 persons.

318. +Portugal Pudding.+-- Grate the crust from a small loaf of bread
and soak the latter in milk; when soft press it out and put in a
saucepan with 1 tablespoonful butter and 1 tablespoonful clarified
dripping; stir for 5 minutes over the fire, transfer it to a dish
and as soon as cold mix with the yolks of 6 eggs, 5 tablespoonfuls
sugar, ¼ pound stoned raisins, ¼ pound well washed currants, the
grated rind and juice of 1 lemon, 2 tablespoonfuls finely cut
citron, ½ cup Cognac or rum and lastly the beaten whites of the
eggs; butter a pudding form, sprinkle with fine bread crumbs, fill
in the mixture, close tightly and boil 2 hours; serve with hard or
wine sauce; sufficient for 10 persons.

319. +Ipsilanti Pudding.+-- Mix 1 cup bread crumbs with 1 cup sweet
cream and let it stand ½ hour; stir ¼ pound butter with 6
tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream and add by degrees the yolks of 8
eggs; after this is well blended together add by degrees the bread,
the grated rind of 1 lemon, 6 ounces finely cut citron, 4
tablespoonfuls bread crumbs fried in butter, 1 teaspoonful ground
cinnamon and if handy 2 tablespoonfuls finely cut preserved ginger;
beat the whites of the 8 eggs to a stiff froth, mix all well
together, fill the mixture into a pudding form which has been well
buttered and sprinkled with bread crumbs, boil 2 hours and serve
with wine or cherry sauce.

320. +Fine Cherry Pudding (of fresh fruit, for a family of 6).+-- ¼
pound finely chopped suet, ½ pound flour, 2 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls
sugar, ½ pint milk or water, 1½ teaspoonfuls baking powder sifted
with the flour and a little salt; mix all the ingredients together;
add ½ pound cherries (minus the pits) to the batter and fill the
mixture into a pudding form which has been well buttered and
sprinkled with bread crumbs; boil the pudding 2 hours and serve with
the following sauce:--Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter with 8 of
powdered sugar to a cream, add the yolks of 2 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls
Cognac, rum or sherry wine and lastly the whites of the eggs beaten
to a stiff froth and ½ cup stoned cherries. 2 tablespoonfuls of
lard, butter or clarified drippings may be substituted for suet, and
instead of cherries any other kind of fruit may be used.

321. +Cherry Pudding (of preserved Cherries).+-- ¼ pound finely
chopped suet, 2 cups flour, 1½ teaspoonfuls baking powder, 2
tablespoonfuls sugar, ½ teaspoonful salt, 2 eggs and 1 cup milk or
water; sift flour, sugar, salt and powder into a bowl and mix them
with the finely chopped suet; make a hole in center, put in the
yolks of the 2 eggs, gradually add the milk and mix the whole into a
smooth batter; lastly add the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff
froth; put a can of preserved cherries in a colander or sieve, drain
off all the liquor and stir 1 cup of the cherries into the batter;
butter well with butter or lard a pudding form and dust it with
finely sifted bread crumbs; fill in the mixture, put on the cover
and tie it tightly with a string; place the form in a large saucepan
of boiling water (the form should not be immersed in the water more
than half its depth), cover the saucepan with a deep dish or pan, so
that no steam can escape, and boil 2 hours; according as the water
boils away add more boiling water; when done turn the pudding onto a
round plate and serve with the following sauce:--Put 1 tablespoonful
cornstarch in a saucepan and mix it with a little cold water; add 1
cup boiling water, stirring constantly, and let it boil for 2
minutes; then remove it from fire, add 1 cup cherry syrup, 1
teaspoonful vanilla, a little more sugar, 1 glass sherry wine and
lastly 2 tablespoonfuls preserved cherries. 1 tablespoonful lard or
butter may be used instead of suet. This pudding can be made of all
kinds of preserved fruit; sufficient for a family of 6 persons.

322. +Cherry Batter Pudding.+-- Stir ½ cup butter with 3
tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream, add by degrees 4 eggs and
alternately 4 cups Hecker’s prepared flour and 2 cups milk; then add
1 quart cherries; butter a pudding form, sprinkle with bread crumbs,
put in the mixture, cover the form, set in a kettle of boiling
water, so that the form is half immersed, and boil 2 hours; serve
with cherry, hard or wine sauce; or stir one cup pitted cherries
into the hard sauce. NOTE.--If fresh cherries are not available the
California canned cherries may be used, and will be found excellent.
If canned fruit is used drain off the juice and only put the
cherries into the batter, using the liquor either for the sauce or
to make a form of jelly (see Jelly). California preserved peaches
and apricots also make very fine puddings. The above recipe is
sufficient for 12 persons.

323. +Plain Suet Pudding.+-- ½ pound finely chopped suet, 4 cups
sifted flour mixed with 3 teaspoonfuls baking powder, 1 teaspoonful
salt, ½ cup sugar, 4 eggs and 1 pint milk; beat up the eggs and add
the salt and milk; when this is well beaten together add the flour
with the powder and sugar, mix the suet with a little flour and stir
it into the batter; butter a pudding dish, sprinkle with bread
crumbs, pour in the mixture, put on the cover, set the form in a
kettle of boiling water, so that the water covers half of the form,
and boil 2 hours; serve with strawberry sauce made as follows:--Stir
2 tablespoonfuls butter with 1 cup powdered sugar to a cream; wash
and mash finely 1 cup strawberries and mix them with the sauce; stir
a handful of whole berries into it, put the sauce into a glass dish,
smooth it with a knife and set some whole strawberries all around
the top. Pitless cherries, cut up peaches, pitless plums or
blackberries may be substituted for strawberries. The above
quantities will make a pudding sufficient for 12 persons.

324. +Suet Pudding (with Apples).+-- Dust 3 cups finely chopped
apples with flour and stir them into the plain suet pudding mixture;
otherwise treat the same as Plain Suet Pudding and serve with hard
or sherry wine sauce.

325. +Blackberry Pudding+ is made in the same manner as Plain Suet
Pudding, except that 1 quart well washed and floured blackberries
are stirred into the batter; serve with hard sauce, into which 1 cup
bruised blackberries may be stirred. Huckleberry pudding is made the
same way.

326. +Cherry Suet Pudding.+-- Add to the plain suet pudding mixture 1
pound stoned cherries (which should be dusted with flour before
adding) and finish the same as Apple Suet Pudding; serve with
following sauce:--Take 1 pound cherries and pound half of them fine
in a mortar; place the whole cherries with the pounded ones in a
saucepan over the fire, add 1 cup water and boil till tender; then
strain them through a sieve, return the liquor to saucepan, sweeten
to taste, add 2 teaspoonfuls cornstarch dissolved in a little cold
water, a piece of cinnamon and boil a few minutes; then add ½ pint
claret and serve; or stir into the hard sauce 1 cup pitted cherries.
Both of these sauces are excellent with cherry pudding.

327. +Suet Pudding (with Nuts).+-- Stir into the plain suet pudding
mixture 1 cup chopped almonds, walnuts or any kind of nuts; boil in
the form the same as Plain Suet Pudding and serve with nut sauce,
which is made as follows:--Stir ½ cup butter with 1½ cups powdered
sugar to a cream and add the yolks of 2 eggs and 1 cup chopped nuts.

328. +Suet Pudding (with Raisins).+-- Stir into the plain suet
mixture 1½ cups stoned raisins broken into pieces, boil the same as
Plain Suet Pudding and serve with hard sauce flavored with rum and
mixed with ½ cup blanched almonds or walnuts broken into pieces.

329. +Suet Fruit Pudding.+-- 1 cup finely chopped suet, 1 cup milk, 1
cup molasses, 1 cup seedless raisins, 1 cup currants, 1 teaspoonful
cinnamon, ½ teaspoonful cloves, ½ nutmeg, ½ teaspoonful salt, 4
eggs, 2 cups bread crumbs and 2 cups sifted prepared flour; mix all
the ingredients together, fill the mixture, into a well buttered
pudding form, boil 2½ hours and serve with the following
sauce:--Boil 1½ cups water, add 1 tablespoonful flour wet with ½ cup
cold water and boil for a few minutes; then add 1 tablespoonful
butter, a little nutmeg, the juice of 1 lemon and sweeten to taste.

330. +Marrow Pudding.+-- ¼ pound finely chopped beef marrow, ¼ pound
finely chopped suet, 5 eggs, 2 cups bread crumbs, ½ cup milk, ½
pound prepared flour, ½ cup rum, ½ cup sugar, ¼ pound raisins, the
same of well washed currants, 2 ounces finely cut citron, the grated
rind of 1 lemon, ½ grated nutmeg and 1 teaspoonful salt; mix all
together with the yolks of 5 eggs and add lastly the whites of the
eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; put the mixture in a well buttered
pudding form and boil 3 hours; serve with hard or brandy sauce. This
pudding may also be boiled in a cloth, but is much finer when done
in a form; sufficient for 10 persons.

331. +Fig Pudding.+-- ½ pound finely chopped suet, 4 eggs, 1 pint
milk, ½ pound figs cut into pieces, 1 pound flour and 3 teaspoonfuls
baking powder; mix flour and baking powder together, add suet, eggs,
1 teaspoonful salt, the figs and mix it with the milk into a stiff
batter; add 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, fill the mixture into a well
buttered pudding form and boil 2 hours; serve with hard or wine
sauce.

332. +Apple Pudding (baked).+-- Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter to a
cream, add ¼ pound sugar, ½ cup chopped almonds, the yolks of 6
eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls flour, the grated rind of 1 lemon and 1 quart
stewed apples; mix all together, add the beaten whites of the eggs,
fill the mixture into a buttered pudding dish and bake 1 hour; when
done sprinkle with powdered sugar and serve without sauce in the
same dish in which it was baked.

333. +Pineapple Pudding (or Souflée).+-- Boil 1 pint milk with 1
tablespoonful butter, while boiling sprinkle in 1 pint sifted flour
and stir constantly until it has formed into a smooth dough and
loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; transfer it to a dish to
cool; stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream, add alternately the
yolks of 4 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 cup milk, the grated rind
of 1 lemon and the paste (1 spoonful at a time); lastly add the
whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; butter a deep pudding
dish and sprinkle with bread crumbs; put in a layer of the mixture
and sprinkle over it a few bread crumbs; put over this a layer of
stewed or preserved pineapples (cut into small dice) and sprinkle
over a few bread crumbs; then a layer of the mixture and pineapples,
until all is used; let the last layer be the mixture; bake 1 hour
and serve with raspberry sauce; sufficient for a family of 8.
Preserved peaches, apricots or cherries may be used instead of
pineapples.

334. +Almond Sponge Pudding.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 pint milk and
1 tablespoonful butter over the fire; as soon as it boils stir in ½
pound sifted flour, keep stirring until it forms into a smooth dough
and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; then transfer it to a
dish and set aside to cool; stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream
and add alternately the yolks of 9 eggs, 9 tablespoonfuls sugar and
the dough; stir it with a potato masher until all the dough, the 9
yolks and 9 tablespoonfuls sugar have been used; add 1 cup finely
chopped or grated almonds, the juice and rind of 1 lemon and lastly
the beaten whites of 9 eggs; fill this mixture into a pudding form
which has been well buttered and sprinkled with bread crumbs or
flour and boil 2 hours; serve with the following sauce:--Place a
saucepan over the fire with 1 pint white wine, 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar, a little lemon rind and 3 whole eggs; beat this until just
about to boil; instantly remove from the fire and serve in a
sauciere with the pudding. NOTE.--The pudding should be served
immediately after being turned out.

335. +Nut Pudding.+-- Remove the shells from 1 pound walnuts, scald
the nuts in boiling water and remove the fine brown skin; pound them
in a mortar with white of egg and mix them with ¾ cup milk; boil ½
pint milk with ½ tablespoonful butter and while boiling add slowly 1
cup sifted flour; stir until it forms into a smooth paste and
loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; put the paste in a dish, mix
it with the pounded nuts and set aside to cool; stir 1½
tablespoonfuls butter to a cream and add by degrees the yolks of 8
eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and (by spoonfuls) the paste; when all
is well mixed add the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth;
butter a pudding dish, sprinkle with bread crumbs, fill in the
mixture, set the dish into a pan of hot water and bake 1 hour in a
medium hot oven; when done turn it onto a dish and serve with fruit
or nut sauce; care should be taken not to use too small a dish, as
the pudding raises very light; serve as soon as baked.

336. +Uncle Tom’s Pudding.+-- Mix 2 teaspoonfuls baking powder with 3
cups sifted flour and a little salt, add 1 cup molasses, 1 cup
finely chopped suet, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 teaspoonful ground
ginger, 1 teaspoonful cinnamon, ½ teaspoonful cloves, ½ grated
nutmeg, 1 cup buttermilk and 3 eggs; butter a pudding form, sprinkle
with bread crumbs, fill in the mixture and boil 2 hours; serve with
lemon or hard sauce.

337. +Plain German Flour Pudding.+-- Sift 4 cups flour, add ½
teaspoonful salt, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, the grated rind of 1
lemon, 1 cup seedless raisins, 1 yeast cake dissolved in ½ cup warm
milk, 2 tablespoonfuls melted butter, 1½ cups warm milk and 2 eggs;
mix all together into a stiff batter; butter a pudding form,
sprinkle with bread crumbs, fill in the mixture and set in a warm
place till it rises to double its height; then cover the form and
boil 2 hours; serve with roast meat and stewed fruit or with sauce.

338. +The Queen of Puddings (with Strawberries).+-- 1 cup sugar, 2
cups fine bread crumbs, 6 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls butter, the grated
rind of 1 lemon, 4 cups milk and 1 pint strawberries; soak the bread
crumbs in the milk for ½ hour; stir butter and sugar to a cream, add
by degrees the yolks of the eggs and next the bread crumbs (by
spoonfuls), stirring constantly; lastly add the whites of 3 eggs,
beaten to a stiff froth, and the lemon; fill this into a buttered
pudding dish, which should be a large one and but ⅔ full; bake until
done; draw to the front of oven, put a layer of fresh strawberries
over it, sprinkle with sugar and cover with a meringue made of the 3
remaining whites of eggs and 1 tablespoonful powdered sugar; put it
back in the oven and bake for a few minutes, until the meringue
begins to color; serve cold with cream or vanilla sauce. Any kind of
fruit may be used instead of strawberries, as may also jelly or
marmalade.

339. +Indian Pudding (boiled).+-- Bring 1 pint milk to a boil, stir
into it 1 cup yellow Indian meal and boil 5 minutes, stirring
constantly; then take it from the fire and mix with 1 cup molasses,
1 tablespoonful ground ginger, 1 cup chopped suet, ½ teaspoonful
salt and 2 eggs; when this is well blended together fill it into a
buttered pudding form and boil 3 hours; serve with the following
sauce:--Mix 2 teaspoonfuls cornstarch with a little cold water, add
1½ cups boiling water and boil a few minutes; then add ¼ teaspoonful
salt, 1 tablespoonful butter, the juice of 1 lemon, 1 cup sugar, 1
teaspoonful vanilla and some grated nutmeg.

340. +Economical Boiled Pudding.+-- 1 cup milk, 1 cup stoned raisins,
1 cup fine chopped suet, ½ cup molasses, ½ cup brown sugar, 3 cups
flour, 1½ teaspoonfuls baking powder, 1 teaspoonful grated nutmeg,
the same of cinnamon, ½ teaspoonful cloves. Mix all together and
boil in a form 2 hours; serve with lemon or vanilla sauce.

341. +Graham Flour Pudding (also called Imitation Plum Pudding).+--
Two large slices of bread, ½ cup milk, ¼ pound butter, 1 cup stoned
raisins, 1 cup currants, ½ cup finely sliced citron, 1 cup molasses,
1 cup graham flour, 1 cup sugar, 1 glass brandy and 1 teaspoonful
baking soda dissolved in a little hot water; mixed with the
molasses, 3 eggs, 1 teaspoonful allspice, ½ grated nutmeg and ½
teaspoonful salt; break the bread into small pieces and put it with
the milk into a bowl; stir butter and sugar to a cream; add the
eggs, one at a time, stirring a few minutes between each addition;
next add the spice; then, alternately, the bread, molasses and
flour; when this is well mixed dust the fruit with flour and stir it
into the mixture; butter a pudding form and dust with fine bread
crumbs; put in the mixture, close the form and set it in a kettle of
boiling water (only enough water to half cover the form should be
used); cover the kettle and boil 3 hours; serve with brandy or hard
sauce. Half of the above quantities will make a pudding sufficient
for a family of 6 persons.

342. +Madeira Pudding.+-- Pare the crust off a 6 cent loaf of bread;
cut the bread into slices and dip each slice in Madeira wine; mix 5
tablespoonfuls sugar with ¼ pound finely cut preserved orange peel,
a little nutmeg and cinnamon; have ready a well buttered pudding
form, which sprinkle with fine bread crumbs; first put in a layer of
bread and sprinkle over it some of the mixed sugar; then a layer of
currant jelly; continue in this fashion until all is used up; lay 1
tablespoonful butter in small pieces on top; beat up 6 eggs with 1
pint cream or milk and pour it into the form over the bread; close
the form and boil 1½ hours; serve with the following sauce:--Put 1
pint Madeira wine in a saucepan with 3 or 4 eggs, the peel of 1
lemon, a piece of cinnamon and ½ cup sugar; place over the fire and
stir with an egg beater until nearly boiling; instantly remove and
serve with the pudding. If the sauce is allowed to boil it will be
spoiled.

343. +Almond Pudding.+-- Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter to a cream, add
5 tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 6 eggs, 1 cup chopped almonds,
the grated rind and juice of 1 lemon, 2 cups fine bread crumbs and
lastly the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; butter a
pudding form, sprinkle with bread crumbs, cover tightly and boil 1½
hours; serve with wine or cream sauce.

344. +Boiled Bread Pudding.+-- Stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream
with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and add by degrees the yolks of 4 eggs,
the grated rind of ½ lemon, 2 cups bread crumbs, ½ cup milk, 2
ounces seedless raisins, the same quantity of well cleansed currants
and 2 tablespoonfuls finely chopped almonds; add lastly the beaten
whites of the eggs; butter a form, sprinkle with bread crumbs, fill
it with the mixture, put on the cover and boil 1½ hours; serve with
sherry wine or cream sauce.

345. +Zwieback Pudding, No. 1.+-- Butter a form and sprinkle with
bread crumbs; take ½ pound round zwieback, ¼ pound seedless raisins,
the same quantity of well cleansed currants and chopped almonds; put
a layer of zwieback into the form and sprinkle some of the fruit
over it; continue in this way until all is used; then beat up 6 eggs
with 6 tablespoonfuls sugar and add 2½ cups milk; pour this over the
zwieback in the form, cover tightly and let it stand 1 hour; then
boil 2 hours; serve with fruit, wine or hard sauce; sufficient for
10 persons.

346. +Cabinet Pudding.+-- Stir ½ cup butter with 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar to a cream and add by degrees the yolks of 8 eggs and the
grated rind and juice of 1 lemon; cut the crust off a 5 cent loaf of
bread, grate the white part and add it to the above mixture with 1½
cups milk, ¾ cup finely cut citron and the whites of the eggs beaten
to a stiff froth; in the meantime pour over ¼ pound vanilla wafers
and ½ pound macaroons, some Madeira or sherry wine and sprinkle with
finely sifted bread crumbs; put a layer of the bread mixture, an
inch in thickness, into the form and cover it with a layer of
macaroons and wafers; then bread again; continue in this way until
all is used, the last layer being the bread mixture; close the form
tightly and boil 2 hours; serve with wine cream or hard sauce;
sufficient for 12 persons.

347. +Lemon Pudding (baked).+-- Stir 1 cup butter to a cream and add
by degrees the yolks of 10 eggs, 2 whole eggs, the grated rind and
juice of 3 lemons, 1 cup finely chopped almonds, 1 cup sugar and
lastly the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; line a
pudding dish with rich pie crust, put in the mixture and bake 1
hour. Or take ¼ pound stale sponge cake, broken into small pieces,
the juice of 4 lemons and the grated rind of 2, 1½ cups sugar, 1
pint cream, a little salt and nutmeg, the yolks of 6 eggs and the
beaten whites of 3; put this into a pudding dish lined with pie
crust and bake ½ hour.

348. +Zwieback Pudding, No. 2.+-- Soak ½ pound zwieback in 1 pint
milk; stir ¼ pound butter with 3 tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream;
add by degrees the yolks of 6 eggs, ¼ teaspoonful cinnamon and 1 cup
finely chopped almonds; add lastly the zwieback and the whites of
the eggs beaten to a stiff froth; put the mixture into a well
buttered pudding form and boil 1 hour; serve with wine sauce.

349. +Pumpernickel Pudding.+-- Cut some stale pumpernickel into
slices and dry them in the oven; then lay on a board, roll fine and
sift them; take 1 cup pumpernickel crumbs, 4 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls
dripping or ½ cup finely chopped suet, 5 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1
teaspoonful cloves, the same quantity of cinnamon and the grated
rind and juice of 1 lemon; stir the yolks of eggs and sugar to a
cream; add by degrees the dripping, bread crumbs and other
ingredients; add lastly the beaten whites of the eggs; fill this
into a well buttered form and boil 1½ hours; serve with lemon or
brandy sauce; sufficient for a family of 6 persons. This pudding is
the equal of a fine plum pudding.

350. +Vienna Pudding.+-- Stir ¼ pound butter with 1 cup sugar to a
cream and add by degrees the yolks of 7 eggs, 2 whole eggs, the
grated rind of ½ lemon and the juice of 2; set this in a vessel of
boiling water and stir over the fire till it begins to thicken; then
remove it, stir until cold and add the whites of the eggs, beaten to
a stiff froth; butter a pudding form and sprinkle it with fine
zwieback crumbs; fill in the mixture, put on the cover, set the form
in a kettle of boiling water, cover closely and boil slowly for 1
hour; in serving turn the pudding onto a warm dish and send wine
cream or fruit sauce to table with it. This pudding should be served
immediately upon being turned out of the form.

351. +Chocolate Pudding.+-- Stir 2 ounces butter with 1 cup powdered
sugar to a cream, add by degrees the yolks of 9 eggs and stir for 20
minutes; then add 2 ounces finely chopped almonds, the grated rind
and juice of 1 lemon, ¼ pound grated chocolate and 6 ounces rye
bread which has been dried in the oven and rolled fine with a
rolling pin; add lastly a glass of Madeira wine or rum and the
whites of the 9 eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; put the mixture into
a well buttered form, boil 2 hours and serve with wine or punch
sauce.

352. +Apple Pudding (with Almonds).+-- Place a saucepan over the fire
with 1 tablespoonful butter; add 1 soup plate finely cut apples, 2
tablespoonfuls well cleansed currants, the same quantity of seedless
raisins and finely cut citron, ¼ pound finely chopped almonds, the
grated rind of ½ lemon or orange and ¾ cup sugar; stir this over the
fire until the apples begin to get soft, add ½ cup raspberry or
currant jelly and set aside to cool; beat up the yolks of 7 eggs,
add by degrees ¼ pound finely rolled zwieback, the apples and lastly
the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; fill this into a
well buttered pudding dish and bake ¾ hour in a medium hot oven;
when done turn the pudding onto a dish, dust with sugar and serve
without sauce; sufficient for 10 persons. It may also be served in
the dish in which it is baked.

353. +Nudel Pudding.+-- Prepare the nudels from the yolks of 2 eggs
and sufficient flour to make a stiff dough; roll it out thin and cut
into long strips about 1½ inches wide; lay 4 strips on top of one
another and cut them as fine as possible; then drop them into
boiling milk and boil 10 minutes; drain on a sieve, return the
nudels to the fire, add ½ tablespoonful butter, 3 macaroons pounded
fine, 1 tablespoonful currant or apple jelly and a glass of sherry
wine; shake this several times over the fire, spread the mixture on
buttered tins ¾ inch in thickness and set in a cool place; put 1
ounce finely chopped or pounded almonds in ½ pint milk, let it stand
½ hour, add 1 whole egg, the yolks of 6 and 3 tablespoonfuls sugar;
when well mixed strain through a sieve and cut the nudels with a
cake cutter into rounds; put them in rows over one another into a
form which has been well buttered and sprinkled with bread crumbs,
sprinkle some pounded macaroons between, pour the cream over it and
place the form in a vessel of hot water; set it on the stove to
simmer gently for 1 hour; when done carefully turn the pudding out
onto a dish and serve with almond, cream or fruit sauce. These
quantities are sufficient for a family of 8 persons.

354. +Potato Pudding.+-- Boil 8 large potatoes with their skins in
water until done; take from the water and set them for a few minutes
in the oven to dry; then set them in a cool place; when cold remove
the skins and grate the potatoes on a grater; use only that portion
which falls behind the grater; this should make 1 quart of grated
potatoes; stir ¼ pound butter with 1 cup sugar to a cream and add by
degrees the yolks of 8 eggs, the grated rind of 1 lemon, ¼ pound
blanched almonds well pounded and 2 tablespoonfuls dry farina; when
this is well mixed add the potatoes and lastly the whites of the
eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; butter a pudding dish, sprinkle well
with bread crumbs, put in the mixture and cover tightly; set the
form into a vessel of boiling water (use only enough water to half
cover the form), cover the vessel closely and boil slowly for 2
hours; when done take the form from the water and set it for a few
minutes in the oven; then carefully turn the pudding onto a round
plate and serve with the following sauce:--Stir 2 tablespoonfuls
butter with 1 cup powdered sugar to a cream and add the yolks of 2
eggs and 1 cup fresh strawberries (either stir them into the sauce
whole or mash them). Fresh cherries freed of their pits or preserved
cherries may be used in place of strawberries. The pudding may also
be served with either wine, lemon or fruit sauce; it should be
served as soon as taken from the form.




BREAD AND APPLE PUDDINGS.


355. +Plain Bread Pudding, No. 1.+-- Lay 3 slices of a 5-cent loaf of
bread (minus the crust) in a pudding dish and pour over them 1 quart
cold milk; set the dish on the side of stove to heat gradually; when
hot stir 2 eggs with 2½ tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream and add a
little cold milk or water and 1 teaspoonful essence of lemon; stir
this into the bread and milk; put ½ tablespoonful butter in small
bits on top, grate over some nutmeg, bake in oven from 20 to 30
minutes and serve hot or cold without sauce.

356. +Plain Bread Pudding (baked), No. 2.+-- Put 3 slices of bread
(minus the crust) into a pudding dish and pour over them 1 quart
boiling milk; cover the dish and let it stand until cold; then beat
up the bread with a fork; stir 3 eggs with 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar to a cream and mix it with the bread; flavor with lemon; put a
few small pieces of butter with a little grated nutmeg on top and
bake in the oven till thick; serve with lemon or nutmeg sauce. ¼
pound raisins or currants may be added if liked.

357. +Bird’s Nest Pudding.+-- Peel 6 good sized greening apples,
remove the cores with an apple corer without breaking the fruit, put
them in a long, shallow tin pan, pour over 2 cups boiling water,
cover with a pan of same size and let them boil on top of stove for
5 minutes; then drain off all the water and put 1 teaspoonful apple
or currant jelly into each apple. For batter take 1 cup flour, 1½
teaspoonfuls baking powder, 1 cup milk, 2 eggs, ¼ teaspoonful salt,
1 tablespoonful lard, butter or clarified dripping and 2
teaspoonfuls sugar; sift flour, powder, sugar and salt into a bowl;
put in the butter or lard and chop it fine in the flour; make a
hollow in center and put in the yolks of the 2 eggs; then add the
milk gradually and mix the whole into a smooth batter; add lastly
the whites of the eggs beaten to a stiff froth; pour the batter over
the apples and bake ½ hour in a medium hot oven; serve as soon as
done and send the following sauce to table with it:--Stir 1
tablespoonful butter with 4 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a white
cream and add the yolk of 1 egg, 1 tablespoonful rum or brandy and a
little nutmeg; lastly stir in the white of the egg, beaten to a
stiff froth; in serving give to each individual an apple on a small
plate and a large spoonful of sauce on each apple; sufficient for a
family of 6. This pudding has the advantages of being healthy and
excellent, while not being expensive.

358. +Bread Pudding (boiled).+-- Soak ¾ pound stale bread (minus the
crust) in water; when soft press it out either in a napkin or with
the hands; melt 2 tablespoonfuls butter or clarified dripping in a
saucepan, add the bread and stir over the fire till it has formed
into a compact mass and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan;
transfer the bread to a dish; stir the yolks of 6 eggs with 4
tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream and add them by degrees to the
bread; add 2 cups well cleansed currants, ½ cup finely chopped
almonds, the grated rind and juice of ½ lemon, a little nutmeg and ½
teaspoonful cinnamon; add lastly the whites of 6 eggs, beaten to a
stiff froth; butter a pudding form and sprinkle with bread crumbs;
fill in the mixture, put on the cover, place the form in a vessel of
boiling water, cover closely and boil 2 hours; serve with lemon,
fruit or hard sauce.

359. +Bread Fruit Pudding.+-- Pare off the crust from a 5-cent loaf
of bread and cut the loaf into thin slices; spread the slices on
both sides with any kind of fruit marmalade; butter a pudding form,
sprinkle with bread crumbs and lay in the bread; stir 8 eggs with ½
cup sugar and the grated rind of 1 lemon until they foam; add by
degrees 1 pint hot milk, stirring constantly; pour this over the
bread, cover the form tightly and boil 1½ hours; serve with wine
cream sauce.

360. +Bread Sponge Pudding.+-- Boil 1 cup milk with 1 tablespoonful
butter; stir in while boiling 1 cup sifted flour and keep stirring
until it has formed into a smooth paste and loosens itself from
bottom of saucepan; transfer the paste to a dish; stir 1
tablespoonful butter to a cream and add, alternately, the yolks of 5
eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, the paste, ¼ pound well cleansed
currants, a little nutmeg and grated lemon peel; pour ½ cup rum over
1 cup fine bread crumbs and add them to the above mixture with the
beaten whites of the 5 eggs; butter a pudding form, sprinkle with
bread crumbs, fill in the mixture and boil in a tightly covered
vessel of water for 2 hours; serve with wine cream, fruit or hard
sauce; sufficient for 8 persons.

361. +Hanoverian Pudding.+-- Pare and quarter 6 large pippin or
greening apples and cut them into fine slices; put them in a
saucepan with 1 tablespoonful butter, ½ cup sugar, 1 tablespoonful
well cleansed currants, 1 tablespoonful seedless raisins, 2
tablespoonfuls finely cut citron and the grated rind and juice of ½
lemon; stir this over the fire till the apples begin to get soft;
add ½ cup raspberry or currant jelly and set aside to cool; soak ¼
pound bread (minus the crust) in water and press it out in a napkin;
then place it in a saucepan with 1 tablespoonful butter and stir
over the fire until the bread loosens itself from bottom of
saucepan; stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream and add,
alternately, the yolks of 5 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and the
bread (by spoonfuls); add lastly the beaten whites of the eggs; next
butter a pudding dish and sprinkle with bread crumbs; put in a layer
of bread mixture and over it a layer of apples; continue in this way
until all is used; bake 40 minutes; serve with or without sauce.

362. +Huckleberry Pudding (German style).+-- Soak a 5-cent loaf of
bread (minus the crust) in milk till soft; press it out, put in a
saucepan with 1 tablespoonful butter and stir over the fire to a
smooth paste; transfer it to a dish and set aside to cool; stir 1
tablespoonful butter to a cream and add (alternately) the yolks of 8
eggs, 5 tablespoonfuls sugar and the bread (by spoonfuls); when this
is well mixed add 1 pint huckleberries and lastly the whites of the
eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; fill this into a well buttered and
floured pudding form, cover closely and boil in a kettle of water 2
hours; serve with hard or wine sauce. This pudding may be made of
peaches, apples, cherries or blackberries; sufficient for 12
persons. For a small family ½ the above quantities will suffice.

363. +Rye Bread Pudding.+-- Stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream
and add by degrees ½ cup sugar and the yolks of 6 eggs; stir this
for ½ hour; then add ¼ pound finely pounded almonds, ½ teaspoonful
cloves, 1 teaspoonful cinnamon, a little cardamon and nutmeg and ¼
pound rye bread which has previously been cut into slices, dried in
the oven and rolled fine with a rolling pin; add lastly the grated
rind of 1 lemon, a small glass of Cognac or rum and the whites of
the 6 eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; butter a pudding form, sprinkle
with bread crumbs, fill in the mixture and cover and set the form in
a kettle of boiling water; the form should only be immersed in water
half way; boil 1½ hours, keeping the kettle closely covered; serve
with brandy, wine or hard sauce.

364. +Apple Pudding (German art).+-- Pare, core and cut into quarters
6 good sized tart apples, put them in a stewpan with a little water
and boil till half done; then carefully remove the apples to a
pudding dish, pour 3 tablespoonfuls raspberry syrup or jelly over
them and set aside to cool; place a saucepan over the fire with 1
pint milk and ½ tablespoonful butter; as soon as it boils put in 1
cup sifted flour and stir until the mixture forms into a smooth
paste and loosens itself from the bottom of saucepan; transfer it to
a dish; stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream and add alternately
the yolks of 5 eggs, 5 tablespoonfuls sugar and the paste,
a spoonful at a time; when this is well blended together add the
grated rind of 1 lemon, ½ cup finely chopped almonds and lastly the
beaten whites of 5 eggs; pour this mixture over the apples and bake
in a medium hot oven for ¾ hour; it may be served with wine, fruit
or hard sauce or may be dusted with sugar and served without a
sauce. NOTE.--When peaches, cherries, plums or berries are used they
need not be cooked before baking.

365. +English Apple Pudding.+-- Butter a deep pudding dish and
sprinkle with bread crumbs; line the sides of dish with a rich pie
crust and put a narrow strip around the bottom so as to leave the
center of bottom uncovered; next fill the dish with finely cut
apples with some sugar sprinkled between them; add a very little
nutmeg, a pinch of cinnamon and a little butter in small pieces;
cover with the same crust and bake 1 hour; when done turn the
pudding out onto a dish and serve with hard sauce. (See Sauce.)

366. +Apple Pudding (boiled).+-- 1 cup finely chopped suet, 3 cups
flour, 1 cup milk, 3 eggs, ½ cup sugar, 3 cups finely cut apples, ½
teaspoonful salt, a little grated lemon peel and 2 teaspoonfuls
baking powder; sift flour, salt and powder into a bowl and add
grated lemon peel and suet; next add the yolks of the eggs and mix
the whole with the milk to a stiff batter; then add the beaten
whites of the eggs; dust the apples with flour and stir them into
batter; butter a pudding form, sprinkle with bread crumbs, fill in
the mixture, cover tightly and boil 2 hours; serve with hard sauce.
NOTE.--The apples and dough may be put in layers in the form,
putting first a layer of dough, then a layer of apples, then dough,
and so on. This pudding may also be made of apricots, peaches, figs,
plums or currants, citron or raisins.

367. +Apple Bread Pudding (German art).+-- Pare and cut into slices 8
large tart apples; soak a 5 cent loaf of bread in cold water; when
soft press it out and put in a saucepan over the fire with 2
tablespoonfuls butter; stir for 5 minutes and transfer it to a dish
to cool; stir 4 tablespoonfuls sugar with the yolks of 4 eggs to a
cream and add the bread, the sliced apples and lastly the whites of
the eggs beaten to a stiff froth; butter a pudding form, sprinkle
with bread crumbs, fill in the bread mixture, boil 2 hours and serve
with hard sauce.

368. +Bread Pudding (with Apples).+-- Cut 3 slices of bread, ½ inch
in thickness, from a 9 cent loaf of bread and soak them in cold
water for 10 minutes; press out and put them over the fire in a
saucepan with 1 tablespoonful butter; stir for 5 minutes, or until
it has formed into a compact mass; transfer it to a dish; when cold
stir the yolks of 3 eggs with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream and
add the bread; then add 2 cups finely chopped apples, 2
tablespoonfuls fine bread crumbs and lastly the beaten whites of the
eggs; butter a form, sprinkle with bread crumbs, fill in the bread
mixture, close tightly and boil for 2 hours; serve with hard, fruit
or wine sauce.

369. +Apple Rice Pudding (German art).+-- Place a saucepan with ½
pound rice covered with cold water over the fire and boil 5 minutes;
drain in colander, rinse off with cold water and return rice to
saucepan; add 1 quart milk, ½ teaspoonful salt and boil till tender;
pare and cut into slices 6 large tart apples and stew them in 2
tablespoonfuls butter till nearly done; put them into a pudding
form; when rice is cold mix it with ¼ pound sugar, the yolks of 6
eggs and lastly the beaten whites of the eggs; pour it over the
apples, bake in the oven and serve with the following sauce:--Put
the apple peels and cores in a saucepan, cover with water and boil
till tender; strain through a jelly bag, return the liquor to
saucepan, add the juice of 1 lemon and boil 5 minutes; add 1 cup
sugar and let it boil 5 minutes; serve with the pudding.

370. +Apple Pudding à l’allemande.+-- Pare and core 6 medium sized
greening apples, put them in a long, shallow tin pan, add 2 cups
boiling water, cover with another pan of same size and boil 5
minutes; drain off the water and put them into a pudding dish of a
size large enough to admit of the apples standing side by side.
Prepare the pudding batter as follows:--Put 1 cup milk in a saucepan
over the fire, add 1 tablespoonful butter and when it boils add 1
cup sifted flour, stirring constantly; continue the stirring until
the mixture has formed into a smooth paste and loosens itself; then
take it off the fire and let cool; in the meantime stir 1
tablespoonful butter to a cream and add 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and
the yolks of 4 eggs, adding 1 yolk and 1 spoonful sugar at a time,
stirring well; then add a little of the paste and continue in this
way until all the paste, yolks and sugar are well mixed; add lastly
the whites of the 4 eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; put 1 teaspoonful
currant jelly into each apple, pour the batter over the apples and
bake ¾ hour; serve with hard sauce.

371. +Old-Fashioned Apple Pudding.+-- ½ pound finely chopped suet, 1
pound flour, 1 teaspoonful salt and 1 cup cold water; sift flour and
salt into a bowl, add the suet and mix the whole with the water into
a stiff paste; roll it out on a floured board ¼ inch in thickness,
put in the center ½ dozen finely cut tart apples, sprinkle 1
tablespoonful sugar and a little flour between them and add a pinch
of nutmeg and 1 teaspoonful butter in small pieces; dip a large
napkin in hot water, ring out and dust it with flour; cover the
apples with the paste, lay the pudding in center of cloth, fold the
cloth together and tie it tightly; have a large kettle of water with
½ tablespoonful salt over the fire; as soon as it boils put in the
pudding, cover the kettle and boil 2 hours; serve with hard, brandy
or cherry wine sauce and if liquor is objected to serve with nutmeg
sauce. The pudding should be served as soon as taken from the water.
For a small family half these quantities will be sufficient.

372. +Roly-Poly.+-- 1 cup finely chopped suet, 2 cups prepared flour,
1 egg and ¾ cup water; mix this into a stiff dough, roll out ⅛ of an
inch in thickness, brush it over with beaten egg and sprinkle over 1
tablespoonful bread crumbs; put on a layer of finely cut apples,
sprinkle over 1 spoonful sugar, roll the dough up like a music
sheet, brush the outside all over with beaten eggs and sprinkle with
fine bread crumbs; dip a napkin into hot water, wring out dry and
dust the inside with flour; put the pudding in center of cloth, fold
the napkin around it, lap the ends over and fasten with a pin; tie a
string around it, drop into slightly salted boiling water and boil
for 2 hours; serve with the following sauce:--Mix 1 tablespoonful
cornstarch with ½ cup cold water and add 1 cup boiling water and 2
tablespoonfuls butter; boil 5 minutes, strain through a sieve, add 1
cup sugar, a little lemon juice and 1 cup sherry wine; or serve with
hard sauce.

373. +Roly-Poly Tutti Frutti.+-- Prepare a dough the same as in
foregoing recipe; roll out ⅛ of an inch thick, brush over with
beaten egg and sprinkle 1 tablespoonful bread or cracker crumbs over
it; pare, core and slice ½ dozen tart apples and put them with 1½
tablespoonfuls butter and 3 tablespoonfuls sugar in a saucepan; add
½ cup currants, the same quantity seedless raisins and finely cut
citron; cover saucepan and stew over the fire till apples begin to
soften; pour them into a dish and when cold spread the apples over
the dough; lay 2 tablespoonfuls currant or apple jelly in small
pieces all over the apples; then finish the same as Roly-Poly; serve
with the following sauce:--Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter with 1 cup
powdered sugar to a cream and add by degrees 2 whole eggs, a little
nutmeg and 4 tablespoonfuls Jamaica rum or brandy; or serve with
lemon or nutmeg sauce.




SOUFLÉS, PANCAKES, OMELETS AND FRITTERS.


374. +Plain Souflé.+-- Boil 1½ cups milk with ½ tablespoonful butter
and add, stirring constantly, 1½ cups sifted flour; stir till it has
formed into a smooth paste and loosens itself from bottom of
saucepan; transfer the paste to a dish and set aside to cool; stir 1
tablespoonful butter to a cream and add alternately the yolks of 6
eggs, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, the grated rind of 1 lemon, the paste
and lastly the beaten whites of the eggs; butter a pudding dish,
sprinkle with bread crumbs and fill it ½ full of fruit--either
peaches, pears pared and cut into quarters, cherries without the
pits, currants, raspberries or finely cut apples; blackberries or
huckleberries may also be used; sprinkle some zwieback crumbs
between the fruit, add sufficient sugar to sweeten, pour over the
souflée mixture and bake 1 hour. All kinds of stewed or preserved
fruits may be used the same way; serve with claret or fruit sauce.

375. +Almond Souflé.+-- Boil 1 cup milk with ½ tablespoonful butter;
mix 1 cup rice flour with 1 cup cold milk; stir it into the boiling
milk; continue boiling, stirring constantly, until it has formed
into a smooth paste and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan;
remove the paste from fire, mix it with the yolks of 2 eggs and set
aside to cool; stir ½ tablespoonful butter to a cream and add,
alternately, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 6 eggs and the
paste; add first 1 spoonful sugar to the butter, then 1 yolk, then a
small spoonful paste; stir each part well before another is added;
the stirring is best done with a potato masher; when these
ingredients are well mixed add by degrees ½ cup finely chopped or
grated almonds; add lastly the beaten whites of 6 eggs and fill the
mixture into a white porcelain pudding dish which has been well
buttered and sprinkled with bread crumbs; bake in a medium hot oven
for 40 minutes; when done take the souflée from the oven, dust with
powdered sugar, set the dish either in an ornamented silver dish or
fold a napkin around it and serve at once with raspberry sauce.
NOTE.--Plain flour may be substituted for rice flour; this is
sufficient for 10 persons.

376. +Lemon Souflé.+-- Boil 1 cup milk or cream with ½ tablespoonful
butter; mix 1 cup sifted flour with 1 cup cold milk and stir it into
the boiling milk; continue stirring until the contents have formed
into a smooth paste and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan;
transfer it to a dish and set aside; when cold stir ½ tablespoonful
butter to a cream and add, alternately, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, the
yolks of 8 eggs and the paste (by spoonfuls); stir each part well
before another is added; then add the grated rind and juice of 1
lemon and lastly the whites of 6 eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; fill
the mixture into a well buttered form and bake in a moderately hot
oven from 30 to 40 minutes, when done serve at once with wine cream
sauce and sprinkle the souflée with powdered sugar.

377. +Vanilla Souflé+ is made the same as Almond or Lemon Souflée,
omitting the almonds or lemon and adding 2 tablespoonfuls vanilla
extract. Extract of lemon may be used the same way.

378. +Orange Souflé+ is made the same as lemon, using in place of
lemon the juice of 2 oranges and the grated rind of 1. Soufflées may
be put into a well buttered form, set in a vessel of hot water and
either boiled or baked in the oven.

379. +Chocolate Souflé.+-- Boil 4 tablespoonfuls grated chocolate in
1 cup milk; mix 3 tablespoonfuls cornstarch with 1 cup cold milk,
stir it into the boiling chocolate, add 1 teaspoonful butter and
continue stirring until the contents loosen themselves from bottom
of saucepan; transfer the paste to a dish and set aside; when nearly
cold stir ½ tablespoonful butter to a cream and add alternately 6
tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 8 eggs and the chocolate paste
(by spoonfuls); add lastly the beaten whites of 6 eggs and finish
the same as Lemon Souflée; serve with vanilla sauce.

380. +Macaroon Souflé.+-- Put into a buttered pudding dish a layer of
macaroons and small sponge cakes; over this a layer of cherries from
which the pits have been removed; then again a layer of macaroons
and sponge cake; continue in this way until the form is filled; whip
the yolks of 6 eggs with 1 bottle Rhine wine and 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar over the fire to a cream, but do not allow it to come to a
boil; pour this over the cake and fruit, set the dish in a vessel of
hot water and bake ½ hour; when done draw the souflée to the front
of oven; beat the whites of the 6 eggs with 4 tablespoonfuls currant
juice or jelly to a stiff froth, spread it over the souflée, set it
back in the oven and bake a few minutes; serve without sauce.

381. +Apple Souflé, No. 1.+-- Pare and core 6 greening or pippin
apples, set in a pan, add 1 quart hot water, cover with another pan
of same size and let them steam on top of stove for 5 minutes;
carefully remove the apples to a pudding dish and set aside to cool;
boil 1 cup milk with a little salt and 1 tablespoonful butter and
stir in gradually 1 cup sifted flour; continue stirring until the
contents have formed into a smooth paste; transfer the paste to a
dish and set aside to cool; stir the yolks of 4 eggs with 4
tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream, add by degrees the paste and when
well mixed together add the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff
froth; put a little jelly or marmalade into each apple, pour the
mixture over them and bake 1 hour; serve with wine or hard sauce.

382. +Apple Souflé; No. 2.+-- Pare 8 or 10 greening or pippin apples,
cut into fine slices and put them in a saucepan with 1 tablespoonful
butter, ½ cup sugar, 3 tablespoonfuls finely cut citron and the same
quantity of seedless raisins and currants; stew this over the fire
till apples are tender, but not broken; add 2 tablespoonfuls apple
or quince jelly and set aside to cool; if jelly is not handy any
kind of marmalade will do; boil 1½ cups milk with ½ tablespoonful
butter and stir in 1 cup sifted flour; stir over the fire to a
smooth paste; remove from fire and when cold stir 1½ tablespoonfuls
butter to a cream and add, alternately, the yolks of 6 eggs, 4
tablespoonfuls sugar, the paste (by spoonfuls) and lastly the whites
of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; next butter a pudding dish and
put in a layer of bread crumbs ⅛ of an inch in thickness; then a
layer of apples and little bits of butter; again bread crumbs, again
a layer of apples; pour over the top the souflée mixture and bake 1
hour; serve without sauce in the same dish in which the souflée is
baked.

383. +Apple Souflé, No. 3.+-- Strain 1 quart apple sauce through a
sieve, sweeten to taste and add the juice and grated rind of 1
lemon, the yolks of 5 eggs and lastly the whites of the eggs, beaten
to a stiff froth; put this into a buttered pudding dish and bake
till it cracks on top; sprinkle with sugar and serve without sauce.

384. +Apple Souflé, No. 4.+-- Pare, core and quarter 6 apples, cut
each quarter into fine slices and put them into a saucepan with 1
tablespoonful butter, ½ cup sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls seedless raisins
and the same quantity of currants and finely cut citron; cover and
stew till apples are tender, but not broken; add 2 tablespoonfuls
quince or apple jelly and set aside; when cold butter a pudding dish
and sprinkle with bread crumbs; have a souflée mixture prepared the
same as in foregoing recipe; put first a layer of the souflée
mixture in the dish and sprinkle over some zwieback crumbs; then a
layer of the apples; continue in this way with apples and souflée
mixture till dish is full; bake 1 hour; when done turn the souflée
onto a round dish and serve with fruit or wine sauce; or without
sauce and dust with sugar.

385. +Pineapple Souflé.+-- Prepare a souflé mixture the same as for
Plain Souflée; butter a pudding dish and sprinkle with bread crumbs;
put in a layer of the souflée mixture and sprinkle over 1 spoonful
zwieback crumbs; put over this a layer of stewed or preserved
pineapples cut into small dice, sprinkle over a little zwieback
crumbs and cover with souflée mixture; put in another layer of
pineapple and a little zwieback crumbs; put the remaining souflée
mixture on top and bake 1 hour; when done turn the souflée onto a
dish and send raspberry or wine sauce to table with it.

386. +Rhubarb Souflé.+-- Pare and cut the rhubarb finely and put it
in a saucepan over the fire to boil; add a little water and
sufficient sugar to sweeten; when done press it through a sieve;
take 1 quart of this stewed rhubarb and mix it with the yolks of 5
eggs and lastly the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth;
bake in buttered dish till it cracks open on top, which will take
about ¾ hour; serve without sauce.

387. +Cherry Souflé+ is made the same as Pineapple Souflé. Remove
the pits from 1 or 2 pounds cherries, sprinkle with sugar and let
them stand 1 hour; then put them in alternate layers with the
souflée mixture into a well buttered dish and finish the same as
Pineapple Souflée; serve with cherry sauce. Peach, apricot and
blackberry souflées are made the same way.

388. +Gooseberry Souflé.+-- Stew the berries with a little white
wine, sweeten to taste and finish the same as Rhubarb Souflée.

389. +Raspberry Souflé.+-- Press 1 quart raspberries with 1 handful
red currants through a sieve, sweeten to taste and mix with the
yolks of 6 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls cream, 3 tablespoonfuls zwieback
crumbs and the beaten whites of the eggs; bake ½ hour.

390. +Cherry Omelets.+-- Remove the pits from 1 pound cherries, put
them with ½ cup sugar and a little water over the fire and stew till
done; transfer them to a dish and set aside to cool; mix 2
tablespoonfuls prepared flour with 1 cup milk, the yolks of 6 eggs
and lastly the 6 whites beaten to a stiff froth; pour half of this
into a hot pan with butter and fry a light brown on the underside;
then slip the omelet onto a plate and set it for a few minutes in
the hot oven; then take out, put 2 or 3 tablespoonfuls stewed
cherries over it, double up and return to the oven until the second
one is finished; sprinkle over some sugar and serve with stewed
cherries.

391. +Fruit Pancakes.+-- Mix 1½ cups sifted flour with ½ teaspoonful
baking powder and add ½ teaspoonful salt, the yolks of 3 eggs and 1½
cups milk or water; when this is well mixed stir in the whites of
the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; bake from this mixture 4 large,
thin pancakes; wash some ripe strawberries, sweeten with sugar and
mash them all up with a silver spoon; put a layer of the mashed
fruit over each pancake, lay them on top of one another, dust with
powdered sugar and serve.

392. +Huckleberry Pancakes.+-- Prepare a batter the same as for Apple
Pancakes; put a pan with 1 tablespoonful lard over the fire; when
hot pour in some of the batter, about ¼ inch in thickness, and let
it bake for a few minutes; then put on a thick layer of
huckleberries and sprinkle over 2 tablespoonfuls zwieback crumbs;
when done on the underside slip the cake onto a large plate; lay a
piece of butter and lard on top of the berries, put over the
fryingpan and turn the cake back onto the pan; cover and fry slowly
about 6 or 8 minutes; then upset the fryingpan upon a hot dish and
sprinkle with sugar; set a plate with the cake over a saucepan of
hot water until all are baked in the same manner; lay the cakes on
top of one another, dust the whole with sugar and serve. NOTE.--The
huckleberries may be stewed with a little lemon juice and sugar and
thickened either with zwieback crumbs or cornstarch; a glass of port
wine added to it will make a great improvement. They may then be
served either separately or put between the cakes. Pancakes with
stewed plums or cherries, or any kind of stewed fruit, are very
nice.

393. +Strawberry Pancakes.+-- Wash 1 quart strawberries and drain
them in colander; then prepare 4 large pancakes the same as for
Cherry Pancakes; as soon as one is done lay the cake on a plate,
cover it with strawberries and sprinkle over some sugar; set the
plate over a saucepan of hot water and continue baking until they
are all done; lay them over one another with strawberries between
and dust the top with fine sugar. Blackberries are treated the same
way. Or cover the surface of each pancake with strawberries and
sugar, roll each one up separately like a music roll, dust them over
with sugar and serve hot.

394. +Cherry Pancakes.+-- Remove the pits from 1 pound red cherries;
put 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water over the fire and boil a few
minutes; put in the cherries and boil 3 minutes; remove from fire
and set aside to cool; prepare 4 large pancakes as follows:--Take 2
cups flour, 1 teaspoonful salt, 6 eggs and 1 pint milk; sift flour
and salt together, add the milk, the well beaten yolks of the eggs
and mix it into a thin batter; beat the batter for 5 minutes with a
wooden spoon or German quill; beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff
froth and stir them lightly through the mixture; bake 4 large
pancakes from this, lay them on one another, with a layer of the
stewed cherries between, dust the top with powdered sugar and serve
hot. Or spread over the surface of each pancake a layer of cherries,
roll each one up separately, arrange the rolls neatly on a long dish
and dust over with powdered sugar; serve while hot. This is a nice
dish for dessert.

395. +Pancakes (with Currants and Raspberries).+-- Strip ½ pound
currants of their stems, pick over an equal portion of raspberries,
put them in a colander and rinse with cold water; put them in a dish
with 1½ cups sugar and let them stand for several hours; bake 3 or 4
medium sized pancakes the same as Cherry Pancake, lay them over one
another, with a layer of the sugared fruit between, dust with sugar
and serve hot.

396. +Plain German Pancakes.+-- 3 cups sifted flour, 2½ cups water,
3 eggs, yolks and whites beaten separately, and 1 teaspoonful salt;
put the sifted flour into a bowl, add the salt, make a hollow in the
center, add the yolks and mix it gradually with the water into a
smooth batter; beat it with a wooden spoon for 5 minutes; then add
the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; put a large
fryingpan with ½ tablespoonful lard and butter over the fire; when
hot pour in some of the mixture, sufficient to cover the bottom of
pan, about ⅛ of an inch in thickness, shake the pan to and fro and
bake till light brown on the underside; slip the pancake onto a
large plate, put a little butter and lard in center, put over the
fryingpan, turn the pancake back into the pan and bake a light
brown; slip the cake onto a hot plate and serve either with syrup,
sugar or jelly; continue the baking until all the batter is used.

397. +Lemon Pancakes.+-- Bake pancakes the same as in foregoing
recipe and when done squeeze over each one some lemon juice, dust
with sugar and lay them over one another; stir 1 tablespoonful
butter with 3 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a cream, set it in a
saucepan of hot water and stir till thin; cut the pancakes into
pieces, pour some of the sauce over each piece and serve hot.

398. +Peach Pancakes.+-- Pare and cut some ripe peaches into fine
slices, sprinkle them with sugar and set in a cool place for 1 hour;
bake the pancakes the same as in foregoing recipe and lay the
peaches between.

399. +Apple Pancakes.+-- Mix 2 cups sifted flour with 2 cups water, ½
teaspoonful salt and the yolks of 3 eggs; when these are well mixed
together add the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; place
a fryingpan with 1 tablespoonful lard over the fire; when hot pour
in some of the mixture, about ¼ inch in thickness, put over this a
thick layer of very finely cut apples, slip a knife underneath the
pancake to keep it from burning and shake the pan too and fro; when
the underside is a light brown slip the pancake onto a plate; put a
piece of butter and lard on top of the apples, lay the fryingpan
over it and turn the pancake over into the pan; cover the pan and
let it fry slowly until apples are soft; slip the pancake onto a hot
plate and set it over a saucepan of hot water until the remaining
mixture is baked the same way. These ingredients will make from 3 to
4 cakes, according to the size of pan. They can be served separately
or piled on top of one another. Sprinkle some sugar over each
pancake.

400. +Apple Fritters.+-- 1 pint flour sifted with 1 teaspoonful
baking powder, 3 eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, ½ tablespoonful
butter, ½ cup milk and 2 cups finely chopped apples; stir butter and
sugar to a cream and add the yolks of 3 eggs; then flour and milk,
next the chopped apples and lastly the whites of the eggs, beaten to
a stiff froth; cut with a spoon a portion from this mixture the size
of a large walnut, drop into boiling fat and fry till done; serve
dusted with sugar and send wine or snow sauce to table with it. The
above recipe will make 20 fritters. If plain flour is used mix it
with 1½ teaspoonfuls baking powder and ½ teaspoonful salt.

401. +Cherry Fritters.+-- Remove the pits from 1 pint nice, ripe
cherries, mix them with the same ingredients as Apple Fritters, fry
in boiling lard, dust with powdered sugar and serve with cherry or
wine sauce.

402. +Orange Fritters.+-- Pare and quarter 6 oranges and remove the
white skin and pits; mix the orange pieces with the same ingredients
as Apple Fritters, drop the mixture, by spoonfuls, into boiling lard
and fry a light brown. See that each fritter has 3 pieces of orange
and serve with following sauce:--Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter with 6
tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a cream and add the yolks of 2 eggs
and ½ cup finely cut orange pieces; set the sauce in a saucepan of
boiling water and stir till it is melted; then serve. Care should be
taken to choose oranges that are not bitter.

403. +Rice Fritters.+-- Put 1 cup rice in a saucepan, add cold water
and boil 5 minutes; drain in colander and rinse with cold water;
return rice to saucepan and add 1 pint milk, ½ teaspoonful salt and
½ tablespoonful butter; boil until rice is thick and soft; transfer
it to a dish and when cold mix with 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, the
yolks of 4 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls prepared flour and lastly the
whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; drop this with a
tablespoon like small dumplings into boiling lard and fry till done;
pile them on a dish, dust over with sugar and serve with snow sauce
flavored with wine and a little vanilla.

404. +Cocoanut Fritters.+-- Make a batter the same as for Apple
Fritters, stir 1 large cup freshly grated cocoanut into it and
finish the same as Apple Fritters. Serve with the following
sauce:--Boil 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water till it forms a thread
between 2 fingers; remove from fire; beat the whites of 2 eggs to a
stiff froth; add the boiling hot sugar syrup slowly, beating
constantly with an egg beater; then stir in 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls
cocoanut.

405. +Currant Fritters.+-- 2 cups flour sifted with 1 teaspoonful
baking powder, ½ tablespoonful dripping or butter, 2 tablespoonfuls
sugar, the grated rind of ½ lemon, ½ cup milk, 2 eggs and ½ cup
well washed and dried currants; stir dripping and sugar to a cream
and add the yolks of 2 eggs; then the sifted flour and milk; the
lemon and currants next; add lastly the whites of the eggs, beaten
to a stiff froth; cut with a spoon small portions, the size of a
walnut, from the mixture, drop them into boiling lard or dripping
and fry a light brown and well done; dust them with sugar and serve
with a syrup made as follows:--Boil 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water
till it begins to turn yellow; then remove from fire, add a little
boiling water, stir for a few minutes and serve. These quantities
make 20 fritters.

406. +Walnut Fritters.+-- Break the nuts into small pieces and stir 2
cupfuls into a batter made the same as for Apple Fritters. Or bake
the fritters plain, prepare a hard sauce, stir some nuts into it and
serve with the fritters. Walnut fritters may be served with wine,
hard or fruit sauce, or they may be served dusted with sugar without
a sauce.

407. +Omelette Souflé à la vanille.+-- Stir the yolks of 9 eggs with
3 tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream; add a little salt, 1 teaspoonful
vanilla extract and 6 macaroons pounded fine; add lastly the whites
of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; place an omelet or large
fryingpan with butter over the fire; when hot put in ⅓ the egg
mixture, shake the pan a little to and fro and bake the omelet to a
delicate brown; have ready a buttered dish, turn the omelet into it,
with the brown side up, set in the oven and bake another omelet the
same way; lay the omelet on top of the one in dish, with brown side
up; then bake the third one; lay it on top of the two and bake the
whole 10 to 15 minutes; draw them to the front of oven, sprinkle
with sugar and hold a red hot shovel over, to brown the sugar; then
remove from oven and serve at once. Omelet souflées should be eaten
as soon as done.

408. +Omelette Souflé Confitures.+-- Prepare 3 or 4 omelets the same
as in foregoing recipe, spread over each omelet some peach marmalade
or fruit jelly, pour over them when done some warm fruit jelly and
serve.

409. +Omelette Souflé (with Chocolate).+-- Prepare the omelets the
same as in foregoing recipe and sprinkle over each one a
tablespoonful grated chocolate.

410. +Omelette Souflé (with Cocoanut).+-- Prepare 3 or 4 omelets the
same as in foregoing recipe, lay them in a buttered dish on top of
one another with thick layers of cocoanut between and bake 10
minutes; dust the souflée with sugar and serve at once.

411. +Rum Or Maraschino Souflé.+-- Melt 2 ounces butter in a
saucepan, add 2 tablespoonfuls flour and stir for a few minutes; add
1 cup boiling milk and stir till it forms into a smooth paste;
remove it from the fire and set aside; when cold stir 2
tablespoonfuls sugar with the yolks of 6 eggs to a cream and add by
degrees the paste and 4 tablespoonfuls rum or maraschino; add lastly
the beaten whites of the eggs and bake in a well buttered and
floured dish ½ hour; serve as soon as baked with lemon cream or wine
cream sauce.

412. +Vienna Souflé.+-- Place a saucepan with ¾ cup milk, 1
tablespoonful flour and 2 tablespoonfuls butter over the fire and
stir till thick; remove from fire and when cold add, alternately,
the yolks of 6 eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 teaspoonful lemon
extract and lastly the whites of the 6 eggs, beaten to a stiff
froth; fill this into a well buttered and floured dish and bake ½
hour in a medium hot oven; when baked take it from the oven, dust
with sugar and serve with raspberry sauce.

413. +Peach Souflé.+-- Pare, quarter and stew 1 dozen large, ripe
peaches in ½ cup water and 1 cup sugar; when done press them through
a sieve and add a little more sugar if not sweet enough; mix with
the yolks of 6 eggs and lastly the beaten whites of the eggs; bake
in a well buttered dish 40 minutes. Another way is to omit the yolks
of the eggs and take only the beaten whites, cherries, huckleberries
and blackberries. Currants and raspberries can also be used the same
way.

414. +Apricot Souflé.+-- Take a can of California apricots, press
them through a sieve, add the syrup and if necessary a little more
sugar; mix with 1 cup zwieback crumbs the yolks of 6 eggs and lastly
the beaten whites of the eggs; put this into a buttered dish and
bake 40 minutes.

415. +Farina Souflé (Vienna art).+-- Put 1½ pints milk with 1
tablespoonful butter over the fire; as soon as it boils stir in 6
ounces farina; stir over the fire until it has formed into a smooth
paste and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; transfer this
paste to a dish; when cold stir ¼ pound butter to a cream, add 4
tablespoonfuls sugar, by degrees the yolks of 8 eggs and the farina
paste; add lastly the grated rind of 1 lemon and the whites of the
eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; fill the mixture into a buttered
pudding dish and bake ¾ hour; serve with fruit or wine sauce.

416. +Farina Souflé (Italian art).+-- Prepare farina the same
as in preceding recipe; when cold stir ¼ pound butter with 5
tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream; add by degrees the yolks of 9 eggs
and the boiled farina; flavor with the rind of 1 lemon; add lastly
the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; fill a layer, 2
inches thick, into a well buttered pudding dish, spread a thick
layer of fruit marmalade over it and continue with layers of farina
mixture and marmalade till all is used; let the last layer be
farina; bake ¾ hour and serve with wine cream sauce.

417. +Farina Souflé.+-- Boil 1 cup milk with ½ tablespoonful butter;
add slowly 4 tablespoonfuls farina and stir till it has formed into
a smooth paste and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; transfer
it to a dish and set aside; when nearly cold stir ½ tablespoonful
butter to a cream and add alternately 5 tablespoonfuls sugar, the
yolks of 5 eggs and the farina paste; stir each part well before
another is added; add lastly the whites of the eggs, beaten to a
stiff froth, 1 teaspoonful essence of lemon and finish the same as
Almond Souflée; serve either with wine cream or fruit sauce.

418. +Strawberry Souflé.+-- Wash and press through a sieve 1 quart
fresh strawberries; mix them with 6 tablespoonfuls sugar and the
beaten whites of 6 eggs; fill this into a buttered dish, sprinkle
with sugar and bake slowly 40 minutes; souflées of any kind of fruit
jelly or marmalade are made the same way.

419. +Chestnut Souflé.+-- Put 30 large chestnuts with cold water over
the fire and boil 5 minutes; take them from the fire and remove the
outside shells and the brown skins; boil the chestnuts in milk till
tender and press them through a sieve; melt ¾ tablespoonful butter,
add 1 tablespoonful flour and stir for a few minutes over the fire;
add ¾ cup boiling milk, stir and let it boil up, remove from fire
and set aside; when cooled off mix it with the chestnut purée and
add 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla and the beaten
whites of 6 eggs. This souflée may be baked either in paper boxes or
in a dish; dust with sugar when ready to serve.

420. +Beignet Souflé.+-- Boil ½ pint milk with ½ tablespoonful
butter, 1 tablespoonful sugar and add by degrees, while boiling, 1
cup sifted flour; stir constantly till it has formed into a smooth
paste and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; remove the paste
from fire and set aside to cool; then mix it with 2 whole eggs and
the yolks of 2; place a wide saucepan with lard over the fire, drop
with a teaspoon small dumplings into the boiling fat and fry them to
a delicate brown; drain them on blotting paper, lay them onto a warm
dish, dust with sugar and serve at once.

421. +Potato Souflé.+-- Boil 6 large potatoes with the skins in water
until done; when cold remove the skins and grate the potatoes on a
grater; use only that portion which lies behind the grater and be
sure there is 3 cupfuls; then stir 1½ tablespoonfuls butter to a
cream and add alternately the yolks of 6 eggs, 6 tablespoonfuls
sugar and the grated rind of 1 lemon; add ½ cup ground or pounded
almonds and 3 tablespoonfuls dry farina; then add the grated
potatoes and lastly the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth;
put this mixture into a well buttered form and bake 1 hour; serve
with the following sauce:--Mix 1 tablespoonful butter with 1½
teaspoonfuls cornstarch, add 1 cup boiling water and stir over the
fire to a thick, creamy sauce; then add 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1
cup sherry wine, a little lemon juice and ½ teaspoonful vanilla;
strain through a sieve and serve.

422. +Vanilla Koch.+-- Put 1½ cups milk in a saucepan and add 3
tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 6 eggs and 3 teaspoonfuls flour;
mix this well together, place the saucepan in a vessel of boiling
water and stir over the fire till nearly boiling and thick; remove
it from the fire and set saucepan in cold water; when cold mix it
with 1½ teaspoonfuls vanilla extract and the whites of the 6 eggs,
beaten to a stiff froth; fill this into a well buttered and floured
mould, set in a pan of hot water and bake in a medium hot oven ½
hour, or till done; when ready to serve send to table either in the
same dish or turn onto another dish and send claret or strawberry
sauce to table with it. Koch of all kinds should be served
immediately upon being done.

423. +Cream Koch (boiled).+-- Stir together the yolks of 6 eggs with
6 tablespoonfuls cream and 3 tablespoonfuls flour and lastly the
whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; butter a mould, dust
with flour, put in the mixture, cover tightly and place in a vessel
of boiling water; boil slowly 1 hour; or place the form in a pan of
hot water and bake in the oven; when baked turn the koch onto a dish
and serve with fruit or claret sauce.

424. +Nudel Souflé.+-- Boil 1 quart milk with ¼ teaspoonful salt and
add 2 cups finely cut home-made nudels; continue the boiling for 15
minutes; then pour the nudels into a dish and when cold stir 1
tablespoonful butter to a cream, add alternately the yolks of 6 eggs
and 6 tablespoonfuls sugar; also add the grated rind of 1 lemon;
then add the nudels by degrees and lastly the whites beaten to a
stiff froth; pour this mixture into a buttered pudding dish, bake 1
hour and serve in the same dish in which it was baked; either set in
a silver dish or fold a napkin around it. For sauce boil ½ cup
water, dissolve 1 teaspoonful cornstarch in a little cold water and
add it to the boiling water; boil a few minutes; then add 1 cup
apple or currant jelly; continue boiling, stirring constantly, till
jelly is dissolved; then strain through a sieve, add ½ cup white
wine and a little sugar if not sweet enough.

425. +Macaroon Souflé.+-- ¼ pound macaroons pounded fine, ½
tablespoonful butter, 3 cups boiling milk and 1 tablespoonful flour;
put the butter in a saucepan and when melted add the flour; stir for
a few minutes; then add the boiling milk and the macaroons; stir
this until it forms a smooth paste; transfer it to a dish and set
aside to cool; stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream and add
alternately the yolks of 8 eggs, the macaroon paste and 2
tablespoonfuls sugar; add lastly the whites beaten to a stiff froth;
fill this mixture into a well buttered form and bake 1 hour; serve
with wine cream sauce or without sauce.

426. +Zwieback Koch.+-- Boil 1 pint milk and add 3 ounces rolled
zwieback and ½ tablespoonful butter; continue boiling, stirring
constantly, until it has formed into a smooth paste; remove from
fire and when cold mix with the yolks of 4 eggs, ¼ pound grated
hazel nuts, ½ cup sugar and lastly the whites beaten to a stiff
froth; fill the mixture into a well buttered dish and bake ½ hour;
when done turn the koch out onto a round dish and pour raspberry
sauce over it.

427. +Almond Koch (with Snow Sauce).+-- Melt 1½ tablespoonfuls butter
and add 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and the yolks of 6 eggs; stir this
over the fire till thick and smooth; remove from the fire and add ¼
pound finely cut almonds, 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract and the
whites of 4 eggs beaten to a stiff froth; put the mixture into a
well buttered and floured form, cover, set in a vessel of boiling
water and boil 1 hour; when done turn the koch onto a warm dish and
pour a snow sauce over it, which is made as follows:--Boil ¾ cup
sugar with ½ cup water until it begins to turn yellow; then remove
from fire and stir it slowly into the beaten whites of 2 eggs while
stirring constantly with an egg beater; flavor with 1 teaspoonful
lemon extract; pour the sauce over the turned out koch, set it for a
few minutes in the oven and serve; or the sauce may be served
separate with the koch.

428. +Plain Koch (with Strawberry Chaudeau).+-- Melt in a saucepan ¼
pound butter and add ¼ pound sugar and the yolks of 8 eggs; stir
this over the fire till thick and smooth; remove and mix it with the
juice and grated rind of 1 lemon, 1 tablespoonful flour and the
whites of 4 eggs beaten to a stiff froth; fill this into a well
buttered and floured pudding dish, cover with a tin plate, set dish
in a pan of hot water and bake 1 hour; when done turn the koch onto
a dish and pour the following strawberry sauce over it:--Beat the
whites of 4 eggs to a froth; press the juice from 1 pint
strawberries and put it in a saucepan with ½ cup white wine or the
juice of 1 lemon, ½ cup sugar and the yolks of 4 eggs; beat this
with an egg beater over the fire till it begins to rise; remove
instantly, continue beating for a few minutes longer and add the
beaten whites; then pour it over the koch or serve it in a sauce
dish; or serve the koch with snow sauce.

429. +Apple Koch; No. 1.+-- Wash and cut 5 medium sized apples into
pieces, put them in a saucepan with a little water and boil till
tender; press them through a sieve and mix with 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar, the yolks of 4 eggs, a little grated orange or lemon peel, ½
cup fine bread crumbs and lastly the 4 whites beaten to a stiff
froth; bake in a buttered dish 1 hour; when done dust with sugar and
serve without sauce.

430. +Apple Koch, No. 2.+-- Pare and cut fine ½ dozen greening or
pippin apples, put them in a saucepan with ½ cup white wine, 2
tablespoonfuls sugar and a little lemon or orange peel and let them
stew till tender; press through a sieve and set aside to cool; stir
the yolks of 4 eggs with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream and add 2
ounces finely cut citron, 2 ounces grated almonds and 3
tablespoonfuls fine bread crumbs; add the apples and lastly the 4
whites beaten to a stiff froth; fill the mixture into a well
buttered form, sprinkle with bread crumbs and bake ¾ hour.

431. +Apple Koch (with Almonds and Raisins).+-- Mix the yolks of 4
eggs with 3 tablespoonfuls sugar and add 4 tablespoonfuls bread
crumbs, 1 cup finely cut apples, 2 ounces finely cut almonds, ½ cup
seedless raisins, 2 tablespoonfuls cream and lastly the whites
beaten to a froth; bake in a buttered dish ¾ hour; when done turn
the koch onto a dish; put 1½ cups claret with 3 tablespoonfuls
sugar, a piece of cinnamon, a little lemon peel and a few cloves
over the fire; let it boil up, strain and pour over the koch.

432. +Jelly Koch.+-- Stir 2 tablespoonfuls sugar with 1 tablespoonful
butter to a cream and add by degrees ½ cup raspberry, currant, apple
or quince jelly; continue stirring until well mixed; then add
gradually the yolks of 4 eggs and lastly the whites beaten to a
stiff froth; bake in a buttered form ¾ hour and serve turned onto a
dish dusted with sugar. If this koch is to be boiled take the yolks
of 5 eggs and the whites of 2; in serving pour a wine cream sauce
around it.

433. +Cream Koch.+-- Put in a saucepan 1½ cups milk, the yolks of 6
eggs, ½ cup sugar, 3 teaspoonfuls flour and stir over the fire till
nearly boiling; remove it, set saucepan in a pan of cold water and
stir till cold; then mix it with the whites beaten to a stiff froth;
fill into a well buttered pudding dish, sprinkle over some sugar and
finely chopped almonds and bake 20 minutes.

434. +Cream Koch (with Sponge Cake).+-- Spread 8 small slices of
sponge cake with quince, apple or currant jelly, put 2 together, cut
them through the center and lay into a buttered dish; pour over a
little cherry, Madeira or fruit syrup; pour over it a cream koch the
same as in foregoing recipe, sprinkle with sugar and bake about 10
minutes. Or dip the cake into the syrup of preserved fruit--either
peaches or cherries--and lay some fruit over it; then cover with
same cream and bake 15 minutes.

435. +Almond Koch.+-- Stir 1½ tablespoonfuls butter with 4
tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream and add the yolks of 6 eggs and 4
ounces finely chopped blanched almonds; add lastly the beaten whites
of 4 eggs and ½ teaspoonful vanilla; butter a small form, sprinkle
with flour, put in the above mixture, cover and set the form in a
vessel of boiling water; boil gently 1 hour; when done turn the koch
onto a dish and serve with strawberry sauce.

436. +Nudel Koch.+-- Prepare a nudel dough from the yolks of 2 eggs,
a pinch of salt and sufficient flour to form a stiff paste; roll
out, cut them fine and boil in cream or milk till tender and thick;
then set aside to cool; stir 4 tablespoonfuls sugar with 1
tablespoonful butter to a cream and add by degrees the yolks of 5
eggs and the grated rind and juice of 1 lemon; add gradually the
nudels and lastly the beaten whites of 3 eggs; put this into a well
buttered form and bake ¾ hour; serve with fruit or wine sauce or
snow sauce.

437. +Nudel Koch (boiled).+-- Butter a pudding form, sprinkle with
bread crumbs and lay thin slices of citron all around the form;
prepare the nudels the same as in foregoing recipe, add some finely
cut citron and put them in the form; boil slowly 1 hour; when done
turn the koch onto a dish, sprinkle with sugar, hold a red hot
shovel over and pour over the juice of 1 orange; serve with wine
cream sauce.

438. +Nut Koch, No. 1.+-- Melt 1 tablespoonful butter in a small
saucepan and add 3 tablespoonfuls sugar and the yolks of 6 eggs;
stir this constantly over a slow fire till thick; remove from fire
and when cold mix it with 3 tablespoonfuls almond paste and the
whites beaten to a stiff froth; butter a pudding form and dust with
flour; set the form in a deep pan of boiling water, cover and set in
a medium hot oven to bake 1 hour; serve with the following
sauce:--Place a saucepan with 1½ cups white wine, 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar and 3 eggs over the fire; beat constantly with an egg beater
until it begins to rise; remove instantly, set saucepan for a few
minutes in cold water and continue the beating; then pour the sauce
in a sauciere and serve. If almond paste is not handy a small cup of
almonds grated on a nutmeg grater may be used.

439. +Nut Koch, No. 2.+-- Melt 1½ tablespoonfuls butter and add the
yolks of 8 eggs and 3 tablespoonfuls sugar; stir this over the fire
till thick; remove it from the fire and mix with ¼ pound finely cut
hazel or walnuts, 2½ tablespoonfuls fine bread crumbs which have
been wet with 3 tablespoonfuls cream or milk and lastly the 8 whites
beaten to a stiff froth and mixed with 2 tablespoonfuls powdered
sugar; butter a pudding form, sprinkle with bread crumbs, fill in
the mixture, cover and set in a vessel of boiling water (the water
should reach half way up the form) and boil 1 hour; serve with the
following sauce:--Beat the whites of 3 eggs to a froth; let ¾ cup
fruit syrup or jelly get boiling hot and add it slowly to the beaten
whites, beating constantly with an egg beater; when the pudding or
koch is turned out onto a dish pour the sauce around it and serve at
once.

440. +Rice Koch.+-- Soak 3 tablespoonfuls rice for 2 hours in cold
water, drain and dry it on a sieve; then pound it fine and boil in 1
pint cream or milk until thick; when cold stir 1 tablespoonful
butter to a cream with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and add by degrees the
yolks of 4 eggs, the rice, 1 tablespoonful rum, the rind of 1 lemon,
2 tablespoonfuls finely cut citron and lastly the whites, which must
be beaten to a stiff froth; butter a pudding form, sprinkle with
fine bread crumbs, fill it with the rice mixture, close the form
tightly and boil 1½ hours; or set the form in a pan of hot water in
the oven and bake 1 hour; serve with fruit sauce.

441. +Vanilla Almond Koch.+-- Stir 3 tablespoonfuls sugar with the
yolks of 5 eggs to a cream and add 2 tablespoonfuls fine bread
crumbs, 2 tablespoonfuls almond paste, 1 tablespoonful melted
butter, 1 teaspoonful vanilla and lastly the whites beaten to a
stiff froth; fill this into a well buttered and floured form, cover,
set in a pan of hot water and bake 1 hour; when done turn the koch
onto a warm dish, pour over some rum, light it and bring to table in
a blaze; send hard sauce to table with it. This koch may also be
boiled on top of stove.

442. +Koch (with Orange Chaudeau).+-- Melt in a small saucepan 2
ounces butter and add 3 tablespoonfuls sugar and the yolks of 5
eggs; stir this over a slow fire till thick and smooth; remove and
mix it with ¼ pound finely grated or pounded nuts, 2 tablespoonfuls
finely cut citron, the grated rind of 1 lemon and ½ ounce finely cut
candied orange peel; add lastly the whites of 4 eggs beaten to a
stiff froth and finish the same as Nut Koch.

443. +Orange Chaudeau.+-- Put the juice of 3 oranges and 1 lemon with
½ cup water in a saucepan and add 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and the
yolks of 4 eggs; beat this over the fire with an egg beater till
nearly boiling; remove, stir for a few minutes longer and serve
either in a sauciere or pour it over the turned out koch. If liked a
little rum may be added to the chaudeau. It is then called Punch
Chaudeau.

444. +Koch (with Nut Cream).+-- Melt 2 ounces butter and add the
yolks of 5 eggs and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; stir over the fire till
thick; remove and mix it with ¼ teaspoonful cinnamon, a pinch of
cloves, the grated rind of 1 lemon and 1½ tablespoonfuls bread
crumbs wet with 2 tablespoonfuls rum or Cognac; remove the shells
from ¼ pound hazel nuts or walnuts and grate the kernels on a nutmeg
grater; add them to the above mixture with the whites of 3 eggs
beaten to a stiff froth and finish the same as in foregoing recipe;
serve with the following cream:--Grate 2 ounces almond, hazel or
walnuts on a nutmeg grater, put them into 1 pint boiling cream or
milk, cover and let it stand till cold; then strain through a fine
sieve; put the milk in a saucepan with the yolks of 5 eggs and 2
tablespoonfuls sugar; stir this with an egg beater over the fire
till nearly boiling; remove instantly, continue the stirring for a
few minutes longer and either pour it over the koch or serve in a
sauciere.

445. +Koch (with Chocolate Beguss).+-- Melt 1 tablespoonful butter
and add 3 tablespoonfuls sugar and the yolks of 5 eggs; stir this
over the fire till thick and smooth; remove and set aside to cool;
soak 2 milk rolls without the crust in milk or cream; when soft put
them with the milk over the fire and boil and stir till it forms
into a smooth paste; remove from fire and when cold mix it with the
above egg mixture; add 1 cup grated nuts and lastly the whites
beaten to a stiff froth; put the mixture into a well buttered and
floured dish; cover and set the dish into a deep pan of hot water,
set in a hot oven and bake 1 hour; when done turn the koch onto a
round dish and pour the following sauce over it:--Boil ¼ pound
grated chocolate with 1½ cups water and ½ cup sugar for 10 minutes;
or boil ¾ cup sugar with ½ cup water until it begins to get light
brown; take from the fire, let it stand for a few minutes and then
pour it over the koch.

446. +Beignets of Buns.+-- Take some long baker’s buns (ones which
are a day or 2 old are the best), cut them into halves, dip each
half separately into cold milk and lay them on a dish; mix 1 cup
sifted flour with ⅛ teaspoonful salt, the yolks of 2 eggs and 1 cup
milk to a smooth, thin batter; add lastly the 2 whites beaten to a
stiff froth; put a large fryingpan with 1 tablespoonful lard and
butter over the fire; when hot dip each half of bun into the batter,
lay them in the pan and fry on both sides to a fine brown color;
serve on a long dish; dust with sugar and lay 1 spoonful stewed
fruit--such as plums, cherries, apples, huckleberries or stewed
gooseberries--or some fruit jelly over each one.

447. +Beignets of Zwieback.+-- Lay 1 dozen round zwiebacks on a long
dish, pour over some cold milk and let them lay until they begin to
get soft; dip each one separately into a batter, the same as
Beignets of Buns; fry in ½ lard and ½ butter on both sides to a
light brown color, dust with sugar and serve with fruit or snow
sauce.

448. +Poor Knights (Arme Ritter).+-- Cut a long loaf of bread (2 days
old) into slices ¼ inch thick, dip each slice into cold milk, lay
them on a dish on top of one another, pour a little milk over the
whole and let them lay for 10 minutes; beat up 3 eggs with 3
tablespoonfuls milk, dip each slice into the beaten eggs and then
fry in ½ butter and ½ lard in a fryingpan to a light brown on both
sides; serve on a hot dish dusted with sugar. Stewed or preserved
huckleberries may be sent to table with it or poured over the bread.
Jellies of fruit or marmalade may also be served with it.

449. +Apple Beignets.+-- Pare and core with an apple corer ½ dozen
large apples, cut them into slices ½ inch in thickness, put them in
a dish, sprinkle over some sugar, a little cinnamon and pour over 1
glass rum; let them lay for 2 hours, tossing them up now and then;
shortly before serving wipe dry, dip them in a batter, the same as
Beignets of Buns, and fry in boiling lard to a light brown color;
serve them piled up on a dish, dusted with sugar, and serve with
wine or snow sauce; or send to table without sauce.

450. +Poveison.+-- Cut a loaf of French bread which is 2 days old
(after the crust has been removed) into slices about ½ inch in
thickness; stew 1 pound dry prunes with a piece of cinnamon and a
little sugar and lemon peel; when done drain them on a sieve, remove
the pits and boil the liquor down to ½; chop the plums fine and mix
them with the liquor; add a little more sugar; spread this plum
marmalade a finger thick on one side of each slice of bread, dip
them separately into milk, lay onto a dish and let them lay ½ hour;
then dip them into beaten egg and fry in boiling lard; when they are
all fried dust them with powdered sugar and a little cinnamon;
arrange them on a dish with a napkin under and serve hot. The
poveison may also be dipped first in beaten eggs and then in bread
crumbs. In place of plums any kind of fruit or marmalade may be
taken, but it must be thick.

451. +Poveison of Pineapple.+-- Prepare the bread the same as in
foregoing recipe, spread one side of the slices with a thick layer
of pineapple marmalade and finish the same as in preceding recipe.

452. +Beignets à la Marie-Louise.+-- Prepare a biroche dough (as in
No. 773), roll it out 1 inch thick, cut into rounds and brush half
of them over with beaten eggs; put in the center 1 teaspoonful peach
or apricot marmalade, cover them with the remaining rounds and press
the edges together; cut them out again with a cutter a little
smaller than the first one, let them lay on a floured board with a
floured napkin under them and set in a warm place for about 1 hour
to rise; shortly before serving fry in boiling lard to a light brown
color, lay them on a soft cloth, to absorb the fat, and serve with
fruit sauce.

453. +Beignets de creme à la française.+-- Beat up 3 whole eggs, the
yolks of 6 and add 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, ¾ cup cream or milk and a
little vanilla; put this into 6 buttered cups, set them in a pan of
water, cover and bake till firm; remove them from oven and when cold
turn them out and cut each one into 3 slices; lay them onto a tin
pan, cut a round piece out of the center and fill up the hole with
warm marmalade; when cold dip the beignets first into pounded
macaroons, then in beaten egg, then in fine bread crumbs and fry in
boiling lard to a light brown; serve on a napkin dusted with sugar
and send either a snow, vanilla or caramel sauce to table with them.

454. +Peach Beignets.+-- Pare and cut into halves 1 dozen large
peaches, sprinkle over ½ cup sugar and pour a glass of Cognac or
white brandy over them; cover and let them stand about 2 hours;
shortly before serving lay them in rows upon a clean cloth and press
another cloth lightly upon them to absorb the moisture; have ready a
batter, dip each one separately into it and fry in boiling lard to a
light brown color; lay them onto blotting paper, to absorb the fat,
dust with powdered sugar and serve with the following sauce:--Heat
the peach syrup to boiling point; beat the whites of 3 eggs to a
stiff froth, add slowly the hot syrup, beating constantly, and
serve.

455. +Batter for Beignets.+-- Mix 1 cup sifted flour with a little
salt, the yolks of 2 eggs and 1 cup milk to a smooth, thin batter;
beat the 2 whites to a stiff froth; then add the batter slowly to
the whites, beating constantly; it is then ready for use.

456. +Pineapple Beignets.+-- Pare a small, ripe pineapple, cut into
very thin slices and remove the hard part in center with a cutter or
apple corer, so they have the shape of rings; dip the rings first
into sugar, then in batter and fry in boiling lard; lay them on
paper or soft cloth, to absorb the fat, dust with sugar and serve
with orange snow sauce made as follows:--Put the juice of 3 oranges
with ½ cup sugar over the fire to boil for 5 minutes and add a
little grated rind; have the whites of 3 eggs beaten to a stiff
froth, add the hot orange syrup slowly, beating constantly, and
serve; or the beignets may be served without sauce or brushed over
with orange glaze. Oranges may be used instead of pineapples.

457. +Beignets of Nudels.+-- Prepare nudels from 2 eggs; cut fine and
boil them in 3 cups milk with ½ tablespoonful butter and 2
tablespoonfuls sugar until thick; spread them ¼ inch in thickness
onto buttered tins and when cold cut them into rounds with a biscuit
cutter or small wineglass; spread 1 side with marmalade or jelly,
lay 2 and 2 together and dip them in beaten eggs and fine zwieback
or bread crumbs; fry in boiling lard and serve on a napkin dusted
with sugar.

458. +Beignets à la polonaise.+-- Bake ½ dozen small, thin pancakes,
put them on paper and cover each cake with the following cream:--Put
in a saucepan 1 tablespoonful flour, 1 cup milk, the yolks of 3
eggs, a pinch of salt, 1½ tablespoonfuls sugar, a teaspoonful butter
and a little vanilla; stir this over the fire till it begins to
boil; remove from the fire and when cold spread it over the
pancakes; roll them up, cut into 2 pieces, press the edges together,
dip each in egg and bread crumbs and bake in boiling lard; serve on
a napkin dusted with sugar and send fruit sauce to table with them.
They may also be dipped into batter and then fried.

459. +Pannequets à la royale.+-- ½ pound sifted flour, 5 ounces
melted butter, 6 eggs, 1½ cups cream or milk, ⅛ teaspoonful salt and
2½ tablespoonfuls sugar; stir the 6 yolks, sugar and salt together
and add slowly the melted butter, flour and the lukewarm cream; add
lastly the 6 whites beaten to a stiff froth; bake this mixture into
small pancakes the size of a saucer, spread them with fruit
marmalade or jelly, roll them up, lay them together in squares,
sprinkle with sugar and hold a red hot shovel over to glaze; arrange
them on a dish in two rows over each other and serve with sabayon of
oranges or wine chaudeau. These pancakes may be served with any kind
of sweet sauce. Stewed fruit may also be laid in center of dish and
the pancakes laid around it.

460. +Pannequets à la vanille.+-- Prepare some pancakes the same as
in Pannequets Meringués, spread over boiled cream, roll each one up
separately, cut them into two pieces, arrange them onto a round dish
in a circle, sprinkle over some sugar and pounded macaroons and let
them heat through slowly in the oven; serve with vanilla sauce.

461. +Pannequets Meringués.+-- Mix ½ cup sifted flour with ½ cup
cream and add a pinch of salt, 2 whole eggs, the yolks of 6, 1½
tablespoonfuls sugar, 2 ounces finely pounded macaroons and 1 pint
rich, sweet cream; mix all the ingredients well together and bake ½
hour before serving thin pancakes from this in an omelet pan; lay
the pancakes on a round dish and spread over each a layer of cream
the same as Beignets à la polonaise; put the cakes on top of one
another; beat the 6 whites to a stiff froth, mix with ½ cup powdered
sugar and spread this meringue all over the cakes; set dish in oven
for a few minutes; put little bits of bright jelly on top and serve
without sauce.

462. +Plain Omelet.+-- 3 eggs, 3 spoonfuls, ¼ teaspoonful salt and a
pinch of white pepper; stir yolks, pepper, salt and milk together;
beat the whites to a stiff froth and add the above mixture slowly to
them, beating constantly; put a large frying or omelet pan over the
fire with ½ tablespoonful butter; when hot pour in the omelet
mixture; do not stir, but as the eggs set slip a broad-bladed knife
under the omelet to keep it from burning on the bottom; when done
slip the knife under one side of the omelet and double it over; slip
it onto a warm plate and set for 2 minutes in a hot oven; serve at
once.

463. +Rum Omelet.+-- Prepare an omelet the same as in foregoing
recipe; when it comes from the oven dust thickly with granulated
sugar; pour 4 tablespoonfuls best rum into a cup, light it with a
match and pour while burning over the omelet; serve at once; as a
dessert sufficient for 3 persons.

464. +Strawberry Omelet.+-- Wash and drain in a colander 1 pint
strawberries, put them in a dish with ½ cup sugar and set aside
until omelet is made. Ingredients for the omelet:--6 eggs, 1
tablespoonful cornstarch mixed with ¼ teaspoonful baking powder, ½
teaspoonful salt, ½ tablespoonful melted butter and 1 cup milk; stir
the yolks, salt, flour, powder and milk together; beat the whites to
a stiff froth and add the above mixture slowly to them, stirring
constantly; put a large frying or omelet pan with ½ tablespoonful
butter over the fire; when hot pour in ½ the omelet mixture; do not
stir, but as the eggs set slip a broad-bladed knife under the
omelet, to prevent burning on the bottom, and shake the pan to and
fro; when the underside is a light brown set pan with omelet for a
few minutes in oven; then scatter ½ the strawberries over the
surface; slip the broad-bladed knife under one side of omelet and
double in two, inclosing the fruit; dust over the top with powdered
sugar and let it remain in oven till the next one is baked the same
way; then serve at once; sufficient for a family of 6 persons.

465. +Huckleberry Omelet+ is made the same way as Strawberry Omelet.
Omelets of blackberries, peaches, stewed or preserved fruit, such as
cherries, plums, etc., are also made the same way.

466. +Orange Omelet.+-- Prepare an omelet the same as for Strawberry
Omelet; pare and cut fine 4 oranges, remove pits and white skin, mix
the pulp of oranges with sugar and finish the same as Strawberry
Omelet.

467. +Jelly Omelet+ is made the same way as Strawberry Omelet, using
jelly instead of strawberries.

468. +Omelette à la française.+-- Break 6 eggs into a kettle, beat
them with an egg beater until they foam and add 1 teaspoonful salt
and a little pepper; place a large frying or omelet pan with 1
heaping tablespoonful butter over slow fire; as soon as butter is
hot pour in the eggs and draw them with a spoon slowly from the side
of pan to the center; when nearly thick let it stand for a few
minutes without stirring and let it get on the underside a light
brown; fold it over from both sides and turn onto a dish with the
folded side underneath. Some finely minced chives or parsley may be
mixed into the eggs before baking.




CHARLOTTES.


469. +Charlotte of Apples, No. 1.+-- Pare and quarter 10 good sized
apples (greening or pippin) and cut each quarter into slices; put
them in a saucepan with 2 tablespoonfuls butter, 6 tablespoonfuls
sugar and the grated rind of ½ orange or 1 lemon; cover and let them
stew till apples are soft, but not broken; then add ½ cup currant or
apple jelly, ½ cup seedless raisins, the same quantity of currants,
2 tablespoonfuls finely cut citron and a little finely cut candied
orange peel; cut a large, stale loaf of bread into thin slices about
⅛ inch thick; cut each slice into rounds with a cake cutter or with
the cover of a baking powder box, dip each round piece with one side
into melted butter and fit them neatly in the bottom and sides of a
2-quart pudding dish with the buttered side towards the dish; lay
the rounds so that they lap over one another; then fill the dish
with the apples; cover them with a layer of the round pieces of
bread with the buttered sides towards the apples; bake in a medium
hot oven 40 minutes; when done turn the charlotte onto a dish, dust
with powdered sugar and serve.

470. +Charlotte of Apples, No. 2.+-- Cut ½ pound rye bread or
pumpernickel into thin slices and dry them in the oven; then roll
them fine on a pastry board with a rolling pin and mix with ½ cup
melted butter, ½ cup sugar and ½ teaspoonful cinnamon; press this
into the bottom and on the sides of a pudding dish in such a way
that the inside has a complete lining of bread; fill it with apples
prepared the same as in foregoing recipe; cover with a thin layer of
bread crumbs and bake 40 minutes; when done turn the charlotte onto
a dish, dust with sugar and serve with fruit sauce. Some of the
sauce may be poured over the charlotte before sending to table.

471. +Charlotte of Peaches.+-- Line a form with bread the same as
Charlotte of Apples, No. 1; pare and cut into halves 15 ripe
peaches; dissolve 1 pound sugar in 1 cup cold water, place it over
the fire and boil 5 minutes; add the peaches and boil about 6
minutes; take them out and set aside to cool; add to the syrup ½ cup
apple jelly and boil 10 minutes longer; when cold put the peaches
into the form, pour over ½ the syrup, cover neatly with bread and
bake 40 minutes; when done turn the charlotte onto a dish, pour the
remaining syrup over it and serve at once. Charlottes may be made of
all kinds of preserved fruits, such as peaches, cherries, apricots,
pears or plums.

472. +Charlotte of Cherries.+-- Remove the pits from 2 pounds
cherries; dissolve 1 pound sugar in 1 cup cold water and boil 5
minutes; put in the cherries and boil 3 minutes; remove the fruit
with a skimmer, boil the syrup a little longer and then set aside;
line a form with bread the same as Charlotte of Apples, put in the
cherries, pour over a little of the syrup, cover with bread and bake
40 minutes; when done turn onto a dish; add to the remaining syrup 1
glass brandy and pour it over the charlotte.

473. +Charlotte of Currants.+-- Remove 1 pound currants from their
stems and add 1 pound raspberries; wash and put them with 1½ cups
sugar into a dish and let them stand for 1 hour; line a form with
bread the same as Charlotte of Apples, put in the fruit, cover with
bread and bake 40 minutes; when done turn the charlotte onto a dish,
dust with powdered sugar and serve.

474. +Charlotte of Pineapple.+-- Line a form with bread the same as
Charlotte of Apples, No. 1; pare and cut into fine pieces 1 large
pineapple; boil 1 pound sugar with 1 cup water, add the pineapple
and boil 20 minutes; remove the fruit with a skimmer, boil the syrup
a little longer and then set aside to cool; put the pineapple in the
form with 2 tablespoonfuls crab apple jelly laid in small pieces
between, pour over a little of the syrup, cover with bread and bake
40 minutes; when done turn the charlotte onto a dish and pour the
remaining syrup over it.

475. +Charlotte à la polonaise.+-- Cut a large stale sponge cake into
slices ½ inch in thickness and pour over each slice a little
maraschino or Madeira wine; spread the bottom slice thickly with
cream frangipane (see Cream), lay over this another slice, spread
again with cream and continue until the cake has its original form
again; set the cake onto a dish; beat the whites of 6 eggs to a
stiff froth, spread it on thickly over the cake, dust with powdered
sugar and set for a few minutes in a cool oven; serve with sabayon
sauce made as follows:--Place a saucepan over the fire with ½ cup
sugar, ½ bottle Rhine wine, the peel and juice of 1 lemon, ½
teaspoonful cornstarch, 1 whole egg and the yolks of 3; beat this
with an egg beater over the fire till nearly boiling; remove
instantly, continue the beating for a few minutes longer, pour the
sauce into a sauciere and serve with the charlotte.

476. +Charlotte Russe, No. 1.+-- Cover the bottom of a round form
with white paper; split and trim 1 pound lady fingers and fit them
neatly in the bottom and sides of form; whip 1 quart cream to a
stiff froth and add 5 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar and 1½
teaspoonfuls vanilla extract; fill cream into the form, cover with
the cakes laid close together and set on ice till wanted; when ready
to serve turn the charlotte russe onto a glass dish, remove the
paper and serve.

477. +Charlotte Russe, No. 2.+-- Boil 3 cups milk with a pinch of
salt, ½ tablespoonful butter and ½ cup sugar; mix 4 tablespoonfuls
cornstarch with 1 cup cold milk; stir this into the boiling milk and
continue boiling for a few minutes; remove from the fire; beat up
the yolks of 4 eggs and mix them with the cornstarch; when nearly
cold beat the whites to a stiff froth, stir them lightly through the
custard and flavor with 1½ teaspoonfuls vanilla; put a round piece
of paper in the bottom of a mould; then line the bottom and sides
with lady fingers, fill in the cold custard, lay the cakes closely
together on top and set on ice till wanted; when ready to serve turn
the charlotte russe onto a glass dish and serve with vanilla sauce.

478. +Charlotte à la russe.+-- Cover the bottom of a round form with
white paper and line the inside of it with sponge cake; cut the cake
for the bottom into 3-cornered pieces, lay them with the points
towards the center and let them lap over on one another; cut the
pieces for the sides as long as the height of form and about 1½
inches wide; cut them a little slanting on one side towards the top,
fit them in firmly close to one another and fill the form with the
following cream:--Soak 1 ounce gelatine in a little cold water;
place a saucepan with 1 pint milk, the yolks of 6 eggs, 1 small cup
sugar and 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla over the fire and stir till nearly
boiling; remove from the fire, add the gelatine and stir till cold;
when it begins to thicken add 1 pint whipped cream and finish the
same as in foregoing recipe. If cream is not handy beat the 6 whites
to a stiff froth and add them instead of it.

479. +Charlotte à la russe (with preserved or stewed Pears).+--
Prepare the milk with gelatine and cream the same as in foregoing
recipe; cover the bottom of a round deep dish with preserved or
stewed pears, also lay some pears on the side of form, pour in the
milk mixture and set on ice till cold; when ready to serve beat the
whites to a stiff froth and add 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and ½
teaspoonful vanilla; turn the charlotte onto a dish and spread the
beaten whites over it; serve with cold strawberry sauce. This may
be made of preserved peaches, apricots or any other kind of fruit in
the same manner.

480. +Snow Eggs.+-- Beat the whites of 6 eggs to a stiff froth and
add 3 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar; put a wide saucepan with milk
and 1 tablespoonful sugar over the fire; as soon as the milk boils
set with a tablespoon large oval-shaped dumplings from the mixture
into the milk, draw saucepan to side of stove, cover and let it
stand for a few minutes; then turn them over, let the milk come to a
boil again, draw it to the side and cover; after a few minutes
transfer the dumplings with a skimmer to a sieve and set aside to
cool; prepare a crême française au chocolat or vanille (see Cream)
in a plain form; when cold turn the cream onto a dish, lay the snow
eggs in a circle around it and serve with vanilla sauce.




RICE PUDDINGS AND DISHES MADE OF RICE FOR DESSERT.


481. +To Prepare Rice Flour.+-- Pick out all the yellow kernels of a
quantity of rice and wash it several times in warm water, rubbing it
well between the fingers; drain the water off and pour boiling water
over it; let it stand until nearly cold; then pour it into a
colander and pour cold water over it; when well drained rub the rice
between a towel, spread out on shallow tin pans or on thick brown
paper and let it dry in a lukewarm oven; when completely dry pound
it to a powder in a wedged wooden mortar; it may then be put away in
jars for use; or pound the rice while wet, then dry and rub it
through a sieve. Another way is to grind the rice in a coffee mill.

482. +Rice Beignets.+-- Wash ½ pound rice, put it with cold water
over the fire and boil for a few minutes; drain in a colander and
rinse with cold water; return the rice to saucepan and add 5 cups
milk, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, ½ tablespoonful butter and ½
teaspoonful salt; boil until tender; then mix it with 3 well beaten
eggs; spread it evenly a finger thick onto buttered tin pans and set
aside; when cold cut the rice into rounds or square pieces, dip them
in beaten egg and bread crumbs and fry in boiling lard; serve with
wine or fruit sauce. Some finely chopped almonds may be boiled in
the rice.

483. +Rice Pears.+-- Parboil ¼ pound rice in water, drain in a
colander and rinse with cold water; return it to the saucepan, add 1
pint milk, a little salt, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 tablespoonful
butter, a little grated lemon peel and boil slowly till done; remove
the rice from the fire; when cooled off add the yolks of 3 eggs and
1 tablespoonful finely chopped almonds; spread this rice onto a long
dish and when cold divide it into equal parts with a spoon the size
of an egg; form them into the shape of a pear and press a preserved
cherry or a little marmalade in the center of each; roll them first
into fine bread crumbs, then into the beaten white of egg; then roll
again in the bread crumbs and fry them a light brown in boiling
lard; put a small piece of cinnamon in the end of each piece, to
form the stern, and serve hot with wine sauce.

484. +Rice Beignets (with Chocolate).+-- Prepare ½ pound rice the
same as in foregoing recipe without the butter and add while hot ¼
pound grated chocolate; spread the mixture evenly a finger thick
onto buttered tins and when cold cut it into small rounds with a
wineglass; dip them into beaten egg and bread crumbs and fry in
boiling lard; dust them with sugar and serve without sauce.

485. +Rice Boiled with Raisins.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 cup rice
over the fire, cover with cold water and boil for a few minutes;
drain in a colander and rinse with cold water; return the rice to
saucepan again, add 1 quart milk, ½ teaspoonful salt, 1
tablespoonful sugar and boil 20 minutes; then add ¼ pound well
cleansed seedless raisins and boil till done; serve dusted with
sugar; or boil the rice in water instead of milk, add very little
sugar, the raisins and a little salt and serve with meat.

486. +Rice Coteletten.+-- Boil ¾ pound rice in water 5 minutes, drain
in a colander and rinse with cold water; return it to the fire and
boil in milk with a little salt till tender and thick; when cold mix
it with 2 eggs and 2 ounces melted butter; form the rice into
cotelettens, brush over with egg, sprinkle with fine bread crumbs
and fry in ½ butter and ½ lard a light brown; dust them with sugar
and serve with stewed fruit. If the cotelettes are to be sweet add
some sugar, finely chopped almonds, the grated rind of 1 lemon,
a little rum or rose water and fry the same way as above recipe;
served with wine, lemon, cream, chocolate or fruit sauce.

487. +Rice à la Creole.+-- Parboil ½ pound rice in water and drain
and rinse with cold water; boil it in 1½ quarts sweet cream or milk
and a little salt; when done sweeten with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and
flavor with 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract; in the meantime put 2
tablespoonfuls sugar in a pan and let it roast to a caramel,
stirring constantly; dissolve it with a little water; add this to
the rice, put on a round flat dish, sprinkle with sugar and hold a
red hot shovel over for a few minutes to glaze it.

488. +Lemon Rice.+-- Place a saucepan with ½ cup rice over the fire,
boil 5 minutes and drain and rinse with cold water; return the rice
to saucepan, add 1 pint milk, ½ teaspoonful salt and boil until
tender; when done add 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; put it into a
blanc-mange mould and let it stand till cold; peel a lemon very
thin, cut the peel into shreds about ½ inch in length and as fine as
possible, put them into a saucepan, cover with water and boil ½
hour, changing the water 3 times; lest they should be bitter pour
about 1 teacupful fresh water upon them; squeeze and strain the
juice of the lemon, add it with 1 cup sugar to the water and shreds
and let it stew gently for ½ hour; then set aside to cool; having
turned out the jellied rice into a glass dish, pour the syrup
gradually over it, taking care that the little shreds of the peel
are equally distributed over the whole.

489. +Rice à la française.+-- Put ½ pound well washed rice over the
fire with cold water, boil 3 minutes, drain in a colander and rinse
with cold water; return the rice to saucepan, add 5 cups milk, ½
teaspoonful salt, ½ tablespoonful butter and boil till nearly done;
then add 8 finely pounded bitter macaroons, 2 tablespoonfuls finely
cut candied orange peel, ½ cup preserved cherries freed from the
pits and cut fine and a little orange water; put the rice when done
on a round flat dish, sprinkle with sugar, hold a red hot shovel
over to glaze and serve with wine sauce.

490. +Rice Cherry.+-- Prepare 1 quart cherry sauce as follows:--Boil
1 pound sour cherries in 1 quart water, crack some of the stones so
as to obtain the flavor from the pits and add a piece of cinnamon,
the peel of 1 lemon, ½ pint wine and a few pounded bitter almonds;
sugar to taste; when done stir it through a fine sieve, return the
sauce to saucepan and add ½ pound rice which has been previously
well washed and boiled in water with a little salt for 5 minutes;
then drain and rinse with cold water; boil the rice in the cherry
sauce till tender; remove from the fire, mix it with the yolks of 6
eggs and when cold add the whites beaten to a stiff froth; rinse out
a mould with cold water, sprinkle the inside with granulated sugar,
fill in the rice and set it on ice for 2 hours; then serve with or
without sweet cream or vanilla sauce.

491. +Poor Man’s Rice Pudding.+-- Place a saucepan with 3
tablespoonfuls rice and cold water over the fire, boil 5 minutes,
drain the rice in a sieve and rinse with cold water; put the rice in
a pudding dish with 1 quart milk, ½ teaspoonful salt, 3
tablespoonfuls sugar and 1 teaspoonful essence of lemon; bake in a
slow oven till the rice is real soft and serve when cold.

492. +Rice Custard Pudding.+-- Place in a saucepan 3½ tablespoonfuls
rice, cover with cold water, boil 5 minutes, drain in a colander and
rinse with cold water; return it to saucepan, add 1 pint milk, ½
teaspoonful salt and boil till tender; when cold mix it with 3 well
beaten eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 pint milk and a teaspoonful
of lemon essence; put this into a pudding dish, lay 1 tablespoonful
butter in small bits on top of it, grate nutmeg over and bake till
the custard is set; ½ cup seedless raisins may be added to the
pudding if liked; serve without sauce.

493. +Rice Pudding (Minutatim).+-- Place a saucepan with ¼ pound rice
covered with cold water over the fire, let it boil a few minutes,
pour into a colander and rinse with cold water; return rice to
saucepan, add 1 pint milk, ½ teaspoonful salt, ½ tablespoonful
butter and boil slowly till tender; transfer the rice to a dish and
when cold mix it with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, ½ cup milk, the finely
chopped peel of 1 lemon, the yolks of 3 eggs and lastly the whites
beaten to a stiff froth; butter some small cups or moulds, line them
with a few pieces of citron cut into small, thin slices, fill the
cups 3 parts full with the rice mixture and bake in the oven; when
done turn them onto a long dish, with a little jelly onto each one,
and serve with lemon or fruit sauce.

494. +Rice Snowballs.+-- Put 1 cup rice covered with cold water over
the fire, boil 5 minutes, drain in a colander and rinse with cold
water; return rice to saucepan, add 1 quart milk, a little butter, 2
tablespoonfuls sugar, ½ teaspoonful salt and boil slowly till
tender; add a flavoring of essence of almonds; when the rice is done
put into teacups and let it remain till cold; then turn the rice out
in a glass dish, pour over a cold custard and on the top of each
ball place a small piece of bright colored preserves or jelly.
NOTE.--The custard may be served separate in a saucer with the
balls, but the flavoring of it should correspond with the rice.
Vanilla or lemon essence may be used instead of almond.

495. +Cold Rice Flour Pudding.+-- Let 1½ pints milk come to a boil,
add 4 tablespoonfuls rice flour, mix with ½ pint cold milk and stir
for 10 minutes over the fire; beat up the yolks of 5 eggs and add
them with 2 tablespoonfuls orange water to the rice mixture; add
lastly the whites beaten to a stiff froth; rinse out a mould with
water; sprinkle with coarse sugar, pour in the pudding and put the
form either on ice or in cold water; when cold turn it onto a dish
and serve with fruit sauce.

496. +Rice Souflée.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 cup milk and ½
tablespoonful butter over the fire; when it boils mix 1 cup rice
flour with milk, add it to the boiling milk and stir constantly;
continue stirring until it forms into a smooth paste and loosens
itself from the bottom of saucepan; transfer the rice mixture to a
dish to cool; stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream and add
alternately the yolks of 5 eggs, 5 tablespoonfuls sugar and the rice
paste; add lastly the grated rind of 1 lemon and the 5 whites beaten
to a stiff froth; pour the whole into a buttered souflée or pudding
dish and bake ½ hour in a moderate oven; all souflées should be
served immediately on being taken out of the oven, or they will sink
and be nothing more than an ordinary pudding; when done take it out,
sprinkle powdered sugar over and send the souflée to table in the
dish in which it was baked, either with a napkin pinned around or
inclosed in a more ornamental dish; serve with wine, cream,
raspberry or cherry sauce.

497. +Rice Flour Pudding (colored).+-- Place a saucepan with 2 cups
milk, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, the grated rind of 1 lemon and ¼
teaspoonful salt over the fire; as soon as it boils mix 4
tablespoonfuls rice flour with 1 cup milk, stir into the boiling
milk and stir constantly about 10 minutes; set the saucepan into a
vessel of hot water, to keep warm; place another saucepan over the
fire with 3 cups fruit juice, ½ currant and ½ raspberry; when it
boils mix 4 tablespoonfuls rice flour with 1 cup claret, add it with
1½ cups sugar to the boiling juice and boil, stirring constantly,
till contents form a smooth paste; then take a handsome form, brush
the inside with almonds or fine olive oil, sprinkle with coarse
sugar and fill the rice mixture in alternate layers with a wet spoon
into the form--first the white, then the red, and so on until form
is filled; smooth each layer evenly with the wet spoon; in serving
turn it out carefully and lay a border of whipped cream around it.
This makes a very handsome dish. Half the above quantities will be
sufficient for a family of 8 persons.

498. +Rose Rice Pudding.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 cup water and 2
cups currant or raspberry juice over the fire, add a piece of
cinnamon and when it boils mix 4 tablespoonfuls rice flour with 1
cup water; add it to the boiling water, stirring constantly, and
boil about 10 minutes; remove the cinnamon and sweeten with sugar to
taste; rinse out a form with water, sprinkle with sugar, pour in the
contents and place the form on ice; when cold turn it out on a dish
and lay whipped cream flavored with vanilla around it; or serve with
vanilla sauce.

499. +Cold Rice Pudding (with Almonds).+-- Put ½ pound rice covered
with cold water over the fire, boil a few minutes and drain in a
colander; return the rice to saucepan, add 1 quart milk, ½
teaspoonful salt and boil till nearly tender; then add 1 cup finely
chopped almonds, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and boil till done; rinse
out a melon-shaped form, sprinkle with coarse sugar, pour in the
rice when nearly cold and set it aside to cool; in serving turn it
out on a glass dish and serve with cold cream or fruit sauce.

500. +Rice Snowballs (with Apples).+-- Place a saucepan with ½ pound
rice covered with cold water over the fire, boil 5 minutes, drain in
a colander and rinse with cold water; return rice to saucepan, add ½
teaspoonful salt, 1 quart milk and boil till nearly done; then set
aside to cool; pare and core 6 large apples (greenings or pippins
are the best) and put into each apple a little butter, sugar and
finely chopped lemon peel; take 6 small, square pieces of white
muslin, such as is used for apple dumplings, dip into hot water and
dust them with flour; spread over each cloth a layer of boiled rice
about ½ inch thick, put an apple in the center of each one, fold the
cloth with the rice around it so that the apple is covered with the
rice, drop them into boiling water and boil ½ hour; serve with wine
or lemon sauce.

501. +Rice kalte Shale (with Wine).+-- Boil 1 cup sugar with 3 cups
water and the peel of 1 lemon for 10 minutes, when cold add 1 bottle
white wine, the juice of 2 lemons and ¼ pound rice which has been
boiled in 2 waters till tender; place the kalte Shale on ice till
wanted.

502. +Rice Radetzky.+-- Put ½ pound rice covered with cold water over
the fire, boil 5 minutes, drain in a colander and rinse with cold
water; return rice to saucepan, cover with water, add ½ teaspoonful
salt and boil till done and thick; in the meantime melt ½
tablespoonful butter and add 4 tablespoonfuls sugar; stir this over
the fire till light brown; then add 3 tablespoonfuls boiling water
and the juice of 1 orange and 1 lemon; let it boil up, add the rice
and let it remain a little longer over the fire; remove from the
fire, mix it with 3 tablespoonfuls rum and put it on a glass dish in
layers with fruit marmalade between it; let the last layer be rice;
cover with the whites of 3 eggs beaten to a froth, sweeten with
sugar and flavor with vanilla; sprinkle over some finely chopped
almonds, set it for a few minutes in oven, to take color, and serve
when cold.

503. +Rice (with Strawberries).+-- Parboil ½ pound rice, drain in a
colander and rinse with cold water; return the rice to saucepan,
cover it with water, add the juice of 2 lemons, the peel of 1 and
boil till done, but in such a manner that the kernels remain whole;
let it drain on a sieve; then put it in a dish and pour over 1 pint
boiling sugar syrup; when cold arrange the rice on a glass dish in
the form of a pyramid with layers of sugared strawberries between
and decorate the whole with large strawberries.

504. +Rice (with Apples).+-- Parboil ½ pound rice in water, drain in
a colander and rinse with cold water; then place it over the fire
with 1 quart milk, add ½ teaspoonful salt, a piece of cinnamon and
boil till tender; transfer the rice to a dish and set it aside to
cool; in the meantime pare and cut fine 6 large apples (either
greenings, pippins or Baldwin’s); put them on a soup plate, sprinkle
with sugar, a little cinnamon, the grated rind of 1 lemon and a
pinch of cloves; cover them with another plate and let them stand
until the rice is cold; next butter a deep pudding dish and put the
apples in the bottom of it; then stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter with 2
tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream and add alternately the rice (by
spoonfuls) and the yolks of 5 eggs, a little cinnamon and the finely
chopped peel of 1 lemon; add lastly the whites beaten to a stiff
froth; spread the rice evenly over the apples, put small pieces of
butter over and then sprinkle over some sugar and finely chopped
almonds; bake 1 hour in a medium hot oven; serve with or without
wine sauce.

505. +Rice (with Marmalade).+-- Boil ½ pound rice the same as in
foregoing recipe and press it through a sieve; when cold stir ¼
pound butter with ½ cup sugar to a cream and add by degrees the
yolks of 6 eggs, the rice and lastly the whites beaten to a stiff
froth; fill this mixture into a well buttered pudding dish with
layers of fruit marmalade between the rice (let the last layer be
rice) and bake in a medium hot oven ¾ hour; send to table sprinkled
with sugar and serve with or without sauce.

506. +Rice (dressed with Sugar and Cinnamon).+-- Place a saucepan
with 1 cup rice covered with cold water over the fire and boil 5
minutes; pour the rice into a sieve to drain and rinse with fresh
water; return it to saucepan, add ½ teaspoonful salt, 1 quart milk
and boil slowly till done; if the rice should be too thick add more
milk; when done fill the rice into a deep dish, lay small pieces of
butter all over the top and sprinkle thickly with sugar into which a
little cinnamon has been mixed; serve as a dessert.

507. +Fine Rice Pudding (with Oranges).+-- Wash ½ pound rice in
several waters, put in a saucepan covered with water and boil 10
minutes; drain in a colander and rinse with water; boil ½ pint white
wine with ½ pound sugar, the grated rind and juice of 1 lemon and ½
pint water for 5 minutes, add the rice and boil till tender; when
done transfer the rice to a dish to cool; place a saucepan in a
vessel of hot water with ½ teaspoonful cornstarch, ½ pint white
wine, 3 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, the juice of 1 lemon and ½
ounce gelatine soaked in cold water; stir this over the fire with an
egg beater until just about to boil; remove instantly from the fire
and stir for a few minutes longer; then set it aside to cool; rinse
a nicely shaped mould with cold water, sprinkle with coarse sugar
and set it into cracked ice; put in first a layer of rice, then a
layer of oranges which have been peeled, cut into slices and freed
of their pits, sprinkle with sugar, pour some of the wine sauce over
it and continue alternately with the layers until the form is
filled; let it stand in ice over night; in serving turn the rice
onto a dish and garnish with sugared oranges.

508. +Fried Rice.+-- Place ½ pound washed rice in a saucepan with
cold water over the fire and boil 5 minutes; drain in a colander,
return rice to saucepan, add 1 quart milk, ½ teaspoonful salt and
boil slowly till tender; when done remove from the fire, mix with
the yolks of 2 eggs and spread it on a flat dish; when cold cut it
into strips 1 inch wide and 2 inches long, brush them over with the
beaten whites of eggs, sprinkle with fine bread crumbs or cracker
dust and fry in ½ butter and ½ lard to a fine golden color; serve on
a hot dish dusted with sugar.

509. +Rice Pudding (baked).+-- Soak ½ pound rice for 1 hour in water,
drain and boil it in water 15 minutes; pour the rice onto a sieve
and after draining it well return to saucepan; add 1 quart milk, ¾
teaspoonful salt and boil till tender; add 3 ounces butter, ¼ pound
sugar and the grated rind of 1 lemon; when cold mix it with the
yolks of 6 eggs, ½ cup finely chopped almonds and 3 tablespoonfuls
finely cut citron; add lastly the whites beaten to a stiff froth;
fill the whole into a well buttered pudding dish and bake 1 hour in
a medium hot oven; serve with fruit sauce.

510. +Boiled Rice Pudding.+-- Place a saucepan with ½ pound rice
covered with cold water over the fire and let it boil 5 minutes;
then pour it into a colander and rinse with cold water; return the
rice to saucepan, add 1 quart milk, a piece of cinnamon, the peel of
1 lemon, 1 teaspoonful salt and boil slowly till tender (but the
kernels must be whole); when cold stir ¼ pound butter with 1 cup
sugar to a cream and add 1 cup finely chopped almonds, 1 cup
stoneless raisins, 1 tablespoonful finely cut preserved orange peel
and the yolks of 8 eggs; add the rice and lastly the 8 whites beaten
to a stiff froth; fill the mixture into a well buttered pudding form
and boil 2 hours; serve with wine cream sauce made as follows:--
Place a saucepan over the fire with 1 pint white wine, the yolks
of 3 eggs, 1 teaspoonful cornstarch, the peel of 1 lemon and 4
tablespoonfuls sugar; stir this with an egg beater until just about
to boil; then remove it instantly from the fire, beat the whites to
a stiff froth and mix it with the sauce; or send cherry sauce to
table with it (see Sauce). This pudding is sufficient for 12
persons. If a smaller one is desired use half the quantities.

511. +Rice Flour Pudding.+-- Take 1 pint milk, 2 small cups rice
flour, 3 tablespoonfuls butter, the grated rind of 1 lemon, 8 eggs,
whites and yolks beaten separately, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 2
tablespoonfuls finely cut citron and ½ teaspoonful salt; put the
milk with ½ of the butter over the fire; mix the rice flour with a
little cold water or milk, add the salt and when the milk boils stir
the flour into it; stir until the contents have formed into a smooth
paste and loosens itself from the bottom of saucepan; remove it from
the fire and set aside to cool; stir the remaining butter to a cream
and add alternately the sugar, the yolks and the rice dough (by a
spoonful at a time); add the lemon, the citron and lastly the whites
of eggs beaten to a stiff froth; blend all well together; have ready
a pudding form well buttered and sprinkled with bread crumbs, fill
it with the mixture and boil 2 hours; serve with wine or cream sauce
the same as in foregoing recipe; sufficient for a family of 10
persons.

512. +Rice Flour Pudding (baked).+-- Place a saucepan with 1 pint
milk and 1 tablespoonful butter over the fire and when it boils stir
into the boiling milk sufficient rice flour to make a smooth dough
that loosens itself from the bottom of saucepan; then remove it from
the fire and set aside to cool; stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a
cream and add by degrees the yolks of 5 eggs, 5 tablespoonfuls
sugar, the grated rind of 1 lemon, the dough of rice flour and
lastly the stiff froth of the 5 eggs; bake ½ hour; serve with wine
cream sauce.

513. +Rice Pudding (baked).+-- Place a saucepan with ½ pound rice
covered with cold water over the fire, let it boil a few minutes,
pour the rice into a colander and rinse with cold water; return it
to saucepan, add 1 quart milk, ½ teaspoonful salt, 1 tablespoonful
butter, a piece of cinnamon, the peel of 1 lemon and boil slowly
till tender; when done remove the rice from fire and let it cool a
little; stir the yolks of 4 eggs with 3 tablespoonfuls sugar to a
cream; mix it with the rice, remove the lemon and cinnamon and add
lastly the whites beaten to a stiff froth; fill the mixture into a
form which has been well buttered and sprinkled with bread crumbs
and bake 1 hour in a medium hot oven; when done turn the pudding
onto a round plate and serve with fruit sauce.

514. +Rice Pudding (with Peaches).+-- Cut 12 large peaches in halves
and peel and boil them in ½ pound sugar syrup; crack the stones,
take out the pits, remove the brown skins and boil the pits with the
peaches; when done transfer the fruit to a dish and set aside to
cool; put ½ pound rice with cold water over the fire and let it boil
up; drain in a sieve and rinse with cold water; return rice to
saucepan with 1 pint sweet cream and boil till tender, but in such a
way as to leave the kernels remain whole; when cold mix the rice
with 5 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract, ¼ pint
maraschino and 1¼ ounces gelatine; put the dish in cracked ice and
stir 1 pint whipped cream through it; fill into a form, cover
tightly, pack it in cracked ice with rock salt sprinkled between it
so that the whole form is completely covered with ice; let it remain
thus for 2 hours; in serving dip the form in hot water, turn the
pudding onto a round dish, lay the peaches all over it and the pits
on top of peaches; pour the syrup around it and serve. Rice with
apples, pears, apricots or any kind of fruit may be made in the same
manner.

515. +Rice Pudding à la Palerino.+-- Put ½ pound rice with cold water
over the fire, boil 3 minutes, pour it into a sieve and rinse with
cold water; return the rice to saucepan, add 1 bottle white wine,
the juice of 4 oranges and ¼ pound sugar and boil slowly till
tender; add 1½ ounces gelatine which has been soaked in cold water
and stir both till it begins to thicken; in the meantime cut some
preserved pineapples into small dice; boil 6 ounces seedless raisins
in sugar syrup till tender; put them with ½ pint preserved cherries
on a sieve to drain; thin ¼ pound apricot marmalade with a little
water, add it with the pineapples, raisins and cherries to the rice
and lastly stir 1 quart whipped cream through it; fill the mixture
into a pudding form, pack it in ice and rock salt and let freeze for
4 hours; in serving dip the form in hot water, turn its contents
onto a round dish, lay preserved apricots around it and put on top
some whipped cream, so as to make this fine dish as tempting as
possible.

516. +Rice à la Malte.+-- Boil 1 pound rice 5 minutes, drain in a
sieve and rinse with cold water; return rice to saucepan, cover with
water and boil till tender, but in such a way that the kernels
remain whole; pour the rice in a sieve and let the water drain off;
rub off the skin of 6 oranges with loaf sugar and pound the sugar
fine; then peel the oranges, divide them into quarters, remove the
pits and lay the fruit on a dish; sprinkle 6 tablespoonfuls sugar
over and set them aside in a cool place; press the juice from 6
oranges; put the rice with 1½ pints white wine in saucepan, add ½
pound sugar and boil till thick; add the orange juice and the juice
of 1 lemon, let it boil a few minutes longer, remove from the fire
and stir the orange sugar into it; rinse out a form with white wine,
pour in the rice mixture and when cold put it on ice for 3 hours; in
serving turn it out on a round dish and garnish with the orange
quarters; boil the juice of 3 oranges with ½ cup sugar and ½ cup
water to a syrup; when cold pour some over the rice and serve the
rest in a sauciere with the pudding.

517. +Rice Pudding à la Wellington.+-- Boil ½ pound rice for 15
minutes in water, drain it in a sieve and rinse with cold water;
return rice to saucepan, add ½ bottle Rhine wine, the peel of 1
lemon, the juice of 3 lemons and sweeten with sugar; when done pour
it into a border form and set it in a cool place; in serving turn it
onto a round dish, decorate with preserved or stewed cherries and
pour a little white syrup over the rice; have ready a plombière of
frozen raspberry ice in a high pointed form and put it in the center
of the rice.

518. +Rice Pudding (with Pineapple).+-- Take a sponge cake (one that
was baked in a round form), hollow it out about 1½ inches, pour some
Madeira wine over and sprinkle with finely chopped almonds; set it
in a cool oven to dry a little; then place it on a round dish with a
fine napkin and cut it down to ⅓ its height into 12 pieces; boil ¾
pound rice 5 minutes in water, drain and rinse with cold water;
return rice to saucepan and boil it in water till nearly done; pour
it onto a sieve and drain off the water; then return it again to
saucepan with some pineapple syrup and boil till done; mix a few
tablespoonfuls finely cut pineapple with it, fill the rice (half
warm) into the sponge cake and decorate with slices of pineapple and
preserved red cherries; serve with apricot sauce. Preserved
pineapple may be used for this.

519. +Rice Pudding (with Apples).+-- Put ½ pound rice in a saucepan
with cold water, let it boil 5 minutes, drain in a colander and
rinse with cold water; return rice to saucepan, add 1 pint milk, ½
tablespoonful butter, ½ teaspoonful salt and boil till tender; pour
into a dish to cool; stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter to a cream with 4
tablespoonfuls sugar and add by degrees the yolks of 6 eggs and the
rice; add 2 tablespoonfuls rum and a finely minced lemon peel; beat
the whites to a stiff froth and add them to the mixture; pare and
cut into quarters 8 large tart apples; put peels and cores in a
saucepan, cover with water, place over the fire and boil till
tender; strain through a jelly bag; put the liquor in a saucepan and
boil 5 minutes; add 1 cup sugar, the rind and juice of 1 lemon and
when it boils put in the apples; boil nearly done; remove them with
a skimmer and put into a dish to cool; butter a pudding dish and
sprinkle with bread crumbs; put in ½ the rice mixture, lay over this
the apples and over them the remaining ½ of rice; lay a few pieces
of butter on top, sprinkle with a little sugar and cinnamon and bake
1 hour in a medium hot oven; serve with the syrup. Half the above
quantities will be sufficient for a family of 6.

520. +Rice Pudding (with Cherries).+-- Put ½ pound rice in a
saucepan, cover with cold water, boil 3 minutes, drain in a colander
and rinse with cold water; return rice to saucepan, add 5 cups milk,
½ teaspoonful salt and boil slowly till tender (the kernels must
remain whole); transfer it to a dish and when cold stir ¼ pound
butter to a cream, add alternately 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks
of 6 eggs, the rice and lastly the whites beaten to a stiff froth;
butter a deep pudding dish and sprinkle with bread crumbs; put in a
layer of rice mixture, then a layer of cherries which have been
previously freed from the pits, stewed with sugar and drained on a
sieve; or take preserved cherries, drain off the liquor and put them
between the layers of rice till the dish is filled; let the last
layer be rice; bake 1 hour in a medium hot oven; when done decorate
the top with preserved or stewed cherries and send a cherry sauce to
table with it. Rice pudding with apricots or peaches may be made the
same way.

521. +Rice Pudding (with Almonds).+-- Prepare the rice the same as in
foregoing recipe; when cold stir ¼ pound butter to a cream, add ¼
pound sugar, the grated rind of 1 lemon, 1 cup finely chopped or
ground almonds, the yolks of 6 eggs, the rice and lastly the whites
beaten to a stiff froth; fill the mixture into a well buttered form
and bake 1 hour; when done dust it with powdered sugar and serve
with fruit or wine sauce.

522. +Lemon Rice Pudding.+-- Let ½ cup rice come to a boil, drain in
a colander and rinse with cold water; return the rice to saucepan,
add 1 cup milk, ¼ teaspoonful salt and boil till tender; when done
pour it into a dish and set aside to cool; stir 1 tablespoonful
butter to a cream, add the yolks of 4 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar,
then the rice and the grated rind of 1 lemon; whip the juice of 1
lemon with the whites of 4 eggs to a froth, stir into the rice
mixture, put it in a well buttered pudding dish and bake ¾ hour;
serve with wine sauce.

523. +Rice Scallop.+-- Place a saucepan with ½ pound rice and cold
water over the fire, boil 5 minutes and drain in a colander; return
rice to saucepan, add 1 quart milk, ½ teaspoonful salt, a small
piece of butter and boil till rice is soft and thick; pare, core and
slice fine 10 large apples, put them in a saucepan with 1
tablespoonful butter, 2 tablespoonfuls finely cut citron, ½ cup well
cleansed currants, ½ cup sugar and stew slowly until apples are
soft; add ½ cup currant jelly or fruit marmalade and set aside to
cool; butter a pudding dish, put in a layer of rice and over it a
layer of apples; continue in this way alternately with rice and
apples till all are used; let the last layer be rice; put little
pieces of butter all over the top of rice and bake ¾ hour; serve
either hot or cold.

524. +Cream of Rice Flour.+-- Mix in a saucepan 4 tablespoonfuls rice
flour with 1 quart milk and add 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 ounce
finely cut orange peel, the yolks of 6 eggs and the grated rind of 1
lemon; stir this over the fire until it begins to boil; remove it
from the fire, add the whites beaten to a stiff froth and serve it
when cold in a glass dish; sprinkle it with sugar, hold a red hot
shovel over to brown the sugar and serve without sauce.

525. +Rice kalte Schale (with Cream).+-- Put ¼ pound rice with cold
water over the fire, boil 5 minutes, drain in a colander and rinse
with cold water; return rice to saucepan and add 1 quart milk, ½
teaspoonful salt, a piece of cinnamon and a little vanilla and lemon
peel; when done remove peel and cinnamon and add the yolks of 4 eggs
and 1 quart boiling hot cream; sweeten to taste and serve when cold.
NOTE.--Milk may be substituted for cream.

526. +Rice Jelly.+-- Mix ¼ pound rice flour with 1 quart milk and add
¼ pound sugar, ½ ounce gelatine which has been soaked for a few
minutes in cold water, 6 pounded bitter almonds and a little lemon
peel; stir this over the fire constantly and boil 15 minutes; remove
lemon peel, fill the mixture into a form which has been well rinsed
out with cold water and sprinkled with sugar and set the form on ice
to cool; in serving turn the jelly out onto a dish and send fruit
syrup to table with it.

527. +Apples with Rice Border.+-- Place a saucepan with ½ pound rice
covered with cold water over the fire, boil a few minutes, drain the
rice in a colander and rinse with cold water; then return it to
saucepan, cover with 1 pint milk and boil till tender and thick;
then stir through it carefully 1 tablespoonful butter, 3
tablespoonfuls sugar, the grated rind of ½ lemon and the yolks of 2
eggs; next butter a mould (special moulds are made for rice border),
fill it with rice and set in a warm place for 10 minutes; pare 12
small tart apples, remove the cores without breaking the fruit and
boil them in sugar syrup with 1 tablespoonful apricot marmalade or
fruit jelly; turn the rice border onto a dish and lay little pieces
of currant jelly on top of it; pile the apples high up in the
center; reduce the syrup by boiling a little longer and pour it over
the apples. Pears, peaches, apricots and cherries the same way.
Preserved fruit may also be used.

528. +Rice Cream.+-- Boil 6 ounces parboiled rice in 3 cups sweet
cream and a little salt till tender; when done mix it with ½ ounce
gelatine which has been soaked in cold water; when this is well
mixed with the rice remove it from the fire, add the well beaten
yolks of 6 eggs, 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and when cold add 1
glass maraschino and the 6 whites beaten to a stiff froth; fill this
into a form and place it on ice to get firm; in serving turn the
cream onto a glass dish and garnish with macaroons.

529. +Rice Cream (with Chocolate).+-- Place 6 ounces well washed rice
with cold water over the fire, boil for a few minutes, drain in a
colander and rinse with cold water; return rice to saucepan, add 3
cups sweet cream, ¼ teaspoonful salt and boil till tender; then mix
with 1 ounce gelatine which has been soaked for 5 minutes in cold
water; also add 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla
extract, ¼ pound finely grated chocolate and when cold add 1 pint
whipped cream; fill the mixture into a form, bury the form in finely
cracked ice with a little rock salt sprinkled between and let it
remain 4 hours; in serving dip the form into hot water and turn the
cream onto a glass dish. NOTE.--The chocolate may be left out of the
cream and a chocolate sauce served with it.

530. +Rice Cream (with Fruit).+-- Put 6 ounces well washed rice with
cold water over the fire, let it boil a few minutes and drain and
rinse it with cold water; return the rice to saucepan, add 3 cups
sweet cream, a little salt and boil till done; when cold mix it with
3 tablespoonfuls sugar, the grated rind of 1 lemon and ½ ounce
gelatine soaked in cold water; when nearly cold add 1 pint whipped
cream and put the mixture into a form with layers of preserved
fruit, such as cherries, peaches, plums, etc., between it; set the
form into a pail with layers of cracked ice and rock salt sprinkled
between; the form should be entirely covered with ice; set in a cold
place for 4 hours; in serving turn the cream out of the form onto a
glass dish and garnish with fruit jelly.

531. +Rice Croquettes (served with Sauce as Dessert).+-- Parboil ½
pound rice for a few minutes in water and drain in a colander;
return the rice to saucepan with 1 pint milk, 3 tablespoonfuls
sugar, ½ tablespoonful butter, ½ teaspoonful salt and boil till
tender; when done remove it from the fire and mix with the yolks of
3 or 4 eggs, the grated rind of 1 lemon and set it aside to cool;
form the mixture into balls the size of a walnut, dip them into
beaten white of eggs, roll them in zwieback crumbs and fry in
boiling lard; serve with wine sauce.

532. +Brioche Dough.+-- Put 1 pound flour into a dish, add ½
teaspoonful salt, make a hollow in the center, pour 1 cup warm milk
in which 1 yeast cake has been dissolved into the center, mix it
with some of the flour and set in a warm place for 1 hour; then stir
¼ pound butter to a cream and add by degrees 2 eggs; mix this with
the flour and yeast to a soft dough, cover and let it rise to double
its height in a warm place; then work it through once more, roll it
out with a rolling pin about ⅛ of an inch in thickness, cut it into
rounds with a tumbler and put in the center either force meat, fruit
jelly or rice; bend them over so that the edges meet; wet them with
beaten egg and press the edges firmly together; set in a warm place
to rise; then brush over with beaten egg, dust with bread crumbs and
fry in hot lard.

533. +Rice Brioche.+-- Prepare a brioche dough the same as in
foregoing recipe with the addition of 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and the
grated rind of 1 lemon; while this is rising put 1 cup rice in a
saucepan with cold water over the fire, let it come to a boil, drain
in a sieve and rinse with cold water; return the rice to saucepan,
add 1 pint milk, ½ teaspoonful salt and boil till tender; remove it
from the fire and when cold mix the rice with the beaten whites of 3
eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, 4 tablespoonfuls finely chopped
almonds, 2 tablespoonfuls finely cut citron and ¼ teaspoonful
cinnamon; when the dough has risen to double its height divide it
into 2 equal parts and roll each part out on a floured board to ½
inch in thickness; spread over each part an equal portion of the
rice, fold together, press the edges firmly, so that the rice cannot
fall out, shape it in the form of a long square and lay in buttered
tin pans; brush over with the yolks of the 3 eggs, sprinkle thickly
with finely chopped almonds and dust with powdered sugar; set in a
warm place and let it rise for ½ hour; then bake in a medium hot
oven about ½ hour; if the oven should be too hot cover with paper;
serve with the following sauce:--Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter with 8
tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a cream and add 2 eggs, a little
nutmeg and 4 tablespoonfuls rum with 1 teaspoonful vanilla; stir
until white; put the bowl which holds the mixture into a vessel of
boiling water, stir over the fire, add gradually 1 cup boiling
water, stir to a creamy sauce and serve. NOTE.--Half these
quantities will be sufficient for a family of 6 persons.

534. +Poveison (with Prunes).+-- Stew some dried prunes with a stick
of cinnamon and lemon peel; sweeten with sugar and set aside to
cool; remove the pits and chop the prunes fine; reduce the liquor by
boiling it down to ½, add the prunes and mix all together; grate the
crust from 3 or 4 milk rolls, cut them into slices about ⅛ of an
inch in thickness, spread each slice with the prunes and lay 2
pieces together with the prunes between them; after all the slices
have been prepared in this way lay them on a long plate, pour some
cold milk over and let them stand for ½ hour; then dip them first in
beaten egg and then in fine bread crumbs and fry in boiling lard;
serve them dusted with sugar.

535. +Croquettes of Nudels.+-- Prepare some finely cut nudels with 1
egg and the necessary flour and boil them in milk with a piece of
butter, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and a pinch of salt; when done
transfer them to a dish and mix with the yolks of 3 eggs, the grated
rind of ½ lemon and 3 bitter macaroons broken into small pieces; set
this mixture on ice and when cold form it into round balls the size
of an egg; dip them in the white of egg, then in boiling lard and
fry in boiling lard to a fine brown; serve with wine or fruit sauce.

536. +Apple Croquettes.+-- Prepare a fine apple sauce, press it
through a sieve and add some finely chopped almonds and a little
vanilla; bake some thin pancakes of eggs, milk and flour, spread
some of the apple sauce over each one, roll them up, turn the ends
over and fasten them with egg; dip them first into beaten egg, then
into fine zwieback crumbs and fry in boiling lard to a nice golden
color; dust them with powdered sugar and serve with a sauce made of
apple jelly thinned with vanilla liquor or maraschino.

537. +Nudels (with Jelly).+-- Boil 2 cups home-made nudels in salt
water 15 minutes; then drain in a colander, put the nudels in a
saucepan with 1 tablespoonful butter and toss them over the fire
till they are well mixed with the butter; then put them in a glass
dish alternately with currant or apple jelly in layers between,
cover the top with jelly and serve. A cupful of freshly grated
cocoanut laid over the top of this dish and dotted with small bits
of jelly is a decided improvement.

538. +Apple Scallop.+-- 1 pound bread crumbs, ¾ cup sugar, 10 large
greening or pippin apples and ¾ cup butter; pare, quarter and cut
the apples into fine slices; put ¼ of the butter into a pudding dish
and let it melt; then put in a layer of bread crumbs and over them a
thick layer of apples; sprinkle over some sugar and lay little bits
of butter over; continue this way alternately with bread crumbs,
butter, apples and sugar till all is used; let the last layer be
bread with bits of butter on top; cover the dish and bake ¾ hour;
shortly before the scallop is done uncover the dish and let it brown
a little; serve either hot or cold without sauce.

539. +Nudel Scallop.+-- Prepare a nudel dough of 1 egg, ½ teaspoonful
butter, 1 tablespoonful water, a pinch of salt and sufficient flour
to make a stiff dough; divide the dough into 4 parts, roll each part
out on a paste board as thinly as possible and let them lay for 15
minutes; then cut each part into long strips 1½ inches in width; lay
4 strips on top of one another and cut them fine, about as thick as
a straw; shake the nudels apart and spread them on a board to dry
for 1 hour; then put them into boiling salted water, boil 10 minutes
and drain in a colander; pare, core and cut into fine slices 10
large greening apples; put the apples in a saucepan with 1
tablespoonful butter and ½ cup sugar, cover and stew gently till
they begin to soften; remove them from fire, add ½ cup apple or
currant jelly and set aside to cool; butter a pudding dish and put
in a layer of nudels; lay little bits of butter over and put over
the nudels a layer of apples; then nudels again; continue in this
way till all is used; let the last layer be nudels; mix 3 eggs with
1 cup milk, a little sugar and 1 teaspoonful vanilla; pour it over
the nudels and bake ¾ hour; serve either hot or cold. NOTE.--Stewed
prunes, peaches or cherries may be used instead of apples. This may
be served without sauce.




+COLD PUDDINGS MADE WITH MILK.+


540. +Cocoanut Custard Pudding, No. 1.+-- 2 cups grated cocoanut, 1
cup sugar, 5 eggs and 1 quart milk; beat up the eggs to a froth, add
the sugar, stir until melted, then add milk and cocoanut; butter a
pudding dish, pour in the mixture and bake till the custard
thickens; the best way to ascertain when pudding is done is to place
the handle of a teaspoon into the center of the pudding; if it is
thick remove instantly and set aside in a cool place; serve when
cold in the same dish in which it was baked, with a napkin folded
around, or place it in an ornamental dish.

541. +Cocoanut Custard Pudding, No. 2.+-- Boil 3 cups milk with 1 cup
sugar; dissolve 2 tablespoonfuls cornstarch in 1 cup cold milk and
add it to the milk; continue the boiling for a few minutes and
remove from fire; beat up the yolks of 4 eggs and after the custard
has cooled a little add them to it; when cold beat the whites to a
stiff froth and stir them into the custard; butter a pudding dish
and put in ½ the custard and a layer of macaroons; then a thick
layer of cocoanut on top into which 2 tablespoonfuls sugar have been
mixed; bake in the oven to a delicate brown color; serve cold
without sauce.

542. +Pudding à la Princess.+-- Take 1 pound any kind of cake
(sponge, pound, cup or raisin cake), which is several days old, cut
it into slices and lay them in a glass dish; put on to each slice 1
teaspoonful currant or apple jelly and pour ½ cup sherry wine and
the juice of 1 lemon over; soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup milk 15
minutes; place a saucepan over the fire with 3 cups milk, ½ cup
sugar, the yolks of 6 eggs and 1½ teaspoonfuls vanilla extract; stir
this over the fire till nearly boiling; then add the gelatine by
degrees, stirring constantly, but do not allow it to boil; as soon
as gelatine is melted remove it from the fire, set the saucepan in
cold water and stir its contents till cold; pour the custard over
the cake; beat the 6 whites to a stiff froth and beat into it
gradually ½ cup currant, cranberry or apple jelly; spread this
meringue over the custard and dot it with little bits of jelly laid
on in a pattern. Half the above quantities will be sufficient for a
small family.

543. +Cold Sponge Pudding.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup milk for
15 minutes; place a saucepan over the fire with the yolks of 6 eggs,
3 cups milk, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla extract
and stir with an egg beater till nearly boiling; add by degrees the
gelatine, beating constantly; remove from the fire and set aside to
cool, stirring it now and then; when cold and beginning to thicken
have the whites beaten to a stiff froth and stir them lightly
through the cream; rinse out a mould with cold water, sprinkle the
inside with sugar, pour in the mixture and set in a cool place to
form; in serving loosen the edge on top with your finger and turn
the pudding onto a dish; serve with cold fruit or claret wine sauce.

544. +Chocolate Pudding.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup milk; boil
¼ pound grated chocolate in 1 cup water and add 1 pint milk, the
yolks of 3 eggs, 5 tablespoonfuls sugar and the gelatine; beat this
with an egg beater over the fire till nearly boiling; remove from
the fire and set aside to cool, stirring it now and then; when cold
and beginning to thicken add the beaten whites of 6 eggs; rinse a
form with cold water, sprinkle with sugar, pour in the mixture and
set aside to form; serve with vanilla sauce made of the 3 remaining
yolks.

545. +Sago Pudding.+-- Boil 1 quart milk with a little salt and while
boiling sprinkle in slowly ¼ pound sago; continue the boiling until
the sago looks clear and is thick; when done remove the saucepan to
side of stove add 4 tablespoonfuls sugar; beat up the yolks of 4 or
5 eggs with a little cold milk, add them to the sago and while hot
add the whites beaten to a stiff froth; turn it into a jelly mould
which has previously been rinsed with cold water and sprinkled with
sugar and place it on ice or in cold water till firm; serve with
fruit or vanilla sauce.

546. +Sago Pudding with Almonds+ is prepared the same as in
preceding recipe. While the sago is boiling add 1 cup finely chopped
almonds. Walnuts or hazel nuts may be used the same way.

547. +Sago Pudding (Allemande).+-- Boil 1 quart milk with a little
salt and while boiling add slowly ¼ pound best sago, ½ cup finely
chopped almonds and 4 tablespoonfuls sugar; continue the boiling for
20 minutes longer, then remove the saucepan to side of stove, add
the beaten whites of 4 eggs and 1 teaspoonful lemon extract; pour
the sago into a well rinsed and sugared jelly mould and set aside to
cool; put the 5 yolks with 3 cups milk, 1 teaspoonful cornstarch and
3 tablespoonfuls sugar over the fire and stir until it begins to
boil; remove instantly, flavor with vanilla or lemon essence and
serve cold with the pudding.

548. +Sago Meringue (with Apples).+-- Boil ¼ pound sago in 1 quart
milk with a little salt and a little butter; in the meantime pare
and core 6 large apples, put them into a long tin pan with 1 quart
boiling water, cover them with another pan and boil 5 minutes;
transfer the apples to a long-shaped pudding dish and put 1
teaspoonful jelly into each apple; when the boiled sago is cold mix
it with the yolks of 4 eggs and 4 tablespoonfuls sugar; pour this
over the apples and bake in the oven; when done draw the pudding to
the front of oven; have the 4 whites beaten to a stiff froth and add
2 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar and a little essence of lemon;
spread this over the pudding, close the oven and let the pudding
bake for a few minutes longer; eat without sauce, either hot or
cold.

549. +Sago Cream.+-- Put ½ pound sago with boiling water over the
fire, let it boil 5 minutes and drain on a sieve; return the sago to
saucepan, add 3 pints water and boil slowly 1½ hours; add 1 bottle
claret, the juice of 2 lemons and the rind of 1; add sufficient
sugar to sweeten and boil ½ hour more; rinse out a jelly mould or
small cups with cold water, sprinkle them with sugar, fill them with
the sago cream and set in a cool place to get firm; serve cold with
whipped cream or vanilla sauce; or take currant juice instead of
wine and otherwise prepare the same as above; when cold turn the
cream onto a glass dish, lay a border of whipped cream sweetened
with sugar and flavored with vanilla around it and serve without
sauce.

550. +Rothe Grütze.+-- Stew ½ pound currants and ½ pound raspberries
with ½ pint water about 20 minutes; strain them through a jelly bag;
put the juice in a saucepan with the same quantity of water and add
sufficient sugar to sweeten; as soon as it begins to boil sprinkle
in slowly some of the best sago, allowing 4 tablespoonfuls sago to 1
quart liquid; add a piece of cinnamon and boil slowly till sago is
clear, which will take about ½ hour; stir it constantly; turn it
into cups or jelly moulds; eat when cold with milk or cream.

551. +Milk Pudding.+-- Boil 1 quart milk with 6 tablespoonfuls sugar,
the peel of 1 lemon and add 16 sheets red gelatine which has been
soaked for 5 minutes in cold water; stir until the gelatine is
dissolved; remove it from fire and add 1 pint Rhine wine; pour it
into a jelly mould which has been rinsed with cold water and
sprinkled with sugar, set it on ice to get firm and serve with
vanilla or lemon custard sauce.

552. +Fruit Custard Pudding.+-- Dip 6 small sponge cakes into the
juice of 1 can peaches and lay the cake in a glass dish; lay ½ the
peaches over the cake and pour some cold custard over it which is
made as follows:--Place a saucepan with 1 quart milk, 4
tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 4 eggs and a pinch of salt over
the fire and add 2 tablespoonfuls cornstarch; stir constantly till
just about to boil; then remove from the fire and when cold pour it
over the cake and peaches; beat the whites to a stiff froth, mix
with 2 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar, spread it over the top and
serve.

553. +Macaroon Meringue.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 quart milk, the
yolks of 4 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1 tablespoonful
cornstarch over the fire and stir constantly till just about to
boil; remove instantly and when cold stir 1 cup finely chopped
almonds through it; put a layer of macaroons in a glass dish, pour
over ½ the custard, put another layer of macaroons and then custard
again; beat the whites to a stiff froth, add 1 tablespoonful
powdered sugar and spread it over the top.

554. +Lemon Custard Pudding.+-- 1 quart milk, 2 tablespoonfuls
cornstarch, 3 eggs, the juice of 2 lemons, the grated rind of 1 and
½ tablespoonful butter; mix the cornstarch with a little cold milk;
put the remaining milk over the fire, add the butter and as soon as
it begins to boil stir in the cornstarch; boil a few minutes,
stirring constantly; remove from fire and when cold mix the eggs
with ¾ cup sugar, add the lemon juice and rind, stir this to a cream
and add gradually to the cornstarch; when well mixed fill it into a
buttered pudding dish and bake till the custard is set; serve cold.

555. +Cornstarch Pudding.+-- 1 quart milk, 4 tablespoonfuls
cornstarch, 5 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and ¼ teaspoonful salt;
mix the cornstarch with a little milk; put the remaining milk with
sugar and salt in a saucepan over the fire; as soon as it boils add
the cornstarch and let it boil for a few minutes, stirring
constantly; when done remove it to side of stove, add the well
beaten yolks of the 5 eggs; when well mixed together keeping it hot,
and beat the whites to a stiff froth and stir them into the mixture;
rinse out a mould with cold water, sprinkle with sugar, pour in the
mixture and set either in a cool place or on ice; serve with fruit
sauce.

556. +Cornstarch Meringue.+-- 1 quart milk, 4 tablespoonfuls
cornstarch, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 4 eggs and 4 tablespoonfuls
fruit jelly; bring the milk to a boil and stir in the cornstarch,
which should be previously dissolved in a little cold milk; boil a
few minutes, stirring constantly; remove it from the fire and while
yet hot stir in the yolks beaten up with the sugar and flavor with 1
teaspoonful vanilla; fill it into a glass dish; beat the whites with
4 tablespoonfuls currant or apple jelly to a froth, spread it over
the pudding and serve when cold.

557. +Armor Pudding.+-- Boil 1 quart milk with the rind of 1 lemon;
dissolve 1 cup cornstarch in 1 cup cold milk and add it slowly to
the milk, stirring constantly; add ¾ cup sugar and a little salt and
continue the boiling for a few minutes; when done remove the
saucepan to side of stove, keeping it hot; beat the whites of 6 eggs
to a stiff froth and mix them with the cornstarch; turn it into a
jelly mould and serve cold with strawberry or vanilla sauce. The
mould should be previously rinsed with cold water and sprinkled with
granulated sugar.

558. +Red Cream Pudding.+-- Boil 1 pint fruit juice and 1 pint water;
add 4 tablespoonfuls cornstarch dissolved in cold water, sweeten to
taste and continue the boiling for 5 minutes; remove it to side of
stove, and while yet hot mix it with the whites of 6 eggs beaten to
a stiff froth; turn it into a jelly mould which has been rinsed with
water and sprinkled with sugar and serve cold with vanilla sauce.

559. +Floating Island.+-- Mix 1 quart milk with the yolks of 4 eggs,
4 tablespoonfuls sugar and ½ tablespoonful cornstarch; stir this
over the fire until just about to boil; remove instantly and add 1
teaspoonful vanilla essence; set a glass dish on a wet cloth and
pour in the hot custard; beat the whites to a stiff froth, spread it
over the custard, sprinkle a little sugar over and cover it up for
20 minutes; then set it on ice or in a cool place; serve cold; or
beat the whites with 4 tablespoonfuls fruit jelly to a stiff froth,
heap this meringue upon the custard when cold and dot it with bits
of jelly laid all over it.

560. +Banana Float.+-- Put in a saucepan 1 quart milk, ½
tablespoonful cornstarch, ½ cup sugar and the yolks of 4 eggs; set
the saucepan in a vessel of boiling water and stir over the fire
till nearly boiling; remove instantly, pour the custard into a dish
and add 1 teaspoonful lemon extract; when cold have ½ dozen bananas
cut into slices and stir them into the custard; beat the whites to a
stiff froth, mix with a little powdered sugar, cover the custard
with the meringue, set lady fingers around the edge of dish and
serve.

561. +Peach Float.+-- Blanch 1 cup almonds, chop them very fine and
stir into a custard made the same as in foregoing recipe; pare and
cut some ripe peaches into eighths and stir them into the custard;
put into a glass dish with meringue on top and garnish with kisses
or lady fingers, Orange float is made the same as Banana Float.

562. +Lemon Custard.+-- Boil 1 quart milk with ½ cup sugar and while
boiling stir in 2½ tablespoonfuls cornstarch previously wet with a
little cold milk; stir constantly and boil a few minutes; then
remove it from the fire and add 2 teaspoonfuls lemon essence and the
well beaten yolks of 4 eggs; turn the custard into a glass dish,
beat the whites to a stiff froth, spread it over the top, sprinkle a
little sugar over and serve when cold.

563. +Lemon Cream Pudding.+-- Place a saucepan over the fire with the
rind of 1 lemon and the juice of 3; add 1 cup sugar, 1 cup white
wine and the yolks of 4 eggs; stir this until nearly boiling; remove
it from the fire and add ¾ ounce gelatine which has been soaked for
10 minutes in cold water; when nearly cold add 1 pint sweet cream
beaten to a stiff froth, turn into a jelly mould and set on ice to
get firm; serve without sauce. Or put in a saucepan the yolks of 6
eggs, ½ pint white wine, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, the juice of 3
lemons and the peel of 1; stir this over the fire until it begins to
boil; remove it and add 1 ounce gelatine which has been previously
soaked in cold water; stir until the gelatine is dissolved; when
nearly cold add the whites beaten to a stiff froth; turn into a
jelly mould and set on ice to get firm; serve without sauce.

564. +Custard Bread Pudding.+-- Mix the yolks of 4 eggs with 1 quart
milk, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1 teaspoonful vanilla; pour this
into a pudding dish and lay 2 slices of buttered bread on top of the
custard; bake until nearly done; beat the whites to a froth, mix
with 1 tablespoonful sugar, spread it over the pudding and bake to a
light brown color; serve cold.

565. +Custard.+-- Beat 5 eggs with ½ cup sugar to a cream and add 1
quart milk and 1 teaspoonful vanilla or lemon essence; pour this
into a pudding dish and bake in a medium hot oven till done; to
ascertain when the custard is done put the handle of a teaspoon into
the center of dish; if the custard is thick and jelly-like, and no
milk is to be seen, remove instantly from the oven and serve when
cold, or pour the custard into small cups, set them in a long pan of
hot water and bake in a medium hot oven till the custard is thick.

566. +Apple Custard.+-- Pare and core 6 medium sized apples, put them
in a pan half filled with boiling water, cover with another pan of
same size and let them boil till soft all through, but not broken;
transfer them carefully to a glass dish, sprinkle over some sugar
and when cold put 1 teaspoonful apple, currant or quince jelly in
center of each apple; pour over a cold soft custard. For custard mix
1 pint milk with 3 well beaten eggs and add 2 tablespoonfuls sugar
and 1 teaspoonful cornstarch; stir over the fire till nearly
boiling, flavor with essence of lemon and set aside to cool.

567. +Pineapple Custard.+-- Pare and cut a ripe pineapple into small
pieces, taking care not to lose any of the juice; put the fruit with
sugar into a glass dish and set on ice; boil 1 pint milk; mix 2
tablespoonfuls cornstarch with 1 cup cold milk, add it with a little
salt to the boiling milk and stir and boil for a few minutes; remove
from fire and add 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 3 eggs and 1
teaspoonful vanilla extract; mix this well together and set aside;
when cold pour the custard over the pineapple; have the whites
beaten to a stiff froth, mix a little powdered sugar through it and
put on top of custard like a pyramid; place the dish for ½ hour on
ice before serving.

568. +Strawberry Custard.+-- Wash 1 quart strawberries, drain and put
them besprinkled with sugar in a glass dish; pour over a cold
custard and finish the same as Pineapple Custard.

569. +Peach Custard.+-- Pare and cut into slices some ripe peaches,
sprinkle over some sugar and finish the same as Pineapple Custard.
Apricot custard is made the same way.

570. +Chocolate Fruit Custard.+-- Dissolve 3 tablespoonfuls grated
sweet chocolate in a little milk and mix it with a custard made the
same as Pineapple Custard; when cold pour it over strawberries,
pineapples, oranges or any kind of preserved fruit and cover with
the whites of 3 or 4 eggs beaten to a stiff froth. If preserved
fruit is used the syrup may be used for jelly.

571. +Fruit Custard (with Cake).+-- Cut some sponge cakes several
days old into square pieces; drain off the liquor from a can of
peaches; dip each piece of cake into the liquor and lay them in a
glass dish; lay the peaches between and pour a cold custard over;
spread over the top the whites of 3 or 4 eggs beaten to a stiff
froth, sprinkle over a little sugar and serve. Any kind of stale
cake may be used up in this way.

572. +Tutti Frutti Custard.+-- Cut any kind of stale cake into small
pieces; put a layer of cornstarch custard into a buttered pudding
dish, then a layer of cake; sprinkle over the cake some finely cut
citron, raisins and currants; continue in this way until 2 layers of
cake and 2 of custard are in the dish; cover the top with a meringue
made of the whites of 3 eggs beaten to a stiff froth, add a little
powdered sugar and bake in the oven for a few minutes, till meringue
is a light brown, and serve. The raisins, currants and citron should
be boiled for 15 minutes in a little water before adding them.

573. +Apple Custard Pudding.+-- Pare and core 6 large pippin or
greening apples, place them in a long pan with 1 quart boiling
water, cover with another pan of same size and stew from 5 to 8
minutes, or until a straw will penetrate through them easily; do not
allow them to break; then remove the apples carefully to a pudding
dish and put 1 teaspoonful currant jelly into each apple; stir 5
eggs with 4 tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream and add 1 teaspoonful
lemon extract and 1 quart milk; pour this over the apples and bake
till custard is firm; serve cold in the same dish in which it has
been baked.

574. +Peach Meringue.+-- Boil 3 cups milk with a pinch of salt,
½ tablespoonful butter and 4 tablespoonfuls sugar; mix 2
tablespoonfuls cornstarch with 1 cup milk, stir it into the boiling
milk and continue boiling for a few minutes; then remove from fire
and set aside; when cold mix it with the yolks of 4 eggs and 1
teaspoonful lemon extract; pare and cut into halves 8 or 10 large,
ripe peaches, lay them in a well buttered pudding dish and sprinkle
3 tablespoonfuls sugar over; pour over the cornstarch and bake 20
minutes; draw the dish to front of oven; have the whites beaten to a
stiff froth, spread them over the top, sprinkle a little sugar over
and bake for 5 minutes longer; serve when warm with fruit sauce and
when cold with cream or vanilla sauce. Cherries and pineapples may
be used the same way.

575. +Tipsy Parson.+-- Take a sponge cake several days old, crumble
it up fine, put a layer of it in a glass dish and pour over 1 glass
wine; then add ½ cup finely chopped almonds, then a layer of whipped
cream; then begin over again, by laying another layer of cake
crumbs, almonds and cream; continue in this way till all is used;
let the last layer be cream. All kinds of cake crumbs can be used,
but sponge cake is the best.

576. +Russian Cream Pudding.+-- Rub the skin of 2 lemons and 1 orange
on ½ pound loaf sugar; pound the sugar fine, pour the juice of the
lemons and orange over it, add 1 ounce gelatine (which should be
soaked in a little cold water), 1 pint white wine, 4 whole eggs and
the yolks of 8 eggs; put this into a tin pail and set it in a vessel
of hot water; stir with an egg beater until just about to boil;
remove instantly, add ½ pound sugar and stir until cold; then add 1
quart sweet cream beaten to a froth and ½ pint Madeira wine or rum;
fill the cream into a form and set it on ice; in serving turn the
cream out and garnish with lady fingers and macaroons.

577. +Tapioca Pudding.+-- Wash 3 tablespoonfuls tapioca, put it into
a pudding dish with 1 quart milk and let it stand for 1 hour; then
set the dish on the side of stove to heat gradually; when the
tapioca is soft beat up 3 eggs with 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, stir
them into the tapioca and flavor with 1 teaspoonful lemon extract;
put small pieces of butter over the top and bake in the oven; serve
with or without sauce. Preserved peaches may be sent to table with
it.

578. +Tapioca Meringue.+-- Soak ½ cup tapioca in 1 quart milk for 2
hours; set the dish on the side of stove and let it heat slowly;
stir the yolks of 4 eggs with ½ cup sugar to a cream, add them to
the pudding and flavor with 1 teaspoonful vanilla; put 1
tablespoonful butter in small pieces over the top and bake till it
begins to thicken; beat the whites to a stiff froth and add 1
tablespoonful powdered sugar and a little lemon extract; draw the
pudding to the front of oven, spread the meringue over, set it for a
few minutes back in the oven and serve.

579. +Tapioca Pudding (economical).+-- Soak 1 cup tapioca in 3 cups
water for 3 hours; then put the tapioca into a saucepan, set this
into a vessel of hot water, add 1 cup boiling water and boil till
tapioca is done (or clear); add ½ teaspoonful salt, the juice of 1
lemon and a little grated rind; sweeten with 5 tablespoonfuls sugar,
turn into a jelly mould and serve when cold with the following sauce
made of 1 egg, 2 teaspoonfuls cornstarch and 2 cups water; sweeten
to taste; add a little butter; stir this over the fire till just
about to boil; add a little nutmeg, the juice of 1 lemon and serve
when cold with the pudding; or serve with custard sauce.

580. +Tapioca Pudding (with Lemon Sauce).+-- Soak 1 cup tapioca in 1
quart milk for 2 or 3 hours; put this in a saucepan and add ½
teaspoonful salt and 2 tablespoonfuls butter; set the saucepan in a
vessel of boiling water and boil till tapioca is soft; turn into a
jelly mould and set aside to cool; for the sauce pare 1 lemon as
thinly as possible and boil the skin for 20 minutes, changing the
water 3 times; cut the peel in small strips like straws; place a
saucepan with 1 cup sugar, ½ cup water and the lemon peel over the
fire and boil for 10 minutes; in serving turn the pudding onto a
dish and pour the cold sauce over it. This pudding may be served
with vanilla or lemon custard sauce. Tapioca prepared this way may
also be put into cups.

581. +Tapioca Pudding (with Apples).+-- Soak ½ cup tapioca in cold
water for 2 hours; then mix it with ½ cup sugar, 1 quart milk, 4
eggs and 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract; pare and core 6 pippin or
greening apples, put them in a pan with water, cover them with
another tin pan and let them boil 5 minutes; remove the apples
carefully, put them into a pudding dish, pour the tapioca mixture
over them and bake in the oven; serve with hard sauce or send it to
table without sauce sprinkled with powdered sugar.

582. +Apple Tapioca Pudding.+-- Soak 1 cup tapioca over night in 4
cups water; next morning add about 6 large tart apples, chopped very
fine (or more, according to size), and add 1 cup sugar; bake slowly
until done; to be eaten either warm or cold with cream. A delicate
dish for invalids.

583. +Farina Custard Pudding.+-- Boil 3 tablespoonfuls farina in 1
quart milk with ½ teaspoonful salt; when cold mix it with 4 well
beaten eggs, ½ cup sugar and 1½ teaspoonfuls essence of lemon; put
into a pudding dish and bake till custard is set; eat hot or cold
without sauce. This pudding may also be made with a meringue the
same as Cornstarch Meringue.

584. +Rose Pudding.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup cold water 15
minutes; then add 1 cup boiling water, the yolks of 6 eggs, 6
tablespoonfuls sugar, the peel of 1 lemon and 1 pint white wine;
stir this with an egg beater till it nearly boils; then remove
instantly, add a little cochineal to color it to a beautiful pink
and set aside to cool; when cold and beginning to thicken stir in
the whites beaten to a stiff froth; turn into a mould previously
rinsed with cold water and sprinkled with sugar and set the form on
ice for 2 hours; when ready to serve turn the pudding onto a dish
and send vanilla sauce to table with it.

585. +Figaro Pudding.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in a little water for
15 minutes; place a saucepan with 1 pint sweet cream, the yolks of 4
eggs and 6 tablespoonfuls sugar over the fire and stir until nearly
boiling; add the gelatine and stir till it is dissolved; remove it
from the fire and set aside to cool, stirring it now and then; when
quite cold and beginning to thicken stir in lightly 1 pint whipped
cream and flavor with vanilla; rinse out a mould with cold water,
sprinkle with sugar, fill in the cream and set in a cool place to
form; serve with cold strawberry sauce.

586. +Farina Melusine (with Apples).+-- Bring 1 quart milk to a boil,
add, stirring constantly, 1 cup farina and stir until it forms into
a stiff paste and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; transfer
it to a dish; when cold stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter to a cream and
add alternately the yolks of 6 eggs, the farina, 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar, the rind of 1 lemon and lastly the beaten whites; pare and
core 8 large tart apples, put them in a long pan over the fire, add
1 quart boiling water, cover with another pan of same size and steam
them 5 minutes (no longer); then remove carefully, lay them into a
long shaped pudding dish, put a teaspoonful jelly into each apple
and pour the farina mixture over so the apples are entirely covered;
bake in a medium hot oven about ¾ hour and serve with the following
sauce:--Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter with 1 cup powdered sugar to a
cream, add the yolks of 2 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls rum or Cognac,
a little nutmeg and lastly the whites beaten to a stiff froth;
sufficient for a family of 8 persons.

587. +Farina Beignets.+-- Bring 1 pint milk with 1 tablespoonful
butter to a boil and add, stirring constantly, 1 cup farina;
continue stirring until it loosens itself from the bottom of
saucepan; transfer the farina to a dish and when cold mix it by
degrees with the yolks of 3 eggs, the grated rind of 1 lemon and 1
tablespoonful sugar; divide this into equal parts the size of an
egg, roll them into oblong shapes, dip them into the beaten whites,
roll in fine bread crumbs and fry in boiling lard; serve them dusted
with sugar or send fruit sauce to table with them.

588. +Farina Pudding (without Eggs).+-- Boil 3 pints milk with a
little salt and while boiling sprinkle in slowly 5 tablespoonfuls
farina; set the saucepan with the farina in a vessel of hot water
and continue the boiling for ¾ hour; pour it into a jelly mould
which has been rinsed with cold water and sprinkled with sugar and
serve cold with either wine fruit or vanilla sauce; or sprinkle with
sugar. This pudding may also be eaten with cream or milk, and is
also nice cut into slices and fried; or dip the slices into beaten
egg, roll in fine bread crumbs, fry and serve for breakfast with
meat.

589. +Farina Koch (with Chocolate).+-- Boil 3 cups milk, add 5
tablespoonfuls farina and stir constantly until thick; transfer to a
dish and when cold stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter to a cream, add by
degrees the yolks of 5 eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar and add the
farina by a spoonful at a time; add lastly the whites beaten to a
stiff froth; divide the mixture into 2 halves; mix ½ with 2 ounces
grated vanilla chocolate; put first a layer of the white farina
mixture, then a layer of the chocolate mixture into a well buttered
pudding dish; repeat this operation, lay on top some almonds cut
into strips, sprinkle over some sugar and bake ¾ hour in a medium
hot oven; it may be served with or without sauce; send to table in
the same dish in which it was baked; either set in a silver dish or
pin a napkin around it.

590. +Farina Souflée (with Almonds and Raisins).+-- Boil ¼ pound
farina in 2½ cups milk and 1½ tablespoonfuls butter until thick;
when cold mix it with the yolks of 6 eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar,
a little salt, 2 ounces finely chopped almonds, 10 bitter almonds,
2 ounces seedless raisins and the 6 whites beaten to a stiff froth;
bake in a buttered form and serve as soon as done with raspberry or
wine sauce.

591. +Farina Pudding (with Almonds).+-- Boil 1 quart milk and while
boiling sprinkle in slowly 4 tablespoonfuls farina; add 4
tablespoonfuls finely chopped almonds and continue boiling for 20
minutes; sweeten with 4 tablespoonfuls sugar; when done remove from
fire and add the yolks of 4 eggs; pour it into a glass dish, beat
the whites with 4 tablespoonfuls currant, apple or cranberry jelly
to a stiff froth and spread it over the pudding; serve with claret
sauce made as follows:--Put ½ pint water with 3 slices of lemon,
a piece of cinnamon and 2 cloves over the fire and boil 5 minutes;
then add 1 teaspoonful Bermuda arrowroot and boil 2 minutes; take it
from the fire, add ½ pint claret, sweeten with sugar, strain and
serve with the pudding when cold. If arrowroot is not handy use
cornstarch.

592. +Fine Farina Pudding (boiled).+-- Boil 1 cup farina in 1 pint
milk with a little salt and ½ tablespoonful butter until it becomes
thick and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; when cold stir ¼
pound butter to a cream and add alternately 5 tablespoonfuls sugar,
the yolks of 8 eggs and the boiled farina by a spoonful at a time;
add lastly the beaten whites and grated rind and juice of 1 lemon;
butter a pudding form, sprinkle with fine bread crumbs, fill in the
mixture, close tightly and boil 2 hours; serve with wine cream sauce
(see Sauce). NOTE.--This pudding should be served as soon as taken
out of the form.

593. +Farina Souflée.+-- Bring 1 pint milk with 1 tablespoonful
butter to a boil and add by degrees, stirring constantly, 1 cup
farina; continue stirring until it has formed into a stiff paste and
loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; then transfer it to a dish
and set aside to cool; stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream and
add alternately the yolks of 5 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, the
grated rind of 1 lemon and the farina paste by a spoonful at a time;
stir with a potato masher until all is well mixed; add lastly the
whites beaten to a stiff froth; fill the mixture into a well
buttered pudding form and bake ¾ hour; dust the souflée with sugar
and serve as soon as done; send raspberry or any kind of fruit sauce
to table with it.

594. +Farina Mush.+-- Put 1 quart milk in a saucepan over the fire
and when it boils add gradually, stirring constantly, 1 cup farina;
add ½ teaspoonful salt, a small piece of butter and continue
stirring and boiling for 10 minutes; then add by degrees 1 pint milk
and boil a few minutes longer; serve on a dish dusted with sugar and
if the flavor is liked sprinkle a little cinnamon over; some finely
chopped almonds may be added if liked; or put the farina into a
dish, sprinkle thickly with sugar and hold a red hot poker over it
to brown the sugar.

595. +Farina Pudding (cold).+-- Boil 1 quart milk with ½ teaspoonful
salt, ½ tablespoonful butter and while stirring constantly sprinkle
in slowly 5 tablespoonfuls farina; continue the boiling for 20
minutes; when done remove it to side of stove, add 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar, the yolks of 4 eggs, and while hot add the whites beaten to a
stiff froth; fill this into a form, set it in a cool place and serve
with strawberry sauce made as follows:--Place a saucepan over the
fire with 1 cup water; dissolve 1 heaping teaspoonful cornstarch in
a little cold water, add it to the contents of saucepan, boil for a
few minutes, transfer to a dish and mix with the juice of ½ lemon,
a little Rhine wine and ½ pint fresh strawberry juice.

596. +Fine Farina Pudding (with Vanilla Sauce).+-- Boil 5
tablespoonfuls farina in 1 quart milk with a little salt the same
way as in preceding recipe; as soon as done add 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar, and while hot mix it with the whites of 6 eggs beaten to a
stiff froth; fill the mixture into a jelly mould which has been
rinsed with cold water and sprinkled with granulated sugar and set
on ice to cool; put the 6 yolks with 1 quart milk and 4
tablespoonfuls sugar over the fire and stir until just about to
boil; remove instantly from the fire and flavor with essence of
vanilla.

597. +Figaro Pudding.+-- Boil 1 pint milk with a little salt and 1
tablespoonful butter and while boiling sprinkle in slowly 8
tablespoonfuls farina; stir and boil till the farina is thick and
loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; remove it to a dish to cool;
stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream and add alternately the yolks
of 8 eggs, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, the grated rind of 1 lemon and
the boiled farina by a spoonful at a time; add lastly the whites
beaten to a stiff froth; now divide this mixture into 3 parts; color
first part by stirring a few spoonfuls cocoa into it; add to second
part a little cochineal for the red; the third part leave white; put
this into a well buttered form in 3 layers and boil 2 hours; serve
with wine cream sauce.

598. +Apples au beurre.+-- Pare, cut and quarter 12 large tart
apples, remove the cores and put the apples in a wide kettle with ¼
pound melted butter, ¼ pound sugar and 1 teaspoonful vanilla
extract; cover and let them simmer over a slow fire for 10 minutes;
then turn each piece over, add 2 tablespoonfuls water and let them
stew till tender, but not broken; transfer the apples to a dish;
pile them up high in center; add 4 tablespoonfuls apple jelly to the
syrup, let it boil up and if too thick add a little more water; pour
it over the apples and lay around the edge fleurons of puff paste.

599. +Apple Meringue.+-- Pare, core and cut into quarters 12 large
tart apples and stew them the same as in foregoing recipe; put the
cores and peels covered with water over the fire and boil to a pulp;
strain through a jelly bag; measure the liquor; allow for 1 pint
liquor 1 pound sugar; boil the liquor 10 minutes; then add the
sugar; stir until melted; then remove from fire; pile the apples up
high in a dish, pour over the jelly and when cold cover with a thick
layer of meringue; set it for a few minutes in a cool oven and serve
when cold. Apple marmalade may be used instead of apple jelly and
put into the dish in alternate layers with the apples.

600. +Apples (with Whipped Cream).+-- Pare, core and cut into
quarters 1 dozen large tart apples; boil them in rich sugar syrup
till tender, but not broken; remove the apples carefully to a glass
dish; boil the syrup a little longer and pour it over the apples;
when cold put over a thin layer of currant jelly and over this a
thick layer of whipped cream sweetened with sugar and flavored with
vanilla.

601. +Peches à la Condé.+-- Boil 10 ounces rice for 5 minutes in cold
water, drain in a colander and rinse with cold water; return the
rice to saucepan with 1½ pints sweet cream and boil until tender and
thick; then add 1½ tablespoonfuls butter, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar,
a pinch of salt, 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla extract and the yolks of 4
eggs; butter a plain border mould, dust well with flour, put in the
rice and bake 15 minutes; then set it in a warm place; pare and cut
into halves 1½ dozen peaches and boil them in sugar syrup till a
straw will pierce through them easily; take the fruit out carefully
and lay it on a sieve to drain; crack the pits, take out the
kernels, scald them in boiling water, remove the brown skins and cut
the kernels into strips; put them into the peach syrup and boil
slowly till syrup begins to thicken; put the peaches back into the
syrup and set them in a warm place; shortly before serving turn the
rice border onto a round dish, put the peaches in center, pile them
up, pour the syrup over the fruit and a little over the border and
serve at once. Apricots, apples or pears the same way.

602. +Apricots à la parisienne.+-- Pare 12 or 15 ripe apricots, cut
them in halves and boil in sugar syrup; take them out and set aside
to cool; boil 3 cups milk with ½ tablespoonful butter, 4
tablespoonfuls sugar and a pinch of salt; mix 4 tablespoonfuls
cornstarch with 1 cup cold milk, stir it into the boiling milk and
continue stirring and boiling for a few minutes; remove to side of
stove, add the yolks of 4 eggs and 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla extract;
and while hot stir in the 4 whites beaten to a stiff froth; rinse
out a border mould with cold water, sprinkle thickly with granulated
sugar, put in the cornstarch mixture and set on ice to cool; shortly
before serving turn the border onto a round dish and pile the
apricots high up in the center; reduce the syrup by boiling it a
little longer and pour over the fruit and border when cold. Made of
apples, peaches, pears, cherries, pineapples, currants or
raspberries the same way. NOTE.--Stewed cherries or finely cut
pineapples may be stirred into the cornstarch before putting it into
the form and the border. When turned on the dish it may be decorated
with fresh strawberries, cherries or raspberries. The cornstarch may
be put into a round form. When turned out onto a dish lay the fruit
all over it, cover the whole with a meringue and serve the syrup the
fruit was boiled in as a sauce with it; or serve vanilla sauce with
it.

603. +Pineapple Croutes.+-- Pare and cut a small pineapple into small
pieces and boil them in sugar syrup till tender; take the pineapple
out and reduce the syrup by boiling it down; cut a loaf of stale
bread into slices ¼ inch in thickness, cut the slices into rounds
with a cake cutter and toast them to a handsome brown color; lay
them in a pan and dust with sugar; set them for a few minutes in a
hot oven to glaze; spread a thick layer of apple marmalade over the
bottom of a round dish; also spread each piece of toast with the
marmalade; set them around the edge of dish, pour over some of the
syrup and put the pineapple in the center. Brioche when a few days
old may be used instead of bread.

604. +Cherry Croutes+ are made the same as Pineapple Croûtes. Peach
Croûtes and Apricot Croûtes are also made the same as Pineapple
Croûtes.

605. +Apples in Jelly, No. 1.+-- Pare 1 dozen Spitzenberg apples and
remove the cores with an apple corer without breaking the fruit; put
a wide kettle or saucepan over the fire with sufficient water to
cover the apples, let it come to a boil, put in the apples and boil
till a straw will easily pierce through them; then transfer them
carefully to a long glass dish; boil the liquor down to 1 quart and
add 1 cup sugar and 1 ounce gelatine soaked for 15 minutes in a
little cold water; stir it into the apple syrup, boil for a few
minutes and then set aside; when nearly cold pour the syrup over the
apples and set on ice to get firm; serve with whipped cream or
vanilla sauce. Peaches, pears or quinces are made the same way.
Finely chopped nuts sprinkled over before the jelly has hardened or
freshly grated cocoanut sprinkled over is a great improvement. Half
these quantities will be sufficient for a family of 6.

606. +Apples in Jelly, No. 2.+-- Pare 1 dozen pippin or greening
apples, remove the cores without breaking the fruit and lay the
apples into water with the juice of 1 lemon (this will keep them
from turning); put the peels and cores of apples into a kettle,
cover with water and boil until soft; strain first through
cheesecloth and then through a flannel bag till the liquor is clear;
return the liquor to kettle and when it boils put in the apples;
boil until a straw will easily pierce through them; then remove the
apples carefully to a glass dish; measure the apple water and allow
1 pound sugar for 1 pint water; boil the liquid 20 minutes; then add
the sugar, boil 3 minutes and let it cool off a little; then pour it
over the apples and serve when cold without sauce.

607. +Apples (with Custard).+-- Pare, core and cut into quarters 6
large pippin or greening apples; put ½ cup sugar with 1 cup water in
a wide, low pan over the fire and boil 2 minutes; put in as many
apple quarters as will lay in without crowding one another; boil
until a straw will pierce through them easily; then take the apples
out with a skimmer, lay them in a pudding dish and boil the
remaining apples the same way; when the apples are all done and laid
in the dish make a custard in the following way:--Beat 5 eggs until
very light and add 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla and
1 quart cold milk; pour this over the apples and bake till the
custard is firm; when done remove the dish from oven and serve when
cold with a napkin folded around the dish.

608. +Apples (with Currant Jelly).+-- Take 6 large greening apples, 1
cup currant jelly and 1 cup sugar; pare, core and cut the apples
into quarters and lay them in cold water; put the cores and peels in
a saucepan, cover with water and boil till tender; strain them
through a jelly bag and return liquid to saucepan; as soon as it
boils put in some of the apples (not too many at once, so they do
not crowd one another) and boil until a straw will easily pierce
through them; then take them out carefully, lay on a dish to cool
and boil the remaining apples the same way; when all are boiled
again strain the liquid and boil it 20 minutes; then measure it; add
to 1 pint liquid 1 pound sugar and stir until sugar is dissolved;
then add the currant jelly and stir and boil 2 minutes; then remove
from fire; rinse out a mould with cold water, sprinkle with sugar,
lay in the apple quarters and pour the liquid when nearly cold over
them; set on ice to get firm; in serving turn them onto a dish and
lay a circle of whipped cream around the dish or the whites of 3
eggs beaten to a stiff froth and mixed with 1 tablespoonful powdered
sugar; put the yolks of the 3 eggs with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1
pint milk in saucepan and stir over the fire till just about to
boil; add 1 teaspoonful vanilla and when cold serve with the apples.
This makes a pretty dish for supper or dessert.

609. +Steamed Apples.+-- Pare and core ½ dozen large tart apples and
stick 6 cloves all around into each apple; put them in a pan, put a
little sugar into each apple and pour some boiling water in the pan;
cover and steam them on top of the stove until a straw will
penetrate through them easily; transfer the apples to a dish and set
aside to cool; boil the peels and cores in water till soft; then
strain through a jelly bag, add the water the apples were boiled in
and boil the two together 20 minutes; then add for 1 pint liquid 1
pound sugar and boil 10 minutes more; put 1 teaspoonful currant
jelly into each apple and set aside to cool; arrange the apples
neatly in a long dish, pour the apple jelly over them and set in a
cool place till wanted.

610. +Baked Apples, No. 1.+-- Pare some large greening or pippin
apples and remove the cores without breaking the fruit; set the
apples in a shallow tin pan, fill them with sugar and pour a little
water in bottom of pan; set them in a hot oven to bake till done;
care should be taken not to have them broken; when done remove them
from oven, pile up high in a glass dish and dust with fine sugar.

611. +Baked Apples, No. 2.+-- Wash and dry some large tart apples and
remove the cores without breaking the fruit; set them in a long pan,
add a little water and bake in a hot oven; when done transfer them
to a dish, sprinkle over some sugar and serve hot.

612. +Baked Apples and Cocoanut.+-- Pare and core 6 large greening
apples without breaking them, set in a pan and fill each apple with
sugar; boil the peels and cores in water till soft and strain them
through a bag; pour the liquor over the apples, cover with another
pan and boil on top of stove till they are half done; transfer the
apples to another pan, sprinkle them thickly with freshly grated
cocoanut mixed with sugar and set in oven to bake till done and to a
light brown; in the meantime strain the liquor the apples were
boiled in into a saucepan and measure it; allow for 1 pint liquid 1
pound sugar and boil 5 minutes; when the apples are done remove them
to a glass dish, pour over the apple syrup and sprinkle a thick
layer of fresh cocoanut and sugar over; serve when cold.

613. +Pound Sweets (baked).+-- Remove the cores from ½ dozen pound
sweet apples without breaking them; put them in a long, shallow tin
pan, add a little water and bake till tender; remove them to a glass
dish, put into each apple 1 teaspoonful apple or currant jelly and
dust them over with sugar; serve with or without sweet cream.

614. +Pound Sweets (in Syrup).+-- Pare, core and cut into halves ½
dozen large sweet apples and lay them in cold water with a little
lemon juice or a little vinegar; put the cores and peels over the
fire, cover with water and boil till soft; strain through a coarse
bag, return the liquor to saucepan and add the juice of 1 lemon,
a little of the rind and 1 cup sugar; as soon as it boils put in the
apples; let them boil until a straw will pierce through them easily;
remove the apples to a dish and strain the liquor over them; serve
when cold. A few whole cloves and a piece of cinnamon may be added
if the flavor is liked.

615. +Apples Baked with Jelly.+-- Pare and core 6 good sized greening
or pippin apples and stick cloves all around the top near the
opening into each one; put them in a tin pan in a hot oven, add ½
cup water and bake till done; put the peels and cores in a saucepan,
cover with water and boil till tender; strain through a jelly bag,
return the juice to saucepan and boil 20 minutes; then add for 1
pint juice 1 pound sugar and boil 10 minutes; remove the apples to a
glass dish, pour the apple jelly over them and serve cold.

616. +Apple à la Neige.+-- Pare, core and cut into quarters 6 large
tart apples; put them in saucepan with the peel of ½ lemon, ½ cup
water and cover and stew till the apples fall apart; then press them
through a coarse sieve or colander (the former is the best), add ½
cup sugar and set aside; when cold beat the whites of 6 eggs to a
stiff froth, slowly add the apple sauce and continue the beating for
½ hour; heap it on a glass dish, set lady fingers divided in two all
around the dish with bits of currant jelly between and serve with
the following sauce:--Stir the yolks with 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and
1 teaspoonful vanilla extract to a cream; add slowly 1 pint cold
milk and serve with the above dish. This is a pretty supper dish and
a nice dessert. This dish may be made of peaches or cranberries the
same way.

617. +Apple Sauce.+-- Pare, core and cut into small pieces 12 good
sized tart apples, put them into a saucepan with ½ pint water and
cover and stew till tender; add 1 cup sugar, press it through a
sieve or colander, pour into a glass dish and serve either warm or
cold.

618. +Apple Sauce (economical).+-- Wash 1 dozen tart apples and cut
them into pieces; put them over the fire in a porcelain-lined or
agate saucepan, add 1 cup water, cover tightly and stew till tender;
when done press them through a sieve or colander (the former is
best), sweeten with sugar and serve. Apple sauce made in this way
needs only half the apples, and is equally as nice when made right
as if the apples were peeled. Apples should never be stewed in rusty
tins or iron pots, as they will spoil the appearance of the sauce.
Take either a porcelain-lined saucepan, an agate kettle, a new tin
kettle or pan or a stone saucepan. Either of these are good for
stewing fruit in.

619. +Apples Stewed with Lemons.+-- Pare, core and quarter 12 good
sized tart apples; put a kettle over the fire with 1 quart water, 1
cup sugar, 1 large lemon cut into thin slices and freed from the
pits and boil for a few minutes; then put in the apples and boil
until a straw will pierce through them easily; then remove from
fire, put the apples into a dish and pour the strained syrup over
them; serve either warm or cold.

620. +Apples Stewed Whole with Currants.+-- Pare and core 1 dozen
medium sized tart apples without breaking them; boil 1 cup sugar
with 1 pint water to a syrup, put in the apples and boil till a
straw will pierce through them easily; then take out the apples
carefully; put ½ cup well washed and dried currants into the syrup
and boil 5 minutes; pour it over the apples and serve when cold.
Finely cut citron or seedless raisins may be used instead of
currants, or use all three together.

621. +Stewed Dried Apples.+-- Wash and soak the apples for 1 hour,
put them in a saucepan, cover with cold water (or put them on with
the water they were soaked in), cover, boil slowly till tender and
sweeten them with sugar; serve either hot or cold.

622. +Stewed Evaporated Apples.+-- Wash ½ pound evaporated apples in
several waters, put them in a saucepan, cover with cold water and
boil till tender; add ½ cup sugar and boil for a few minutes;
transfer them to a dish and serve either hot or cold; or press the
apples when done through a sieve and serve in a glass dish.

623. +Peaches Stewed Whole.+-- Pare 1 quart small peaches; boil 1 cup
sugar with 1 cup water for a few minutes, put in the peaches and
boil till the fruit shows signs of baking; then remove and when
nearly cold pour them into a glass dish and serve cold. Apricots are
stewed the same way.

624. +Stewed Dried Peaches.+-- Wash and soak ½ pound dried peaches
for several hours in cold water, put them with the water they were
soaked in over the fire and boil slowly till tender; add sufficient
sugar to sweeten and let them boil for 2 minutes longer; transfer
the fruit to a dish and serve cold.

625. +Stewed Cherries.+-- Remove the pits from 2 pounds cherries;
boil 1 cup sugar with 1 pint water to a syrup, put in the cherries
and boil 3 minutes; pour them into a dish and serve when cold. If
the cherries are tasteless add the juice of 1 lemon or use 1 cup
water, 1 cup red wine and a stick of cinnamon. If the cherries are
small stew them with the pits.

626. +Stewed Quinces.+-- Pare and cut the quinces into quarters and
lay them in cold water; put the peels and cores over the fire, cover
with water and boil till tender; strain them through a coarse bag
made of double cheesecloth; put the liquor over the fire and when it
boils add the quinces and boil till they are soft; then add
sufficient sugar to sweeten, boil for a few minutes, pour them into
a dish and set aside to cool till wanted.

627. +Stewed Dried Apricots.+-- Wash and soak ½ pound dried apricots
for 2 hours in cold water, put them with the water they were soaked
in over the fire and boil till done; if the water boils away add
more; add lastly sufficient sugar to sweeten and serve when cold.
Dried cherries are stewed the same way.

628. +Baked Pears.+-- Remove the eyes from 1 dozen nice, ripe pears,
put them in a pan with 1 cup water, sprinkle over a little sugar and
bake till done; remove them to a glass dish, pour over the syrup
from pan, sprinkle with sugar and serve cold.

629. +Stewed Pears.+-- Pare 2 dozen stewing pears (if they are large
cut them in halves or quarters, if small leave them whole); put a
kettle with 1 cup sugar and 2 cups water over the fire and boil a
few minutes; put in the pears and stew till done; pour them into a
dish and serve cold. If the syrup should be too thin a teaspoonful
cornstarch wet with cold water may be added and boiled with them for
a few minutes. A little claret, cinnamon, lemon juice and rind may
also be added if liked.

630. +Stewed Dried Pears.+-- Wash and soak 1 pound dried pears for 2
hours; put them over the fire, covered with cold water, add a small
stick of cinnamon, a little lemon juice and peel and boil until
nearly done; then add 5 tablespoonfuls sugar and boil till done.

631. +Stewed Dried Prunes.+-- Wash 1 pound dried prunes in several
waters, put them in a saucepan, cover with cold water, add the juice
and rind of 1 lemon and stew till tender; if the water boils away
add more; when done add 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, pour them into a
glass dish and serve cold. If the liquor of the prunes should be too
much or too thin dissolve a little cornstarch in cold water, add it
to the prunes and let them boil for a minute; but care must be taken
not to get them too thick.

632. +Prunelles.+-- Wash ½ pound prunelles in several waters and soak
them for 2 hours in cold water; then put them over the fire with the
same water they were soaked in to boil slowly till tender; when
nearly done add 1 cup sugar and boil till done; pour them into a
dish and serve when cold. If not sweet enough add more sugar.

633. +Stewed Cranberries.+-- 1 quart cranberries, 2 cups sugar and 1
cup water; wash and pick over the cranberries carefully, put them in
a saucepan with 1 cup water, cover and stew till tender; then strain
them through a sieve; return the pulp to saucepan and boil for a few
minutes; add the sugar and stir and boil just long enough to melt
the sugar; rinse out a mould with cold water and sprinkle with
granulated sugar; pour the cranberries when nearly cold into the
mould and set it in a cool place to get firm.

634. +Stewed Huckleberries.+-- Pick over 1 quart huckleberries, put
them in a colander and rinse with cold water; put a saucepan with ½
cup sugar and ½ cup water over the fire and add the juice of 1
lemon; when it boils add the huckleberries, cover and stew slowly 10
minutes; add 1 teaspoonful cornstarch wet with cold water and boil
for 1 minute; remove the berries from the fire, add ½ cup port wine,
pour them into a dish and serve when cold. They are excellent when
eaten with German pancake, fried bread or French toast. Or put the
huckleberries with ½ cup water, a little lemon juice (or 1
tablespoonful vinegar) and a small stick of cinnamon in a saucepan
over the fire, boil 8 or 10 minutes and sweeten them to taste; break
2 or 3 zwiebacks into small pieces, put them in a dish and pour the
huckleberries over them; remove the cinnamon and serve when cold. ½
cup claret added to the huckleberries adds greatly to the flavor.

635. +Stewed Rhubarb.+-- Pare and cut 2 bunches rhubarb into small
pieces and put over the fire in a porcelain-lined or agate saucepan;
add ½ cup water and boil till soft; add 1½ cups sugar or sweeten to
taste; boil until the sugar is dissolved, pour into a dish and serve
cold.

636. +Stewed Rhubarb (with Eggs).+-- Stew the rhubarb the same as in
foregoing recipe and take it from the fire; beat 3 eggs to a froth
and add 2 tablespoonfuls cold water; then stir in the rhubarb a
little at a time; mix well together and serve cold. If stewed
rhubarb is too thin add 1 teaspoonful cornstarch wet with cold water
and let it boil 1 or 2 minutes.

637. +Compote of Gooseberries.+-- Select 1 quart large gooseberries,
remove heads and stems and wash and drain them; put them in a
kettle, cover with boiling water and boil 5 minutes; pour in a
colander to drain; boil 1 cup sugar with ¼ pound water to a syrup
and add ¾ cup white wine; put the gooseberries in a porcelain or
glass dish and pour the syrup over them; serve when cold.

638. +Compote of Strawberries.+-- Press out the juice from 1 pint
large, ripe strawberries and mix it with 6 tablespoonfuls sugar;
shortly before serving wash and drain 1½ quarts large, ripe
strawberries, put them into a glass dish, sprinkle over 3
tablespoonfuls sugar, pour in half of the cold syrup, shake them up,
pour over the other half and serve at once.

639. +Compote of Cherries.+-- Remove the pits from 2 pounds large
cherries; boil 1¼ cups sugar with ¾ cup water to a syrup, put in the
cherries and boil 2 minutes; pour them into a dish, cover with paper
and set in a cool place; when cool drain off the syrup and reduce it
to one-half by boiling it down; then set aside to cool; in serving
put the cherries into a glass or fine porcelain dish and pour the
cold syrup over them.

640. +Compote of Raspberries.+-- Pick over carefully 1½ quarts
raspberries, put them in a glass dish and set on ice; shortly before
serving sprinkle over 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; press out the juice of
1 pint raspberries, put the liquid with the same quantity of sugar
over the fire and boil 10 minutes; let it get cold and pour the
syrup just before serving over the raspberries. Currant juice may be
used instead of raspberry juice. A compote may also be prepared with
half currants and half raspberries.

641. +Compote of Greengages (or large Egg Plums).+-- Select 3 dozen
ripe plums, either greengages or the large egg plums, prick them
with a needle all around the stem, put them in a kettle with boiling
water and let them boil 30 minutes; drain them on a sieve; boil 1½
cups sugar with 1 cup water to a syrup; put the plums in a dish,
pour the boiling syrup over, cover with paper and set them in a cool
place for 2 hours; then drain off the syrup and reduce to one-half
by boiling it down; arrange the plums nicely in a dish and pour the
cold syrup over them.

642. +Compote of Plums.+-- Choose 3 dozen large blue plums, cut them
open on side, remove the pits and pare off the skins; boil 1 cup
sugar with 1 cup water, put in the plums and boil a few minutes;
pour them into a dish, cover with paper and let them cool; when cold
pour the plums onto a sieve and drain off all the liquid; put the
syrup over the fire and boil 10 minutes; when cold put the plums
into a glass dish and pour the cold syrup over them.

643. +Compote of Oranges.+-- Pare and cut 10 large oranges into
slices, remove the pits and sprinkle 6 tablespoonfuls sugar over
them; let them stand 1 hour; drain off the syrup, put it over the
fire, add the juice of 1 lemon and boil slowly 8 minutes; then set
aside to cool; just before serving pour the syrup over the oranges
and send to table in a glass dish.

644. +Compote of Prunes.+-- Wash 1 pound French prunes in several
waters, put them in a saucepan, add sufficient red wine to cover,
add a small piece of whole cinnamon and the peel of 1 lemon and boil
slowly for 2 hours, or until they are soft; when done add 4
tablespoonfuls sugar and as soon as melted remove them from the
fire; serve when cold in a glass dish.

645. +Compote of Raisins.+-- Remove the pits from 1 pound large
raisins, put them in a saucepan with ½ pint water, ½ pint Madeira
wine and 1 cup sugar and boil them slowly for 1 hour; serve in a
glass dish when cold.

646. +Compote of Dates.+-- Cut 1 pound dates open at the side and
remove the pits; put the dates with a little Malaga wine, ½ cup
water and 4 tablespoonfuls sugar over the fire and boil slowly
nearly 1 hour; then serve when cold.

647. +Compote de Marrons.+-- Remove the shell from 2 dozen large
Italian chestnuts and boil the nuts for a few minutes in water; take
them out one at a time and remove the brown skin; boil ½ pound sugar
with ½ cup water, put in the chestnuts, pour them together with the
syrup into a stone dish, cover and set them in a cool place; next
day pour off the syrup, boil it up, add 1 teaspoonful vanilla
extract and pour it over the nuts; repeat this once more and serve
when cold.

648. +Compote Chaude de Marrons.+-- Shortly before serving roast 2 or
3 dozen large Italian chestnuts in the oven, remove the shells and
lay the nuts into a hot dish; put 1 gill rum in a small saucepan
with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; let it get hot, pour over the
chestnuts, light the rum and bring it burning to table.

649. +Compote of Pineapple.+-- Cut a large, ripe pineapple into thin
slices, pare them carefully and remove the core in center; boil 1
cup sugar with ½ cup water; lay the pineapple slices into a dish and
pour the syrup over them boiling hot; cover and let them stand 2
hours; shortly before serving lay the slices in a glass dish and
pour the syrup through a fine sieve over them.

650. +Compote of Quinces.+-- Chose ½ dozen large apple quinces, pare
and cut them into quarters, remove the cores and lay the quinces in
cold water; put the peels and cores in a kettle, cover with water
and boil till soft; strain them first through a coarse bag, then
through a flannel bag; return the liquor to kettle, add 1 cup sugar,
boil for a few minutes, put in the quinces and boil till tender; put
them into a dish and strain the syrup over them.

651. +Compote of Peaches.+-- Cut into halves 20 large, sound peaches,
pare them carefully and remove the pits; crack the pits open, take
out the kernels, scald them in boiling water and remove the brown
skins; place a porcelain-lined or agate kettle with 1 cup sugar and
1 cup water over the fire and boil a few minutes; put in the peaches
and kernels and boil from 6-8 minutes; pour them into a deep
porcelain dish, cover with paper and set aside; when cold put them
in a sieve or colander over the kettle the peaches were boiled in;
drain off all the liquid and boil it down to one-half; shortly
before serving pile the peaches up high in a glass dish and pour the
syrup over them cold.

652. +Compote of Apricots+ is made the same as Compote of Peaches.

653. +Compote of Pears.+-- Pare and cut 2 dozen medium sized ripe
pears into halves, remove the cores and put the pears in cold water
with the juice of 1 lemon or 2 tablespoonfuls white vinegar; place a
kettle over the fire with 1 pint water, 10 tablespoonfuls sugar, the
juice of 1 lemon, half the rind and boil 3 minutes; remove the scum,
put in the pears and boil till a straw will pierce through them
easily; then pour them in a deep stone bowl, cover with paper and
set aside; when cold drain off the liquor and boil it down to
one-half; then set aside to cool; shortly before serving pile the
pears up high in a glass dish and pour the syrup over them cold. If
large pears are taken use a smaller quantity; if small pears are
chosen use a larger quantity, leave them whole, cut the stems off
half way and pare them.

654. +Compote de Melons.+-- Select 1 large muskmelon (not too ripe),
cut it in half, remove the seeds with a tablespoon, cut the melon
into large pieces, pare off the skin and cut each long piece in two;
put the melon pieces in a saucepan, cover with boiling water and
boil 5 minutes; take them out with a skimmer and lay the melon
pieces on a dish to cool; put a kettle over the fire with 1 pound
sugar and 1 pint water and boil a few minutes; put in the melon and
boil 20 minutes; pour it into a dish, cover with paper and set in a
cool place; when cold drain off the syrup, return it to kettle and
boil slowly 10 minutes; then set aside to cool; pile the melon up
high in a glass dish and pour the cold syrup over it. A piece of
green ginger root or the juice of 1 lemon may be boiled with the
melon.

655. +Compote of Watermelon.+-- Select a nice, ripe watermelon, cut
it in half, then into slices, remove the black pits and cut the red
part into small pieces; take for 1 quart of such pieces 2 cups
sugar, 1 pint water, a piece of green ginger and the juice of 1
lemon; put sugar, ginger and lemon juice over the fire and boil 5
minutes; put in the melon pieces and boil slowly about 20 minutes;
pour into a dish and cover with paper; when cold drain off the
syrup, return it to kettle and boil 10 to 15 minutes; arrange the
melon nicely in a glass dish and pour the cold syrup over it; remove
the ginger before sending to table. The white part of the melon may
be used for preserving. If the melon is a large one part of it may
be used for compote and the other part cut up into slices and
served. A third part may be used as a fruit salad. (See Fruit
Salad.)

656. +Compote of Apples.+-- Choose medium sized tart apples, pare and
cut them into halves, take out the cores, round the edges and lay
them in cold water with lemon juice; boil 1 pound sugar with 1 pint
water and the rind and juice of 1 lemon in a wide, low saucepan; put
in the apples and let them boil 3 minutes; then turn the apples
around, cover the pan and set it on side of stove, where they will
stop boiling; let them stand 10 minutes; then thrust a straw through
them; if it goes through easily they are done; if not, boil them for
a minute longer; remove them from fire and set aside; when cold take
the apples out of the syrup and lay them on a sieve; boil the syrup
down until it thickens; pile the apples up in a glass dish and pour
the syrup over when cold.

657. +Compote de Strélity.+-- Pare, core, cut into quarters and then
into fine slices 12 large pippin apples; boil 1 cup sugar with 1 cup
Rhine wine, 1 cup water, the juice of 1 lemon and 3 ounces finely
sliced citron; put in the apples and boil them for a few minutes;
then set aside to cool; soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup water 20
minutes; add 1 cup boiling water and stir until dissolved; add it to
the apples and boil for 1 minute; then remove from fire; when cold
and beginning to thicken rinse out some small cups or forms with
cold water, sprinkle each one with granulated sugar, fill them ¾
full of apples and set on ice; boil ¾ cup sugar with ½ cup Rhine
wine and a little lemon juice to a syrup and set it in a cool place
until wanted; in serving turn the apples out of the cups, put them
on a round or oval-shaped dish and pour the syrup over them; or
serve the apples with whipped cream.




PIES.


658. +Directions for Making Pies.+-- To succeed in making good pastry
the following rules should be observed:--Flour should be of the best
quality, dry and sifted before using. Butter, unless fresh, should
be washed several times in cold water and dried in a napkin. Lard
should be sweet, and is best when tried out from leaf lard. If suet
is used it should be fresh, chopped fine and freed from all skin.
During the process of chopping it should be dredged with flour. Beef
dripping should be clarified, and if the dripping has any odor or
by-taste a very disagreeable flavor will be imparted to the paste.
Strict cleanliness must be observed. All utensils used for pastry
making should be clean and kept exclusively for that purpose.
Prepare the crust as quickly as possible and do not touch it with
your hands any more than necessary. When the crust is ready take a
pie plate (agate pie plates are the best) and dust it with flour; do
not grease it with butter or lard. Cut off a portion of the crust,
roll it out thin, lay it over the plate, press it down lightly with
the hand, set the plate in front of you, press with the palms of
both hands against the edge of plate and cut the paste which hangs
over the edge off with your fingers. The plate is then ready to
receive the ingredients of which the pie is to be made. If pumpkin,
cocoanut or custard pie is to be made, brush the surface of crust
over with beaten egg and sprinkle over 2 tablespoonfuls finely
sifted bread or cracker crumbs; then fill in the mixture. This keeps
the crust dry and prevents it from being heavy. Pies that are made
of stewed or preserved fruit should also be treated the same way.
For fine meringue pies the crust should be baked before the mixture
is put in. This is done in the following manner:--Line the pie plate
with crust and brush the edge over with beaten egg; then roll some
pie crust very thin, cut it into strips 1 inch wide and cut one side
of the strips into scallops with a knife; wet the edge of crust on
the pie plate with beaten egg or water; then lay the strip around
the edge of plate so the scallops stand a little above the edge;
next lay some thin, buttered brown paper into the plate all over the
crust, fill the plate with dry peas and bake it in a medium hot oven
till crust is done; then take it from the oven, remove paper and
peas, fill in the mixture and bake again till pie is done; draw the
pie to front of oven, spread over the meringue and let it remain in
oven for a few minutes; then transfer it to a cool place and serve
cold. 1 or 2 quarts of dry peas should be kept for this purpose
only. They may be put away in a box or glass jar and can then be
used several times. If the peas should at any time become rancid
from the butter or lard of which the pie crust is made, pour boiling
water over them and drain and rub thoroughly with a dry towel; then
spread them apart on shallow tins and when dry put away until wanted
again. Instead of peas the pie plate may be filled with pieces of
stale bread, which can then be used for bread crumbs; but peas are
best for this purpose.

659. +Pie Crust (quick and good).+-- 2 cups flour, ½ teaspoonful
salt, ½ cup ice water and 1 cup lard; sift flour and salt in a bowl,
add the lard and chop it fine with a knife in the flour; add the
water and mix it with the same knife into a stiff paste; put the
paste on a floured board and work it for a few minutes with the
knife; take a portion from it and roll it out thin; line a pie plate
with it and fill the plate with the ingredients the pie is to be
made of; roll out another portion of paste and spread over the top ½
tablespoonful lard; lay this over the pie with the lard side up,
press the paste off which hangs over the edge of plate with your
hands and place the pie in oven to bake. This crust is excellent,
inexpensive and quickly made; sufficient for 2 large pies.

660. +Rich Pie Crust.+-- ½ pound flour, ½ teaspoonful salt, ½ pound
lard and ½ cup ice water; sift flour and salt into a bowl, add the
water and mix it into a paste; put the paste on a floured board and
work it thoroughly for 5 minutes, or until it does not stick to the
hands; then roll it out into a square about an inch in thickness;
also shape the lard into a square, but 1 inch smaller than the
paste; lay it in center of paste, fold the paste over and place it
for ½ hour on ice; then put it on the board again, dust it under and
over with flour, roll it out 3 times as long as wide with a rolling
pin, fold over one-third to the center, roll over it once, fold the
other end over that, so the paste is three double, roll over it once
with the rolling pin, turn the paste around, roll it out again 3
times as long as wide, fold it up the same way as before and set the
paste again for ½ hour on ice; repeat the folding and rolling twice
more and let it rest each time for ½ hour; when ready to make the
pie roll a portion of the paste out very thin, line pie plate as
directed with it and fill the plate with the ingredients the pie is
to be made of; roll out another portion of the paste, spread the top
thickly with lard, lay the paste over the pie with the lard side up
and remove the paste which hangs over the edge of plate by pressing
against the edge with the palm of your hand; sufficient for 2 large
pies.

661. +Fine Pie Crust.+-- 1 pound flour, 1 teaspoonful salt, ½ pint
ice water, ½ pound lard, 6 ounces butter and the yolk of 1 egg; sift
flour and salt in a bowl, add ½ the lard and chop it fine in the
flour with a knife; put the yolk in the ice water and beat it with
an egg beater till it foams; then add it to the flour and mix it
with the same knife into a stiff paste; turn the paste onto a
floured board and roll it into a square piece about an inch in
thickness; form the remaining lard and the butter also into a square
piece, but 1½ inches smaller on all sides; lay it in center of
paste, fold it over the lard and butter together, first from right
and left, then from and towards you; lay the paste onto a plate and
let it rest for ½ hour on ice; then put it on a board, dust under
and over with flour and roll it out 3 times as long as wide, rolling
always from you; fold over one-third to the center, roll over it
once with the rolling pin, fold the other end over that, so the
paste is 3 double, roll over it once with a rolling pin, turn the
paste around, roll it out again 3 times as long as wide, fold it up
the same as above and set the paste again for ½ hour on ice or in a
cool place; repeat the rolling out and folding up twice more and let
it rest each time ½ hour; after the last rolling let it rest 10
minutes and then use as directed; sufficient for 4 large pies.

662. +Family Pie Crust.+-- ½ pound butter, 6 ounces lard, 1 pound
flour, 1 cup ice water and ½ teaspoonful salt; sift flour and salt
into a bowl, add the lard and chop it up with a broad-bladed knife
into the flour until it is very fine; next pour in the ice water and
mix it with the same knife into a smooth paste; turn it onto a
floured board, dust under and over with flour and roll it out 1 inch
in thickness; divide the butter into 3 parts; put 1 part in small
bits in regular rows all over the paste; then fold it up, first the
right side towards the left, then the left side towards the right,
so the paste has 3 thicknesses; turn it around, roll it out again
the same way, put over the second part of butter, fold it up and
roll out again the same way; put over the third part of butter, fold
it up and roll it out twice more; let it rest for 1 hour on ice or
in a cool place; then use; while the rolling and folding is going on
flour must be sprinkled under and over the paste; the rolling pin
must be kept floured, to keep the paste from sticking to it. This
paste may be made the day before it is to be used, and if it stands
for 2 or 3 days it will not hurt it as long as the paste is kept in
a cool place; sufficient for 4 large pies.

663. +Fine Paste for Meat Pies, Patties and Baked Apple
Dumplings.+-- Put 1 pound sifted flour on a paste board, make a
hollow in center and put in the yolks of 3 eggs and ½ pound butter;
work this quickly with your hands into a stiff paste, adding by
degrees a little ice water; then roll it out 1 inch in thickness and
fold the right and left side to the center, so they meet together;
then fold the other two sides over to the center the same way and
set it for 1 hour on ice or in a cool place; when that time has
expired lay the paste onto a floured board, roll it out 3 times as
long as wide, fold one-third over to the center, roll over it once
with the rolling pin, fold the other third over that, so the paste
has 3 layers, roll out again 3 times as long as wide, fold it up the
same way, let it rest for ½ hour and roll and fold it up once more;
then use. This paste is excellent for chicken, oyster, pigeon or
beefsteak pie; also for baked apple dumplings and fine patties;
sufficient for 1 large pie or for 9 apple dumplings.

664. +Puff Paste.+-- 1 pound flour, a pinch of salt, 1 cup ice water
and 1 pound butter; sift flour in a bowl, add salt and ice water and
mix it into a smooth paste; work it thoroughly on the board with
your hands for 5 minutes, cover and set it for 20 minutes on ice;
knead the butter well in ice water, to remove the salt, and dry it
in a napkin; put the paste onto a floured board and roll it out into
a square about 1½ inches in thickness; press the butter flat, also
into a square, but smaller than the paste; lay the butter in center
of paste and fold the paste first from the right and left side; then
from you and towards you over the butter together; turn the paste
over with the folded side towards the board; dust under and over a
little flour and roll the paste out 3 times as long as wide; fold
the lower third over the center and roll over it once with the
rolling pin; then fold over that the upper third, so the paste is
three double; roll over it once with the rolling pin; turn the paste
around, roll it out again 3 times as long as wide, fold it again 3
double, lay it on a plate and set the paste for 1 hour on ice; then
roll it out again and fold the same way twice; let it rest for ½
hour on ice; roll and fold it twice more, so the paste has been
rolled out and folded up 6 times; after the last rolling let it rest
for 20 minutes and then use. The rolling out and folding together
must be done with the greatest care, so the layers fit exactly over
one another, as the whole success depends upon this. The paste has
attained its greatest lightness when rolled and folded together 6
times; if it is rolled out oftener it will loose in lightness; and
if it is to be used where lightness is not wanted it must be rolled
and folded together from 8 to 10 times. Puff paste is best made in a
cool place, and if handy on a marble slab.

665. +Short Paste (Mürber Teig--German art).+-- ½ pound sifted flour,
6 ounces butter, the yolks of 4 eggs, a pinch of salt, 1
tablespoonful sugar and the grated rind of ½ lemon; knead the butter
in ice water, to remove the salt, and dry it in a napkin; put the
flour on a board, make a hollow in center, put in the yolks, lemon,
sugar, salt and butter and work it quickly into a smooth dough with
your hands; set it on ice for 1 hour before using. Another way:--½
cup butter, the yolks of 3 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls cream, ½
tablespoonful sugar, a pinch of salt and ½ pound flour; mix these
ingredients together the same as above. Short paste (or Mürber Teig)
is used a great deal in Germany the same as pie crust in America,
and is excellent when made right. A very nice pie is made as
follows:--Roll the paste out very thin, cover a pie plate with it
(one which is not very deep), cut off what hangs over the edge of
plate, spread a thick layer of any kind of fruit marmalade over it,
cover with a thin layer of the paste and bake in a quick oven; or
bake thin layers of the paste the same as Jelly Cake, and when done
lay 2 together with jelly, fruit marmalade or whipped cream between
them. Another way to use it is:--Roll the paste out ⅛ of an inch in
thickness, cut it into rounds with a cake cutter, brush them over
with beaten egg and sprinkle chopped nuts and sugar over them; bake
in a medium hot oven and serve with wine.

666. +Neapolitan Paste.+-- Scald 5 ounces almonds in boiling water
and let them lay for a few minutes; then remove the brown skins and
pound the almonds fine in a wedgewood mortar with the yolks of 4
eggs and 1 tablespoonful powdered sugar; sift 1 pound flour on a
pastry board, make a hollow in center, put in ¾ pound butter, ½
pound powdered sugar, the almonds, 1 whole egg and 1 yolk and the
finely chopped peel of 1 lemon; work this into a stiff paste and set
it for 1 hour on ice before using.

667. +Florentinian Paste.+-- Sift 1 pound flour on a pastry board,
make a hollow in center, put in 1 cup butter, 1 cup sugar, 5 ounces
grated chocolate, 2 whole eggs and the yolks of 5 hard boiled eggs
rubbed through a sieve; add a little cinnamon and vanilla; knead
this into a smooth paste and let it stand for 1 hour in a cool place
before using.

668. +Almond Paste.+-- Pour boiling water over ½ pound almonds,
remove the brown skins, let the almonds lay in cold water for 24
hours and change the water 2 or 3 times; then pound the almonds in a
wedgewood mortar with 2 tablespoonfuls water and the juice of ½
lemon; press them through a sieve and mix with ½ pound powdered
sugar into a stiff paste; put the paste into a porcelain-lined
saucepan and stir over the fire until it loosens itself from bottom
of saucepan; remove the paste from the fire and when cold put some
powdered sugar on a pastry board, lay the paste on the sugar and
work it into a round ball; then set it in a cool place 1 hour before
using.

669. +Boiled Paste (Paté à choux).+-- Place a saucepan with 1 pint
water or milk over the fire and add 1 cup butter, 1½ tablespoonfuls
sugar, ¼ teaspoonful salt and the peel of 1 lemon; as soon as it
boils sprinkle in slowly, stirring constantly, 1 pint sifted flour;
continue stirring until it has formed into a smooth paste and
loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; transfer the paste to a dish
and let it cool; then mix it by degrees with 8 whole eggs and use
for cream cakes, chocolate eclairs and other small cakes.

670. +Nudels.+-- Sift 1 cup flour in a bowl and add a pinch of salt,
a piece of butter the size of a hazel nut, 1 egg and 1 tablespoonful
water; mix this into a stiff paste and work it well on a board so it
does not stick to the hands; then divide it into 4 equal parts; roll
each part out as thin as paper and let them lay on a board to dry
for 10 minutes; then cut them into strips 1 inch wide; lay 4 strips
over one another and cut them as fine as possible, like fine straws;
when all are cut scatter the nudels all over the board and let them
lay till dry; then use or put them away in a box; they will keep for
some time. The yolks of 2 eggs may be used instead of 1 whole egg.
Nudels are used for puddings or souflées and serve as a dessert;
they are also largely used in soup. They should always be put into
boiling water, soup or milk and boiled 10 minutes when wanted for
use.

671. +Mince Pie.+-- 1 pound finely chopped boiled beef, ½ pound
finely chopped suet, 1 pound well washed and dried currants, 1 pound
stoned raisins, 1 pound finely cut citron, 1 pound sugar, ½
teaspoonful salt, the juice and a little grated rind of 2 oranges,
the juice and grated rind of 1 lemon, 1 pint cider, ½ pint brandy, ½
pint sherry wine, 1 teaspoonful ground cloves, 1 teaspoonful
cinnamon, 1 teaspoonful mace, 1 grated nutmeg and 3 pounds finely
chopped apples; mix all the ingredients well together and use;
sufficient for 6 good sized pies. If this mince meat, is to be kept
for any length of time omit the apples and fill the mince meat into
glass jars; close tightly and keep them in a cool place. It will
then keep all winter. When wanted to make pies of take 1 jar at a
time and mix the mince meat with an equal portion of chopped apples;
line 2 pie plates with rich pie crust, fill them with the mince
meat, cover with same crust as directed (see Directions for Pies),
cut a small opening in center and one on each side of upper crust
and place the pie in a medium hot oven to bake; when done remove it
from oven and pour a little good brandy in center, sides and
openings and serve warm. Mince pies will keep in a cool place for
two weeks, but they should always be put for 10 or 15 minutes in the
oven to heat through before serving. For a large quantity of mince
meat put 8 pounds beef off the round in a kettle of boiling water,
add 1 tablespoonful salt and boil till tender; when done remove the
kettle from the fire and set aside to cool; then take out the meat,
remove all skin, fat and hard part and chop the meat as fine as
possible; then weigh the chopped meat and take for each pound the
same ingredients as in above recipe; put it away in well closed jars
without the apples.

672. +Mock Mince Pie.+-- 3 finely rolled soda crackers, 1 cup well
washed currants, ½ cup stoned raisins, ½ cup finely cut citron, ½
teaspoonful ground cloves, 1 teaspoonful cinnamon, ½ grated nutmeg,
½ teaspoonful salt, 1 tablespoonful butter, ½ cup sugar, ½ cup
molasses, ½ cup brandy or wine, the juice of 1 orange and a little
grated rind, the juice and grated rind of ½ lemon and ¼ pound dried
apples; wash and stew the dried apples till tender; add the ½ cup
sugar and sufficient boiling water to make 3 cupfuls stewed apples;
set aside to cool; then mix them first with the rolled soda
crackers, by degrees with all the other ingredients and use as
directed for pies; sufficient for 3 medium sized pies or 2 large
ones. A good plan is to leave a small opening in center of upper
crust and when the pies are done pour a little brandy into it.

673. +Apple Pie, No. 1.+-- Line a pie plate with crust as directed
(see Directions for Pies); pare, quarter and cut greening or pippin
apples into fine slices; fill the plate with apples, sprinkle over
some sugar (about 2 tablespoonfuls for a medium sized pie), cover
with crust and bake till apples are done and the crust has attained
a delicate light brown color. If the flavor is liked a pinch of
cinnamon and nutmeg may be added. In the spring of the year the
juice of ½ lemon squeezed over the apples of each pie is a great
improvement, as the apples have lost a great part of their flavor.
Apple pies are best when eaten the same day they are baked. If they
stand over till next day they should be put in the oven for about 10
minutes 1 hour before serving. They will then be as good as fresh
pies; otherwise the crust is apt to be tough.

674. +Apple Pie, No. 2.+-- Make an apple pie the same as in foregoing
recipe; put ½ tablespoonful butter in small bits over the apples,
grate over a very little nutmeg and a pinch of cinnamon, add no
sugar, leave a small opening in center of upper crust and bake until
done; in the meantime boil 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water 5 minutes;
when the pie is done put a small funnel in the opening in center of
upper crust and pour the syrup carefully through it into the pie;
set the pie aside and serve when cold. The pie plate should be deep
and large for this pie.

675. +Apple Pie, No. 3.+-- Line a large, deep pie plate with fine pie
crust, fill the plate with finely cut tart apples, sprinkle over ½
cup sugar, dust over a little flour and cover with crust; leave a
small opening in center of upper crust and bake till done; 10
minutes before the pie is taken from the oven put a small funnel in
the opening in the center of upper crust and pour carefully ½ cup
sweet hot cider through the funnel into the pie; when done remove
the pie from oven and serve when cold. Another way is:--Stew the
apple peels and cores in water till tender; then strain them through
a coarse bag, return the liquid to saucepan and boil 10 minutes;
then add for 1 cup liquid 1 cup sugar, boil 10 minutes longer and
pour the hot syrup into the pie in place of cider.

676. +Apple-Citron Pie.+-- Line a deep pie plate with rich pie crust,
fill it with finely cut tart apples, lay small pieces of butter
between the apples, sprinkle over each pie ½ cup sugar and ½ cup
finely cut citron, add 2 tablespoonfuls currant or apple jelly,
cover with crust and bake till done.

677. +Apple Meringue Pie.+-- Press 1 pint stewed apples through a
sieve, sweeten to taste and add the juice of ½ lemon, a little
grated nutmeg and the yolks of 4 eggs; line a pie plate with crust,
cover with buttered paper, fill the plate with dried peas and bake
till crust is a light brown; remove paper and peas, fill in the
mixture, return pie to oven and bake till done; in the meantime beat
the 4 whites to a stiff froth and add 1 tablespoonful powdered sugar
and a little essence of lemon; when pie is done draw it to front of
oven, spread over the meringue and let it remain for a few minutes
longer in oven; then take it out and serve when cold.

678. +Dried Apple Pie.+-- Wash ½ pound dried apples, put them in a
saucepan with plenty of cold water, cover and place saucepan over
the fire and stew till done; then add 1 cup sugar; pour the apples
into a dish and set aside; when cold line 2 pie plates with fine pie
crust, brush the surface of crust over with beaten egg and sprinkle
over some bread or zwieback crumbs; fill in the stewed apples, cover
with crust and bake till done. Dried peaches or apricots can be used
the same way.

679. +Tutti Frutti Pie.+-- Pare and cut fine 10 large tart apples,
put them with 2 tablespoonfuls butter in a saucepan over the fire
and add 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls finely cut citron,
½ cup seedless raisins, the same quantity of well washed currants
and the grated rind of ½ orange or lemon; stir this over the fire
till apples are soft and add ½ cup currant or apple jelly; line a
pie plate with fine pie crust, fill the plate full with the apples,
cover with crust, in which a small opening should be cut in center,
and bake till done; boil the peels and cores of apples with a little
water till tender; strain them through a jelly bag, return the
liquid to saucepan and boil 10 minutes; add to 1 cup liquid 1 cup
sugar and boil 5 minutes longer; when pie is done take it from the
oven, put a small funnel into the opening in center, pour carefully
some of the apple syrup through the funnel into the pie and serve
when cold.

680. +Cherry Pie.+-- Line a pie plate with crust and remove the pits
from 1 quart nice, ripe cherries; fill the fruit into the plate,
sprinkle over some sugar and dust over a little flour; cover with
top crust, with a small opening in center, and bake in a medium hot
oven; in the meantime stew 1 cup cherries in a little water till
tender; strain them, return the liquid to saucepan and boil 5
minutes; add to 1 cup liquid 1 cup sugar and continue the boiling
for 5 minutes; remove from fire, add a little brandy or wine and
pour this syrup, when pie is done, through a funnel into the pie.
Another way is:--Do not stone the cherries; after the plate is lined
with crust fill it full with cherries, dust over some flour,
sprinkle them with sugar and add 3 tablespoonfuls water to each pie;
cover with crust and bake till done. Another way is:--Boil ½ cup
currant juice with ½ cup sugar for 5 minutes and when the pie (made
like the first one) is done pour the currant syrup through a small
funnel into the pie. This is an excellent way to give cherries which
have not much flavor a nice taste.

681. +Banana Pie.+-- 4 large bananas, 1 cup milk, 4 eggs, ½ cup
sugar, ½ tablespoonful melted butter and 1 teaspoonful essence of
vanilla; remove the skins and press the bananas through a sieve; mix
them with the 4 yolks, sugar, milk, melted butter and vanilla; line
a deep pie plate with crust, ornament the edge, lay in a piece of
buttered brown paper, fill the plate with dry peas or with pieces of
stale bread and bake till done; remove it from oven, free the plate
from paper and peas, return the plate for a few minutes to oven
again, fill in the banana mixture and bake till done; in the
meantime beat the whites to a stiff froth and add 1 tablespoonful
powdered sugar; draw the pie to front of oven, spread over the
meringue, let it remain for a few minutes longer in oven, take it
out, set it in a cool place and serve ice cold.

682. +Pineapple Pie.+-- Pare 1 ripe pineapple, remove the eyes and
hard core in center and chop it fine; line a deep pie plate with
fine pie crust, fill it with the finely chopped pineapple, sprinkle
over 1 small cup sugar and dust a little flour over; cover the pie
with crust and bake a light brown and well done; put the eyes and
cores of the pineapple with 6 greening apples cut into pieces in a
saucepan, nearly cover them with water and boil till tender; then
strain through a bag, return the liquid to saucepan and boil 20
minutes; then add for 1 cup liquid 1 cup sugar, boil 5 minutes and
fill the jelly into tumblers. This makes an excellent pineapple
jelly.

683. +Pineapple Pie (with Meringue).+-- 1 large, ripe pineapple, ½
cup milk, 1 cup sugar, the yolks of 4 eggs, 1 whole egg and ½
tablespoonful butter; pare and grate the pineapple; then mix it with
the sugar and other ingredients; melt the butter before adding it;
line a deep pie plate with fine pie crust, cover with buttered
paper, fill it with dry peas and bake till done; take it from the
oven, remove the paper and peas, fill in the pineapple mixture and
bake till done; in the meantime make the meringue, as follows:--

Beat the 4 whites to a stiff froth and mix it with 1 tablespoonful
powdered sugar; when pie is done draw it to front of oven, spread
over the meringue and return the pie for a few minutes to oven again
till the meringue is a light brown; serve ice cold. This will make 1
large pie, sufficient for a family of 8 persons.

684. +Prune Pie.+-- Wash and soak 1 pound prunes for 4 hours in cold
water, drain them in a colander, remove the stones, put the prunes
in a dish, pour over 1 cup cold water and let them stand over night;
next morning line 2 pie plates with crust, put in the prunes with
the liquor, sprinkle over some sugar and a little flour, cover with
top crust and bake till light brown and well done. Another way
is:--Stew the prunes in a little water, remove the stones, sweeten
the prunes with sugar, add the juice of ½ lemon and finish as above.

685. +Peach Pie.+-- Pare and slice some large, ripe peaches; line a
pie plate with crust, fill it with the peaches, sprinkle over some
sugar and bake with an upper crust.

686. +Peach Meringue Pie.+-- Line a large, deep pie plate with a rich
pie crust, brush the surface of crust over with the beaten white of
egg and sprinkle over 2 tablespoonfuls finely sifted bread or
cracker crumbs; take 1 can preserved peaches, drain off the liquor,
put them in the pie plate (with the hollow side up), sprinkle over a
little flour, a few spoonfuls sugar, pour over some of the liquor
and bake in a medium hot oven till done; in the meantime make the
meringue, as follows:--Beat the whites of 5 eggs to a froth, mix
them with 2 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar and flavor with a little
essence of vanilla; when pie is done draw it to front of oven,
spread over the meringue and bake for a few minutes longer; remove
it from the oven and set the pie in a cool place; serve cold;
sufficient for 10 persons.

687. +Peach Mountain Pie.+-- Pare 1 dozen medium sized peaches; line
a large deep pie plate with pie crust, fill the plate with the whole
peaches, sprinkle over ¾ cup sugar, cover with a thin crust and bake
in a medium hot oven.

688. +Plum Pie.+-- Remove the pits from some ripe plums, sprinkle the
fruit thickly with sugar and let them stand for ½ hour; line a pie
plate with crust, put in the plums, cover with crust and bake till
done.

689. +Cranberry Pie.+-- Wash and stew 1 quart cranberries with 1 cup
water; when done press them through a colander or coarse sieve,
return the cranberries to saucepan, add 2 cups sugar and boil and
stir for 5 minutes; then set aside to cool; line a pie plate with
fine crust, brush the surface of crust over with the beaten white of
egg and sprinkle over 2 tablespoonfuls finely sifted bread crumbs;
put in some of the cranberries, about ½ inch thick, and cover with
crossbars of crust (lattice-like); bake a light brown and well done;
serve cold.

690. +Gooseberry Pie.+-- Top, tail and wash the berries, put them
into a pie plate lined with crust, sprinkle plenty of sugar among
them, cover with crust and bake till done.

691. +Blackberry Pie.+-- Line a deep pie plate with crust; have some
ripe blackberries washed and drained; fill the plate with the
berries, sprinkle over some sugar, pour into each pie 1
tablespoonful vinegar, dust over a little flour, cover with crust
and bake a light brown and well done.

692. +Huckleberry Pie.+-- Wash and drain some ripe huckleberries;
line a pie plate with crust and cover the bottom of crust with 2
tablespoonfuls finely rolled zwieback; next fill the plate with the
berries, sprinkle sugar between and over the fruit, add a little
more zwieback, cover with crust and bake in a medium hot oven to a
light brown and well done; serve cold dusted with sugar.

693. +Currant Pie.+-- Wash and strip some ripe currants and mix them
with the same quantity of sugar; line a pie plate with fine pie
crust, fill it with the fruit, dust over some flour, cover with top
crust, press the edges firmly together and bake till done and to a
light brown. Raspberries and currants may be used together for this
pie.

694. +Rhubarb Custard Pie.+-- Stew 2 cups finely cut rhubarb with 2
cups sugar and ½ cup water; when done strain the rhubarb through a
sieve and mix it with 2 well beaten eggs; have a deep pie plate
lined with rich pie crust, fill in the mixture, lay fine strips of
pie crust across the pie (lattice-like), place the pie in a hot oven
and bake till the custard is firm and the crust a light brown.

695. +Rhubarb Pie.+-- Line a pie plate with some rich pie crust;
remove the skin from some fresh rhubarb and cut it into fine pieces;
take for every cup rhubarb 1 cup sugar, fill it into the plate and
dust over a little flour; cover with crust and bake till done, which
requires about ½ hour; serve cold dusted with powdered sugar.

696. +Rhubarb Meringue Pie.+-- Place a saucepan with 2 cups finely
cut rhubarb, 2 cups sugar and ½ cup water over the fire and stew 20
minutes; when done press the rhubarb through a sieve, add the beaten
yolks of 4 eggs and set aside; line a deep pie plate with crust,
ornament the edge, cover with buttered paper, fill the plate with
dry peas and bake till crust is a light brown; then remove paper and
peas, fill the plate with the rhubarb mixture and bake about 15
minutes; beat the 4 whites to a stiff froth and mix them with 1
tablespoonful powdered sugar; draw the pie to front of oven, spread
over the meringue, bake for a few minutes longer and serve when
cold.

697. +Sweet Potato Pie.+-- 3 medium sized sweet potatoes, 3 eggs, 1
pint milk, ½ cup sugar, 1 tablespoonful butter, 1 teaspoonful
ginger, ½ teaspoonful cinnamon, ½ grated nutmeg and ¼ teaspoonful
salt; boil the potatoes until done; scrape off the skin and press
the potatoes through a sieve or colander; mix them first with the
eggs and salt, then add the melted butter, sugar and spice and
lastly the milk; line a large, deep pie plate with rich pie crust,
fill in the mixture and bake till done; serve when cold.

698. +Pumpkin Pie.+-- Pare and cut a medium sized pumpkin into
pieces, remove the pits, put the pumpkin in a kettle, cover with
boiling water, add ½ tablespoonful salt and boil till tender; when
done put the pumpkin into a colander and drain off all the water;
then press it through the colander; measure the strained pumpkin and
take for every quart of it 1 pint milk, ½ tablespoonful melted
butter, 1½ cups sugar, 3 eggs, 2 teaspoonfuls cornstarch mixed with
the milk and 1 teaspoonful ground ginger; mix all the ingredients
together; dust some deep pie plates with flour, line them with pie
crust and brush the surface of crust all over with beaten egg; roll
out some pie crust and cut it into strips 1 inch wide; cut one side
of the strips into scallops and lay it around the edge of plate so
the scallops stand a little above the edge of plate; brush the strip
over with beaten egg and sprinkle 2 tablespoonfuls fine bread or
cracker crumbs over the crust (this keeps the pumpkin from sogging
into the crust); fill the plate with the pumpkin mixture, grate over
the top some nutmeg and bake till done; when the pumpkin is firm to
the touch of your finger and a little brown on top the pie is done;
remove it from oven, set in a cool place and serve when cold.
A medium sized pumpkin will make 4 medium sized pies. A good plan if
the family is small is to fill some of the boiled pumpkin as soon as
done, boiling hot, into glass jars. Close the jars at once and set
them in a cool place. When wanted for use open the jar, turn the
pumpkin into a colander, drain off all the water, press the pumpkin
through a colander and finish the same as above.

699. +Custard Pie.+-- Stir 5 eggs with 5 tablespoonfuls sugar to a
cream and add 2 tablespoonfuls essence of vanilla or lemon and 1
quart milk; line a large, deep pie plate with crust, brush the
surface of crust all over with the beaten white of egg and sprinkle
over 2 tablespoonfuls finely sifted bread or cracker crumbs; pour in
the custard, grate over the top some nutmeg and bake in a hot oven
till custard is firm. Care must be taken to remove the pie as soon
as done, otherwise it will curdle. To ascertain when pie is done
stick the handle of a teaspoon into center of custard. If no milk is
to be seen and the custard is thick the pie is baked. Remove at once
and serve ice cold.

700. +Cocoanut Pie.+-- To make 2 large pies take 3 pints milk, 6
eggs, 3 cups freshly grated cocoanut, a pinch of salt, 1½ cups sugar
and 1½ teaspoonfuls essence of vanilla; stir sugar and eggs to a
cream and add the milk, salt and flavoring; take a large cocoanut,
remove the shell without breaking the cocoanut, pare off the brown
skin and grate the cocoanut; add 3 cups of the grated cocoanut to
the other ingredients; line 2 large, deep pie plates with crust,
brush the surface of crust over with the beaten white of egg and
sprinkle over 2 tablespoonfuls fine bread or cracker crumbs; fill
the plates with the cocoanut mixture and bake in a hot oven till
firm and a light brown on top; when done remove it from oven and
serve cold.

701. +Lemon Cocoanut Pie.+-- 1 pint milk, 4 large eggs, 1½ cups
sugar, the grated rind and juice of 1 large lemon, 2 cups freshly
grated cocoanut and ½ tablespoonful butter; put milk and butter in a
saucepan to boil; stir the 4 yolks and sugar to a cream and add the
grated rind and juice of lemon; when this is well mixed add
gradually, stirring constantly, the boiling milk; when cold add the
grated cocoanut; in the meantime line a large, deep pie plate with
pie crust, ornament the edge with a strip of crust cut into
scallops, brush the surface of crust all over with beaten egg and
sprinkle over 2 tablespoonfuls fine bread or cracker crumbs; pour in
the cocoanut mixture and bake in a hot oven. While the pie is baking
prepare the following meringue:--Beat the 4 whites to a stiff froth
and add 1 tablespoonful powdered sugar and a little essence of
lemon; as soon as the pie is done take it from the oven, spread over
the meringue, make it smooth with a broad-bladed knife dipped in
water and return the pie to the oven for 2 minutes; then set it in a
cool place and serve very cold.

702. +Chocolate Cream Pie.+-- Place a saucepan with 2 tablespoonfuls
grated chocolate, 1 pint milk and ½ cup sugar over the fire; add 2
tablespoonfuls cornstarch and stir and boil for a few minutes;
remove from the fire and add 1 teaspoonful essence of vanilla, when
cold mix it with the yolks of 4 eggs and finish the same as Vanilla
Cream Pie.

703. +Vanilla Cream Pie.+-- Line a large, deep pie plate with crust,
lay over it a piece of buttered paper, fill the plate with dry peas
or pieces of stale bread and bake till crust is a light brown; in
the meantime boil 1 cup milk with 1 tablespoonful butter and a pinch
of salt; mix 2 tablespoonfuls sifted flour with 1 cup cold milk to a
smooth batter and stir it into the boiling milk; continue stirring
and boiling for a few minutes; remove it from fire and let it cool a
little; stir the yolks of 4 eggs to a cream with 3½ tablespoonfuls
sugar; stir this into the above mixture and flavor with 1½
teaspoonfuls essence of vanilla; when the crust is done remove paper
and peas, fill in the mixture and bake 10 minutes; in the meantime
beat the 4 whites to a stiff froth and mix it with 1 tablespoonful
powdered sugar; draw the pie to front of oven and spread over the
meringue; set the pie for a few minutes in the oven and serve when
cold.

704. +Orange Cream Pie.+-- 1½ cups milk, ¾ cup sugar, 1½
tablespoonfuls cornstarch, ½ tablespoonful butter, 4 eggs, the juice
of 3 oranges, the grated rind of 1 and a pinch of salt; put
cornstarch, butter, milk and salt in a small saucepan, set it in a
vessel of boiling water and stir over the fire till the contents of
saucepan thicken; then remove it from fire and set aside; stir the
yolks of 4 eggs with the ¾ cup sugar to a cream, add it to the
boiled cornstarch and lastly stir in gradually the juice and grated
rind of oranges; line a deep pie plate with fine pie crust, lay over
it a piece of buttered brown paper, fill the plate with dry peas or
pieces of stale bread and bake till crust is a light brown; remove
the paper and peas, fill in the cream and bake till’ done; in the
meantime beat the 4 whites to a stiff froth and add 1 tablespoonful
powdered sugar and a little essence of vanilla; when pie is done
draw it to front of oven and spread over the meringue; return it for
a few minutes to oven; then set the pie in a cool place and serve
ice cold.

705. +Lemon Cream Pie.+-- Boil 1 cup milk with ½ tablespoonful butter
and a pinch of salt; mix 1½ tablespoonfuls cornstarch with ½ cup
cold milk and stir it into the boiling milk; continue stirring and
boil for a few minutes; remove it from fire and set aside to cool;
stir the yolks of 4 eggs with 1 cup sugar to a cream and add the
grated rind of 1 lemon and the juice of 2; stir this into the cold
cream; line a deep pie plate with fine pie crust, ornament the edge
with a border, cover it with buttered brown paper, fill the plate
with dry peas or pieces of stale bread and bake till crust is a
light brown; remove the paper and peas, put in the cream mixture and
bake about 10 minutes; in the meantime beat the 4 whites to a stiff
froth and add 1 tablespoonful powdered sugar and a little essence of
lemon; when the pie is done draw it to front of oven and spread over
the meringue; return the pie for a few minutes to oven; then set it
in a cool place and serve cold.

706. +Fine Lemon Pie (with an Upper Crust).+-- The yolks of 3 eggs, 1
whole egg, 1 cup sugar, the juice and grated rind of 1 large lemon
and ½ tablespoonful butter; stir the 3 yolks to a cream and add the
grated peel and juice of lemon; put the butter in a small saucepan
over the fire; as soon as melted add the yolks and stir the whole
over the fire to a creamy thickness; then remove from fire; when
cold mix it with the sugar and the whole egg; line a pie plate (one
which is not very deep) with fine pie crust, brush the surface of
crust over with the beaten white of egg, sprinkle over 2
tablespoonfuls fine bread crumbs and put in the lemon mixture; cover
with a thin crust and bake in a medium hot oven to a light brown;
serve when cold.

707. +Lemon Pie (plain).+-- Mix 1 tablespoonful cornstarch with ½ cup
cold water, add ½ cup boiling water, ¾ cup sugar and boil for a few
minutes; remove from fire, add the juice of 1 lemon, ½ the grated
rind, 1 egg and set aside to cool; line a pie plate with crust, put
in the mixture, cover with a thin, rich crust and bake a light
brown; serve cold dusted with sugar.

708. +Lemon Meringue Pie.+-- 5 large eggs, ½ tablespoonful butter, 1
cup sugar and the juice and grated rind of 1 large lemon; beat 4
yolks to a cream and add the grated rind and juice of lemon; put the
butter in a small saucepan over the fire; as soon as melted add the
beaten yolks and stir over the fire to a creamy thickness; remove it
from fire and when cold mix with 1 cup sugar and 1 whole egg; next
line a large (not too deep) pie plate with fine pie crust, ornament
the edge either with the pastry wheel or lay strips of paste around
the edge cut on one side into scallops, brush the surface of crust
all over with beaten egg and sprinkle over a little finely sifted
bread or cracker crumbs; put in the lemon mixture, put the pie into
a medium hot oven and bake till done; in the meantime beat the 4
remaining whites to a stiff froth and add 2 tablespoonfuls sifted
powdered sugar and a little grated lemon peel; when the pie is done
take it from the oven just long enough to spread over the meringue;
return it again to oven for a few minutes and serve when cold.

709. +D’Artois (or Pie of Marmalade).+-- Divide ½ pound puff paste
into 2 parts; roll one part out into a thin square piece and spread
over it, ½ inch thick, apple marmalade ½ inch from the edge; roll
out the remaining half into a piece of same size, hold it on the
rolling pin and lay over the marmalade; wet the edge of first paste
and press the 2 edges together; cut the top paste with a sharp knife
into strips, first lengthwise, then crosswise, like lattice work;
put in a tin pan and bake in a medium hot oven to a delicate brown;
when done dust powdered sugar over and let it remain for a few
minutes in the oven to glaze; then remove and serve when cold. Any
kind of marmalade or cream may be used.

710. +Allnumettes.+-- Roll out 1 pound puff paste 16 inches long and
5 inches wide and spread over a clear icing made as follows:--Beat
the white of 1 egg to a froth, add 4 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar,
2 drops lemon juice and beat it for 5 minutes; spread this over the
rolled out paste, let it lay for a few minutes, cut it into 8 pieces
and bake in a quick oven from 45 to 50 minutes.

711. +Jelly Tarts.+-- Roll the puff paste 1 inch in thickness and cut
it into rounds with a biscuit cutter; brush a long tin pan over with
water, so as just to dampen the pan, and then lay the rounds in the
pan with the side which was rolled towards the pan and not too close
together; brush the top over with beaten egg, being careful not to
let any of the egg run down the sides: then dip a smaller cake
cutter into hot water, press it on each round ⅛ of an inch deep to
form the cover; the cake cutter must be dipped in the hot water each
time for each round; then bake them in a hot oven to a golden color;
when the tarts are done take them out, cut the cover loose with a
pointed knife and lift it off; hollow the tarts out a little with
your finger; when ready to serve fill them with jelly. These tarts
may be filled with stewed oysters or clams. They are then called
Oyster or Clam Patties.

712. +Tarts.+-- Line some small patty pans with rich pie crust or
puff paste and fill them with either fruit marmalade of peaches,
apricots, cherries or any kind of preserved or stewed fruit; roll
the paste which is left out thin and cut it into strips ¼ inch in
width; lay them over the tarts like lattice work, brush over with
beaten egg and bake in a hot oven.

713. +Peach Tarts.+-- Pare and cut some nice, ripe peaches into
halves and boil them for 5 minutes in sugar syrup; take them out and
set aside to cool; boil the syrup 5 minutes longer; line some patty
pans with rich puff paste or pie crust, put into each a piece of
buttered paper, fill them with dry peas and bake in a hot oven till
nearly done; remove the paper and peas and fill each one with the
peaches and a little syrup; return them to the oven again and bake
till done; serve when cold.

714. +Apple Tarts.+-- Pare and cut into fine slices ½ dozen large
tart apples and put them in a small saucepan with 1 tablespoonful
butter, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, ½ cup seedless raisins, currants and
finely cut citron; mix, cover and let it simmer over the fire till
apples are soft, but not broken; remove them from fire; add 2
tablespoonfuls currant or apple jelly, mix it with the apples and
finish the same as Cranberry Tarts.

715. +Rice Tarts.+-- Line 12 small forms with rich pie crust or puff
paste; put ½ pound rice with cold water over the fire and boil a few
minutes; drain the rice in a colander and rinse with cold water;
return the rice to saucepan; cover with sweet cream or milk, add 1
tablespoonful butter and boil till tender; remove it from the fire
and mix the rice with the yolks of 4 eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1
teaspoonful vanilla extract and lastly the 4 whites beaten to a
stiff froth; fill the rice into the small forms and bake in a medium
hot oven 20 minutes; when done take them out of the forms, arrange
on a long dish with a napkin, dust over with powdered sugar and
serve either hot or cold.

716. +Tartelettes of Cherries.+-- Roll out 1 pound short paste ¼ inch
in thickness and cut out with a tumbler or round cake cutter 20
rounds about 2 inches in diameter; roll out the remaining paste and
cut it into long strips ½ inch wide and ⅛ inch thick; lay these
strips around the top edge of each round and ornament them with the
pastry wheel by pressing small dents in it with the wheel; lay
around each a strip of white paper, fasten the two ends with the
white of egg (to keep it in its place) and set them in shallow tins;
remove the pits from 2 pounds cherries, mix the fruit with sugar and
fill them into the tartelettes; then bake in a hot oven; in the
meantime crack the pits of cherries, put them over the fire with a
little water and boil 5 minutes; then strain; mix in a bowl 1 cup
sour cream with 2 rolled zwiebacks, the yolks of 2 eggs, 2
tablespoonfuls sugar and 2 tablespoonfuls of the strained water from
the pits; when the tartelettes are nearly done fill 1 spoonful of
the above mixture into each one and return them to oven again until
the cream is firm; take them from oven, remove the paper and serve
when cold dusted with sugar.

717. +Tartelettes+ of peaches, plums or apricots are made the same
as cherries, but without the cream.

718. +Tartelettes d’apricots.+-- Line ½ dozen small patty pans with
puff paste or fine pie crust and fill them half full with apricot
marmalade; cut 9 apricots in halves, peel them and remove the pits;
boil the apricots for 2 minutes in sugar syrup, lay a half apricot
into each tartelette and bake in hot oven; in the meantime boil the
syrup until thick; crack the pits, take out the kernels, scald them
in boiling water, remove the brown skins and divide them into
halves; when the tartelettes are done take them out of the form, lay
onto each one 2 halves of the kernels and pour a little of the cold
syrup into each one; serve when cold.

719. +Tartelettes+ of peaches, plums, apples, cherries, currants,
raspberries or gooseberries are made the same way as apricots.

720. +Tartelettes of Strawberries.+-- Roll out ½ pound puff paste
about ⅛ inch in thickness and cut out with a round cake cutter 10
rounds; lay them into 10 small buttered patty pans and press the
paste in evenly; let the paste stand a little higher than the pan;
mix flour and water to a stiff dough, divide it into 10 equal parts
the size of a walnut, roll it out into balls and put into each form
a ball; press them in firmly and bake in a hot oven; when done draw
them to front of oven, dust over with sugar and return them to oven
again so they obtain a glaze; then remove the inside water dough and
set the tarts aside to cool; roll out thin the remaining puff paste
and cut out small rings; lay them on shallow buttered tins, dust
them with sugar and bake in a slow oven; press ½ pint strawberries
through a sieve and mix them with 3 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar;
wash and drain ½ quart strawberries, put them in a dish, pour the
mashed strawberries over the whole fruit and fill them into the
tartelettes; lay onto each one 2 rings and serve them on a napkin.
Raspberries and currants stewed together may be used instead of
strawberries. Stewed cherries, peaches, apricots, plums or any kind
of preserved fruit may also be used.

721. +Fleurons of Puff Paste.+-- Roll the puff paste out ⅛ inch in
thickness, cut it with a cake cutter into shapes of half moons, lay
them on tins, brush over with beaten egg and bake in a quick oven.
Fleurons are used for garnishing dishes.

722. +Fanchonnettes de creme.+-- Line 12 small patty forms with short
paste (Mürber Teig) and put into each one a thin layer of fruit
marmalade; put 4 whole eggs into a saucepan and beat them to a
froth; add 1 pint sweet cream or milk, 3 tablespoonfuls sifted
flour, a pinch of salt, 1 heaping tablespoonful butter and 4
tablespoonfuls sugar; stir this over the fire till it boils; then
add 10 macaroons rolled fine; fill the patty forms ½ full with the
boiled cream when cold and bake in a medium hot oven; when done take
them out of the form and fill them full with the remaining cream;
when cold spread over some marmalade, squirt over the top a little
meringue and serve on a napkin.

723. +D’Artois Meringues.+-- Prepare ½ pound puff paste, roll out and
fold over 10 times; line a large pie plate with it, spread over a
thick layer of pineapple marmalade and bake in a medium hot oven;
when done draw it to front of oven and spread over a thick meringue;
cut the pie into pieces, move them a little apart, lay on each one a
few strips of blanched almonds, dust over some sugar and set for 15
minutes into a cool oven to dry.

724. +Condés.+-- Chop fine 6 ounces blanched almonds and mix them
with 3 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar and the beaten whites of 1 or 2
eggs; roll out some rich puff paste very thin, spread over the
almond mixture and dust over some powdered sugar; cut them into
finger lengths 2 inches wide and bake in a slow oven.

725. +Small Royal Cakes.+-- Prepare a puff paste and roll it out thin
about ¼ of an inch in thickness; mix 6 ounces powdered sugar with
the beaten whites of 2 eggs; spread this over the rolled out paste,
cut it into strips of 1½ inches wide and 3½ inches long, lay them
in shallow tin pans and bake in a slow oven to a delicate brown.

726. +Paté à choux.+-- Place a saucepan over the fire with 1 pint
water or milk, ½ pound butter, 1½ tablespoonfuls sugar, the grated
rind of 1 lemon and a pinch of salt; as soon as it boils add slowly
½ pound sifted flour, stirring constantly; stir until it forms into
a smooth paste and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; transfer
the paste to a dish and when cooled off a little mix it by degrees
with 6 or 8 eggs. This paste should be soft, but must not run apart
when dropped on a tin.

727. +Chocolate Eclairs.+-- Prepare a pâté à choux, put it into a
pastry bag or paper funnel and squirt it upon buttered tins in long
narrow cakes 4 inches long and 1 inch wide; brush over with beaten
egg and bake in a medium hot oven; when done brush them over with
boiled chocolate glaze and set for a few minutes in oven again; then
set them aside in a cool place; shortly before serving cut each one
open on the side and fill with vanilla cream. For cream cakes drop
this mixture (by tablespoonfuls) onto buttered tins, not too close
together and in the form of round cake; when cold slit them open on
one side and fill with vanilla cream.

728. +Canapes.+-- Prepare a puff paste and roll it out ½ inch in
thickness; cut it out into square pieces of 2 inches wide, cut these
again into strips of ½ inch wide, lay them with the cut side in a
shallow tin pan, not too close together, and bake in a hot oven;
when done draw them to front of oven, dust with sugar and let them
remain in oven a few minutes longer to glaze; put two and two
together with jelly between; or they may be served single.

729. +Cannelous.+-- Prepare 1 pound puff paste and roll it out 8
times, instead of 6; then take about 18 connelonghölzer (they
consist of round pieces of wood about 5 inches long and a finger
thick, and can be bought at wholesale confectioneries) and rub each
piece of wood over with butter; roll the paste out very thin and cut
it into strips of about 1 inch wide and 9 inches long; wind a strip
of the paste around each piece of wood, snake-like, brush them over
with beaten egg, lay them in shallow tins and bake in a quick oven;
when done remove the pieces of wood and when cold fill the cannelous
with whipped cream flavored with vanilla and sweetened with sugar.

730. +Vole-au-vent.+-- Carefully prepare 1 pound puff paste and roll
and fold it 6 times; great care must be taken in doing this, as the
whole result depends upon it; after the last rolling let it lay in
summer ½ hour on ice, in winter in a cold place; when ready to use
roll the paste out 1 inch in thickness, place the dish on which the
vol-au-veut is to be served upside down onto the paste and cut off
the paste from the dish; turn the paste around and lay it on a tin
which has been dampened with water; make with the back of a knife a
few dents in it around the edge, brush the top over with beaten egg
and make with the point of a knife a slight incision in the paste
all round the top about 1½ inches from the edge; this forms the
cover; bake in a very hot oven; do not open the oven for 10 minutes;
then open and if the vol-au-veut is a light brown cover with paper
and bake from ¾ to 1 hour; when done remove the cover, put the
vol-au-veut onto the dish it was made to fit and set it for a few
minutes in the oven to dry; then fill with either ragouts or
fricasseed chickens, birds, rabbits or pigeons, put on the cover and
serve; or fill it with fresh or preserved fruit and serve as a
dessert.

731. +Vole-au-vent (with Strawberries and Whipped Cream).+-- Roll out
some carefully made puff paste ¾ inch in thickness and cut it out
with a fluted cutter the desired shape, either round or oval; make a
slight incision in the paste 1 inch from the edge and bake in a very
hot oven; when nearly done brush it over with white of egg, dust
with sugar and put it back in the oven to glaze; when done remove
the interior, or soft crumbs, and fill the vol-au-veut shortly
before serving with fresh strawberries sweetened with sugar and
cover them with whipped cream.

732. +Vole-au-vent (with Currants and Raspberries.)+--Prepare a
vol-au-veut the same as in foregoing recipe; strip some large, ripe,
cherry currants from their stems, put them in a colander with the
same quantity of raspberries, let cold water run over and drain them
well; put the fruit into a dish with plenty of sugar, mix them up
with 2 silver forks and let it stand in a cool place for several
hours; shortly before serving put the fruit into the vol-au-veut,
put over the cover, again dust with sugar and serve.

733. +Vole-au-vent (with Peaches and Cream)+ is made the same as
strawberries. Preserved pineapples, apricots, cherries or plums may
be used in the same manner; also oranges peeled and cut into slices,
freed from their pits and well sugared. Put into the vol-au-veut and
serve either covered with its own cover or whipped cream. Makes an
excellent dish for dessert.

734. +Neapolitan Breads.+-- Mix a finely chopped orange peel (only
the yellow part) with ½ pound neapolitan paste; divide it into small
pieces the size of a walnut, roll these lengthwise about ½ finger
thick, bread 3 together, brush them over with beaten egg and bake in
a medium hot oven; or the paste may be rolled into long, thin rolls,
breaded together and then cut into lengths 2½ inches long.

735. +Viennoises.+-- Stir ½ cup butter with ½ cup powdered sugar to a
cream and add the yolks of 5 eggs, 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract, 1½
cups sifted flour, ¼ cup cornstarch and lastly the beaten whites of
2 eggs; spread this over a sheet of buttered paper ½ inch in
thickness, lay the paper in a shallow tin and bake in a slow oven;
when done cut the cake into 2 pieces; cover one piece with pineapple
or peach marmalade and lay the other piece over it; also cover the
top with marmalade and glaze the whole with wine glaze; then cut the
cake at once into small, long pieces and set them in the oven again
for a few minutes.

736. +Almond Tartelettes.+-- Pound ¼ pound blanched almonds with ¼
cup water in a mortar to a paste and press it through a sieve; mix
it with ¼ pound powdered sugar; next add the beaten whites of 4 eggs
and the juice of ¼ orange; have ½ pound puff paste prepared, rolled
out and folded 10 times; line 8 or 10 small tin patty forms with the
paste, fill them ¾ full with the above almond mixture and bake in a
medium hot oven; when nearly done draw them to front of oven, dust
over some fine sugar and bake till done.

737. +Puites d’amour.+-- Prepare 10 ounces puff paste and roll it out
½ inch in thickness; cut out into 20 rounds, about 2 inches in
diameter, with a scalloped tin cake cutter; cut a round piece out of
the center of each one, so that only a ring remains; roll out the
remaining paste the same way, cut out 20 rounds, lay them in a tin
pan and brush over with the white of egg; put on the rings, brush
the top over with beaten egg and bake in a hot oven; when done dust
them over with sugar and let them remain for a few minutes longer in
oven to glaze; remove and shortly before serving fill them either
with whipped cream sweetened and flavored with vanilla or some
preserved fruit. NOTE.--Care must be taken not to get any egg on the
outside of tart, as this will prevent the rising.

738. +Neapolitans.+-- Take neapolitan paste, roll it out thin, brush
over with egg and bake in buttered tins to a light brown color; when
done cut the cake into two pieces; spread one piece with fruit
marmalade or jelly and lay the other over it; cut the whole into
small pieces, pour over a wine or maraschino glaze and set them for
a few minutes in the oven.

739. +D’Artois Grilles.+-- Prepare ½ pound puff paste, roll it out
and fold over 10 times; roll out one-half into a thin, square piece;
put this into a square, shallow tin pan, wet the edge with beaten
white of egg, spread over a thick layer of apricot or peach
marmalade and over this a thick layer of apple marmalade 1 inch from
edge; roll out the remaining paste, cut into strips, lay it over the
marmalade like lattice work, brush over with beaten egg and bake;
when done dust over some sugar, let it remain for a few minutes
longer in the oven and cut into pieces when cold. Another way is to
line a pie plate with puff paste, spread over a layer of apple
marmalade flavored with vanilla and bake; when done spread over a
thin layer of apricot marmalade and pour over this a sugar glaze;
make it smooth with a knife and cut into pieces before the glaze
becomes hard.

740. +Cream Tarts.+-- Line small patty forms with short paste (Mürber
Teig), fill them with vanilla cream (see Cream) and bake in a hot
oven; when done spread a thin layer of peach marmalade over the
cream, pour over the marmalade a little lemon glaze and let them dry
for a few minutes in front of oven; mix the beaten white of 1 egg
with ¾ cup sugar and 3 drops lemon juice; put this into a paper
funnel, squirt a wreath over the glaze and put ½ teaspoonful apple
jelly in the center.

741. +Fine Pineapple Tarts.+-- Line some small patty forms with
neapolitan paste and bake in a quick oven to a delicate brown; when
done squirt round the edge a rim of meringue, sprinkle finely
chopped almonds or pistachio nuts over and let them dry for a few
minutes in oven; shortly before serving fill the tarts with finely
cut preserved pineapple and pour a little pineapple syrup over them.

742. +Gooseberry Tarts.+-- Remove the tops and ends of 1 quart
gooseberries, put them in a saucepan, cover with boiling water and
let them boil 3 minutes; pour them into a colander, drain off the
water and put them into a dish; sprinkle over 1 cup sugar, add a
little white wine and let them stand till cold; then finish the same
as Cranberry Tarts.

743. +Grape Tarts+ are made the same as Cranberry Tarts.

744. +Cranberry Tarts.+-- Boil 1 quart cranberries with 1 cup water
till they are soft; then press them through a coarse sieve, put the
pulp into a saucepan and boil 5 minutes, stirring constantly; then
add 1 pound brown sugar and stir until it is dissolved; line 1½
dozen patty pans with puff paste, put into each one a small piece of
buttered paper, fill them with dry peas and bake in a hot oven till
nearly done; then take them from the oven, remove paper and peas,
fill each tart with the stewed cranberries, return them to the oven
again and bake till done; serve cold.

745. +Fanchonnettes de pommes.+-- Line 12 patty forms with short
paste (Mürber Teig), fill them half full with apricot marmalade
mixed with apple marmalade and bake in a medium hot oven till done;
when done take them out of the form, fill evenly with marmalade and
put over the top a meringue; set them in a long, shallow pan and
return for a few minutes longer to oven; arrange them on a long dish
with napkin and just before serving put a little currant jelly on
top of each; serve cold.

746. +Darioles à la vanille.+-- Line 10 small patty forms with puff
paste which has been rolled out 10 times; mix 1 tablespoonful flour
and 1 tablespoonful cornstarch with 1½ cups milk or cream and add 1
whole egg, the yolks of 3, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1 teaspoonful
vanilla extract; when this is well mixed press it through a sieve
and add 6 macaroons broken into small pieces; 20 minutes before
serving fill the forms ¾ full with this cream and bake in a hot
oven; as soon as the cream is firm draw them to front of oven and
dust with sugar; let them remain a minute longer in oven; then
remove, take them out of the form and serve at once on a napkin.
Grated orange peel may be substituted for vanilla, lemon or almond
flavor.

747. +Flan de fruits printaniers.+-- Roll out ½ pound short paste
(Mürber Teig) ⅛ of an inch thick and lay over it a large pie plate
or round tin cover 12 inches in diameter; cut the paste off close to
the edge of plate, lift off the plate and put the round piece of
paste onto a large buttered tin or thick brown paper; next prepare a
warm paste (pâté à choux), put it into a paper funnel and squirt a
border 1 inch high on the surface on top of the round close to the
edge; then squirt small rills towards the center of round, so that
the flau can be cut by these rills and each piece has a border of
the paste; then squirt into each compartment 2 rills, so that each
piece has 2 compartments; brush the whole over with beaten egg and
bake a light brown; take an equal quantity of currants, raspberries
and strawberries, sprinkle them thickly with sugar and set in a cool
place; then cut some preserved peaches into pieces and add finely
cut preserved pineapple and preserved pitted cherries; reduce the
liquor of the 3 preserves by boiling it down; then set it aside to
cool; when the flau is done remove it from oven and set aside to
cool; shortly before serving cut the flau into pieces, lay them on a
large, round plate on a napkin (or take a round teatray) and arrange
the pieces so that the flau has its original form again; next put
into each compartment the fruit; arrange it tastily, pour a little
syrup over each one, brush the border over with syrup and serve.

748. +Flan de Cerises à la creme.+-- Line a deep jelly cake tin or
pie plate with short paste and fill it with pitted red cherries;
sprinkle over some sugar and set the flau in a medium hot oven to
bake; in the meantime mix together the yolks of 3 eggs, ½ cup sour
cream, 6 finely chopped almonds and 2 tablespoonfuls finely rolled
zwieback; when the flau is nearly done pour the mixture over and let
it bake till done; serve cold dusted with fine sugar.

749. +Flan de frangipane.+-- Line a large, deep pie plate with fine
pie crust or short paste, fill it half full of cream frangipane
flavored with a little grated rind and juice of orange and bake in a
medium hot oven; when done slip the flau onto a large plate; remove
the brown crust on top of cream and spread over a layer of marmalade
or jelly; fill up the plate with cream, spread over this a thin
layer of marmalade and pour over the top a maraschino or wine jelly
glaze.

750. +Flan de pommes à l’anglaise.+-- Line a deep pie plate with
short paste (Mürber Teig), spread over a thick layer of apricot
marmalade, fill up the plate with finely cut tart apples, sprinkle
over some sugar and bake in a medium hot oven; when done remove from
oven, spread over the top another layer of apricot marmalade and
serve cold.

751. +Flan de pommes.+-- Line a deep pie plate or jelly cake tin with
short paste (Mürber Teig) and ornament the edge with a pastry wheel;
the paste should be about ¼ inch in thickness; pound 6 ounces
blanched almonds with the yolks of 3 eggs, put the almonds in a dish
and add 4 more yolks, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, ¼ pound finely rolled
macaroons, 1½ tablespoonfuls melted butter and ¼ pound finely cut
citron and orange peel mixed; stir this to a cream and add the
beaten whites of 6 eggs; fill this mixture into the lined plate and
bake 30 minutes in a medium hot oven; as soon as it begins to brown
a little on top cover with buttered paper; in the meantime pare,
core and cut into quarters 1 dozen pippin or greening apples; place
a kettle with ¼ pound sugar, ½ bottle Malaga wine and 1½ cups
cherry syrup over the fire; as soon as it boils put in the apples and
continue the boiling until they are soft, but not broken; take out
the apples carefully and boil the syrup a little longer; when the
flau is done take from the oven and when cold lay the apples over
it; arrange them nicely, pour the syrup, half warm, over the apples
and serve. Flau of Bartlett pears or quinces are made the same way.

752. +Flan d’apricots à la creme meringue.+-- Line a large, deep
jelly cake tin with short paste (Mürber Teig), ornament the edge
with a pastry wheel, fill it half full of cream frangipane flavored
with vanilla and bake in a medium hot oven; when done carefully take
it out of the pan, lay it on a flat tin and put a layer of preserved
apricots over; cover them with cream frangipane, so the flau is
evenly full, spread over a thin layer of apricot marmalade and over
this a thin meringue; take some meringue in a paper funnel and
squirt rills in small squares over the top like lattice work; dust
over some fine sugar and place in a slow oven to bake till a light
brown; when cold put a little currant jelly into each small square
and serve on a napkin.

753. +Flan de peches.+-- Line a large, deep jelly cake tin with short
paste (Mürber Teig); roll some paste out and cut it into strips of
about 1 inch wide and ¼ inch thick; set this around the inside
against the rim of tin and ornament it with a pastry wheel; or cut
and scallop the strips before putting into the tin so the points of
scallops stand a little over the tin.

754. +Flan de peches.+-- Roll out ½ pound short paste ⅛ of an inch in
thickness, lay a deep jelly cake tin upside down onto the crust and
cut the paste off close to the tin with a knife; remove the tin and
lay the round piece of paste into the bottom of tin; roll out the
remaining paste and cut it into strips a little wider than the rim
of the jelly tins, ornament them with a pastry wheel or scallop one
side of the strips; fit the strips in neatly inside the rim so the
points of scallops stand a little above the edge of tin; fill the
tin half full of apricot marmalade mixed with apple marmalade and
also spread some of the marmalade on the sides; put the flau in a
hot oven and bake till done; in the meantime pare and cut into
halves 12 large, ripe peaches and boil them 5 minutes in sugar
syrup; remove the peaches and boil the syrup till it begins to
thicken; lay the peaches into the syrup again, add 1 teaspoonful
vanilla extract and boil them for a few minutes; when the flau is
done take it from the oven; remove the brown crust of marmalade and
spread over a little fresh marmalade; take the flau out of the jelly
tin, slip it onto a large plate and put in the peaches; have the
peach kernels blanched and freed from the brown skins, divide in
halves and lay them over the peaches; put little bits of currant
jelly over the peaches; boil the peach syrup down a little more and
pour when cold, just before serving, over the peaches. This may be
made of apples, cherries, apricots, plums, pears or any kind of
preserved fruit.




STRUDEL, STRAWBERRY SHORT CAKES, BABA, SOLEIL, ETC.


754a. +Strudel Paste.+-- Put ½ teaspoonful butter with ½ cup warm
milk, a little salt and the yolk of 1 egg into a bowl and mix it
with sufficient sifted flour to make a soft dough; put the dough on
to a floured board and work it with the hands for 10 minutes; it
should be soft, but not stick to the hands; brush the paste over
with a little warm water; rinse out a bowl with boiling water and
put it over the paste; let it lay ½ hour; after that time has
elapsed cover a kitchen table with a white cloth, dust with flour,
put the dough in center of table and pull it out as thin as
possible, like paper; when one side is pulled out lay a rolling pin
on it while you pull out the other side; then pull out the edges all
around, brush it over with melted butter and spread over a filling
of stewed preserved or fresh fruit or fruit marmalade; rice, farina,
chocolate or creams may also be used; after the filling is put on
lift the cloth up at one end and roll the strudel up like a music
roll; butter a large, round pan (not too deep) thickly with butter,
put one end of the strudel in the center of pan and turn the other
end around it so as to give it the shape of a snake curled up; brush
the strudel over with melted butter and bake till a light brown and
well done in a medium hot oven; when ready slip the strudel into a
dish, sprinkle thickly with sugar and serve. It may be eaten hot or
cold, with or without sauce. If 2 small strudels are to be made of
this quantity the paste should be divided into 2 parts before
pulling it apart. It may also be baked in the pan straight.

755. +Rice Strudel.+-- Put ½ cup rice with cold water over the fire,
boil 5 minutes, drain in a colander and rinse with cold water;
return rice to saucepan again with a little salt and 1 cup milk and
boil till soft; when done mix it with 1 ounce butter, the yolks of 2
eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, ¼ teaspoonful cinnamon and 3 ounces
seedless raisins; have the strudel paste pulled out on table as
directed, brush over with melted butter, spread over the rice, roll
it up and finish as directed in foregoing recipe. Serve with the
following sauce:--Boil ½ cup sugar with a little water until it
begins to turn yellow; remove from the fire and mix it slowly with
the whites of 2 eggs, previously beaten to a stiff froth, and add 1
tablespoonful wine and a little vanilla.

756. +Small Rice Strudels.+-- Prepare a dough from 1 tablespoonful
butter, 3 eggs, a little salt and sufficient flour to make a stiff
dough; roll it out very thin and cut into rounds the size of a tea
plate; parboil ½ cup rice in water, drain in a colander and rinse
with cold water; return the rice to saucepan again, add 1 pint cream
or milk, a little salt, sugar to taste and boil till tender; stir 1
tablespoonful butter to a cream and add the yolks of 3 eggs, the
grated rind of 1 lemon, the cooled off rice and lastly the whites
beaten to a stiff froth; spread a layer of rice over each of the
rounds of dough, roll them up like omelets, lay them into a buttered
pan or dish, pour 1 cup of boiling cream or milk over and bake the
strudels in a medium hot oven to a light brown; serve them sprinkled
with sugar as a dessert.

757. +Rice Strudel (with Jelly).+-- Put little pieces of apple or
currant jelly over the rice before rolling it up, otherwise the same
as in foregoing recipe.

758. +Farina Strudel.+-- Boil 1 pint milk with a little salt,
sprinkle in slowly ½ cup farina and continue boiling for 10 minutes;
when nearly cold stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream, add 2
tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 4 eggs, the farina and lastly the
whites beaten to a stiff froth; finish the same as Rice Strudel;
serve with snow sauce. These quantities will make 2 medium sized
strudels, sufficient for 12 persons; serve as dessert.

759. +Farina Strudel (with Cocoanut).+-- Prepare the farina the same
as in foregoing recipe; spread the farina over the prepared strudel
paste and sprinkle over some grated cocoanut; roll up as directed
and bake in a buttered pan; serve with cocoanut snow sauce made as
follows:--Boil 1 cup sugar with 1 cup water until it begins to turn
yellow; remove from fire, add a little boiling water and mix it
slowly with the whites of 4 eggs previously beaten to a stiff froth;
add 1 teaspoonful vanilla, ½ cup white wine and 1 cup grated
cocoanut.

760. +Citron Strudel.+-- Stir the yolks of 6 eggs with 4
tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream and add the beaten whites of 3 eggs;
have the prepared strudel paste pulled out on a table, brush over
first with butter and then spread over the mixture of eggs and
sugar; over this spread the remaining 3 whites beaten to a stiff
froth; next sprinkle over ¼ pound well washed and dried currants, ¼
pound finely cut citron and roll the strudel up; have ready a
buttered pan, put one end of strudel in center of pan and turn the
other end around it as directed; brush over with beaten white of
egg, sprinkle with sugar and bake till done; serve either with or
without wine cream sauce.

761. +Lemon Strudel.+-- Mix 6 ounces finely cut citron with ½ pound
finely chopped almonds and add 1 cup of sugar, the juice of 3 lemons
and the grated rind of 1; let this stand for 1 hour; prepare a
strudel paste as directed, pull it out on a table over floured board
or tablecloth, brush over with butter, put on the lemon mixture and
roll it up; lay the strudel in a buttered pan, twist it around,
brush over with water and sprinkle as much sugar over till it lays
dry on top; then bake. This strudel is eaten cold and will keep for
weeks.

762. +Almond Strudel.+-- Stir 2 eggs with ½ cup sugar and the grated
rind of ½ lemon to a cream; pull out the strudel paste over a
tablecloth, brush over with melted butter, spread over the egg
mixture and sprinkle over this ¼ pound grated almonds and ½ cup
currants and seedless raisins; roll it up, put into a buttered pan,
brush over with melted butter, sprinkle with sugar, pour ½ cup milk
or cream into the pan and bake a light brown; serve with wine cream
sauce.

763. +Chocolate Almond Strudel.+-- Prepare a strudel paste as
directed; stir the yolks of 3 eggs with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar to a
cream and add the whites beaten to a stiff froth; brush the pulled
out strudel paste over with melted butter and then spread over the
egg mixture; next sprinkle over 3 ounces finely grated chocolate and
2 ounces finely cut almonds; roll it up and lay into a buttered pan,
brush over with beaten egg and bake in a medium hot oven to a light
brown; when done sprinkle over some grated chocolate and sugar;
serve cold with cream sweetened with sugar.

764. +Chocolate Cream Strudel.+-- Boil 2 tablespoonfuls sugar in ½
cup water and add 2 tablespoonfuls grated chocolate which has been
melted in oven; stir this over the fire until chocolate is well
dissolved and add ½ pint cream and the yolks of 4 eggs; beat this
with an egg beater until nearly boiling; remove and set aside to
cool; then mix it with the beaten whites; pull out a strudel paste,
brush over with melted butter, spread over the chocolate cream and
sprinkle over ½ cup finely cut almonds and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar;
roll it up, brush over with melted butter and sprinkle with sugar;
then bake in a buttered pan. This strudel is best eaten cold. 1
tablespoonful cocoa may be used instead of chocolate.

765. +Apple Strudel.+-- Pare, quarter and cut into fine slices ½
dozen greenings, put them in a saucepan with 1 tablespoonful butter,
3 tablespoonfuls sugar and cover and let them stew for a few minutes
till apples begin to get soft; then add 2 tablespoonfuls currants,
the same quantity of seedless raisins and finely cut citron,
a little grated orange peel and 1 tablespoonful apple or any other
kind of fruit jelly; mix all together and set aside; when cold have
the strudel paste pulled out over a tablecloth, brush over with
melted butter, spread the apples all over it, roll up and finish as
directed.

766. +Cherry Strudel.+-- Remove the pits from 1 pound ripe cherries,
put them over the prepared strudel paste, sprinkle over some sugar,
a little finely rolled zwieback and finish the same as directed;
serve dusted with sugar.

767. +Plum Strudel.+-- Remove the pits from 1 pound ripe plums, cut
them fine, put them over the strudel paste, sprinkle thickly with
sugar, dust over a little flour and finish as directed; serve
without sauce and dusted thickly with sugar. Peach strudel is made
the same way.

768. +Plain Strawberry Shortcake.+-- 1 quart flour, ½ teaspoonful
salt, ½ cup butter, 2 cups milk and 2 teaspoonfuls baking powder;
sift flour, powder and salt into a bowl, add the butter and chop it
very fine with a chopper in the flour; then mix it with the milk
into a soft dough; divide it into two equal parts and roll them out
to the size of a jelly plate; butter a deep jelly tin, put in 1
layer and brush it over with melted butter, put on the other layer
and bake in a quick oven; when done remove it from oven, separate
the 2 layers with a broad-bladed knife and spread them with butter;
mash some fresh strawberries with a silver spoon, cover the bottom
layer with the mashed strawberries and sprinkle thickly with
powdered sugar; lay on the other layer with the crust side downward,
cover with a thick layer of strawberries, sprinkle with sugar and
serve with vanilla sauce, sweet cream or the following sauce:--Beat
2 eggs until they foam, add 2 small cups milk, stirring constantly,
sweeten to taste and flavor with vanilla extract.

769. +Strawberry Shortcake, No. 1.+-- ½ cup butter, 1 cup sugar, 2
eggs, ¾ cup milk and 2 cups prepared flour; stir butter and sugar to
a cream and add the eggs 1 at a time; next add the sifted flour and
milk alternately; bake in two well buttered jelly tins in a medium
hot oven; when done remove and lay them on a napkin which has been
dusted with sugar; when cold put a layer onto a plate and cover the
cake with fresh strawberries; sprinkle over some sugar, lay over the
other layer, cover the top with strawberries, dust with sugar and
serve with cold cream or vanilla sauce.

770. +Strawberry Shortcake, No. 2.+-- 1 cup powdered sugar, 3 eggs
and 1 cup sifted flour mixed with 1 teaspoonful baking powder and 2
tablespoonfuls water; stir the yolks and sugar to a cream, add water
and flour and lastly the beaten whites; bake in 3 layers; when done
lay them over one another with strawberries between, sprinkle top
well with sugar and serve with cream or vanilla sauce.

771. +Peach Shortcake+ is made the same as Strawberry Shortcake. In
place of berries take peaches pared and cut into slices. Or this
cake may be made of all kinds of preserved fruit and served either
with sweet cream or vanilla sauce.

772. +Vienna Bröselcake.+-- 4 eggs, 5 tablespoonfuls sugar, 3 cups
flour, 1 cup warm milk, ½ cup butter, the grated rind of ½ lemon, 1
yeast cake, ¼ teaspoonful salt and a little vanilla; dissolve the
yeast in 1 cup milk, add 1 cup sifted flour and mix it into a
batter; set it in a warm place to rise; as soon as the sponge is
very light stir butter and sugar to a cream and add by degrees the
eggs, 1 at a time, stirring a few minutes between each addition;
next add salt, lemon or vanilla and lastly the remaining 2 cups
sifted flour and the sponge alternately; beat the whole thoroughly
with a wooden spoon and set it aside to rise; when light beat it
again with a spoon and fill it into a cake mould with tube in
center, which should be well buttered and dusted with fine bread,
cracker or zwieback crumbs; let it rise again to double its height;
in the meantime cut 1 handful almonds into small pieces without
removing the brown skin and mix them with 1 handful sugar, a little
cinnamon, a little grated lemon peel and some melted butter; work
this with a fork briskly into the dough; when the cake is ready to
bake press little dents in it with the handle of a silver spoon,
brush over with beaten egg, spread the almond mixture over the top
and bake in a medium hot oven 1 hour.

773. +Brioche Cake.+-- ¾ pound sifted flour, ½ pound butter, 4 eggs,
2 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 yeast cake dissolved in ½ cup warm milk
and ½ teaspoonful salt; mix ½ cup flour with the salt, yeast and
milk into a batter and set it in a warm place to rise until very
light; then stir the butter to a cream and add the sugar, the eggs,
1 at a time, stirring a few minutes between each addition; as soon
as the batter is light add it gradually to the butter and egg
mixture, add the flour and work it with your hands on a floured
board into a soft dough; cover and let it rise to double its height;
work it thoroughly and let it rise again; when the dough has
attained double its size butter a deep, round cake mould and cover
the bottom with a round piece of buttered paper; take one-sixth of
the dough off and lay it aside; shape the remaining dough into a
round loaf and put it into the buttered pan; make a hollow in
center; form the small piece of dough into the shape of a pear and
put the pointed end into the center of cake; set it to rise to
double its size; brush over with the yolk of 1 egg mixed with 1
tablespoonful water and bake in a medium hot oven.

774. +Small Brioche.+-- Take the same dough as in foregoing recipe
and roll it into small round balls the size of an egg; make a small
opening in center of each with a wet finger; put a small ball of
dough the size of a hazel nut into each one and set the brioche into
a buttered pan; let them rise to double their size; brush over with
the yolk of egg diluted with a little cold water and bake in a hot
oven; when done brush them over with melted butter.

775. +Baba.+-- ¾ pound flour, ½ pound butter, 5 eggs, 2 ounces sugar,
the finely chopped peel of ½ lemon, ¼ teaspoonful salt, 1 yeast cake
dissolved in ¼ cup warm milk, 2 ounces well washed and dried
currants, 1½ ounces seedless raisins, 1½ ounces finely cut citron
and a little finely cut candied orange peel; mix yeast, milk and ½
cup flour together and set it in a warm place to rise; stir the
butter to a cream, add the sugar and next the eggs, 1 at a time,
stirring a few minutes between each addition; next add the yeast
which was set in a warm place to rise, then the flour and fruit;
beat the whole thoroughly with the right hand for 15 minutes; cover
with a clean cloth and let it rise to double its size; press it down
and let it rise again; then put it into a well buttered form with a
tube in center, which should be ¾ full; let it rise till form is
full; paste with the white of egg a strip of buttered paper around
the top edge of form and bake the cake about 1 hour; when done turn
the cake out of form and set it for a few minutes in the oven to
dry; in the meantime put ½ cup sugar with ¾ cup Madeira wine over
the fire; let it get hot and pour all over the baba; serve either
hot or cold on a napkin. Small babas are made of the same dough and
baked in small deep forms, otherwise treated the same as above.
Instead of Madeira any other kind of wine may be used; also vanilla
or pineapple syrup.

776. +Savarin Cake.+-- 1 cup lukewarm cream or milk, 2 yeast cake, 3
ounces butter, 4 eggs, ¼ teaspoonful salt, ½ gill Cognac, 2
tablespoonfuls powdered sugar and 10 ounces sifted flour; dissolve
the yeast in half the milk and mix it with half the sifted flour
into a smooth batter; cover and set it in a warm place to rise,
which will take about ½ hour; in the meantime stir butter and sugar
to a cream and add the eggs, 1 at a time, stirring a few minutes
between each addition; next add alternately the remaining milk,
brandy, flour and lastly the batter which has been set in a warm
place to rise; beat the whole with the right hand for 15 minutes;
then cover with a napkin and let it rise in a warm place; butter a
round mould which holds about 1½ to 2 quarts and dust with flour;
turn the mould upside down, so the loose flour may fall out; when
the dough is very light mix it with 2 ounces finely cut almonds and
carefully fill it into the mould; set again in a warm place to rise
to double its size; bake in a medium hot oven for ½ hour; to
ascertain whether the cake is done or not thrust one end of a
knitting needle into center of cake; if the needle comes out clean
it is done; if any dough adheres to it the cake must be baked a few
minutes longer; as soon as the cake is done turn it onto a round
wire grate or sieve and prepare the following glaze:--Place a
saucepan with 1 cup sugar and ½ pint cold water over the fire and
boil 5 minutes; add 1 glass Jamaica rum, Cognac, sherry wine, kirsch
or any other kind of liquor; set the cake with the grate or sieve
onto a dish and pour the syrup evenly all over it; pour the syrup
which drops from the cake onto the dish back to saucepan again, boil
it up and pour over the cake; lift the grate on one side and slide
the cake onto a dessert dish; the top may be decorated with
preserved cherries or other fruit. The savarin is served as dessert,
either hot or cold. Small savarins are baked in small, deep forms
and dipped in hot syrup when done.

777. +Soleil.+-- 1 pound sifted flour, 10 ounces butter, 2 ounces
sugar, the grated rind of 1 lemon, ¼ pound sweet almonds, 2 yeast
cake, 8 eggs, a pinch of salt and ½ cup cream; dissolve the yeast in
a little warm milk; take 1 cup sifted flour and mix it with the
yeast into a soft dough; lay this in a bowl with a little warm cream
and set it in a warm place to rise to double its size; sift the
remaining flour, sugar and salt into a mixing bowl and make a hollow
in center; put in by degrees the well beaten eggs and butter and mix
and beat the whole with the hands for 15 minutes; pound the almonds
with 2 eggs and press them through a sieve; add them with the yeast
dough to the above mixture and mix the whole thoroughly together;
dust over some flour and set in a warm place to rise to double its
size; then fill it into a paper-lined form, which should be ½
filled, and set it to rise till form is nearly full; take a large
tin plate and cover the bottom with salt; onto this set the pan with
cake and bake in a medium hot oven about 40 minutes; try the cake
with a larding or knitting needle; when done remove it from the
oven, turn onto a sieve and pour hot vanilla syrup all over it; when
cold boil 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water till it forms a thread
between 2 fingers; remove from the fire, add 1 tablespoonful
raspberry syrup and stir till nearly cold; pour it over the cake and
set in oven for 2 minutes; remove instantly and lay a slice of
pineapple in center of cake; cut the pineapple into 4 parts without
altering its form and lay long strips of citron around it to imitate
the sun.

778. +Compiegne.+-- 1 pound sifted flour, 10 ounces butter, 4 whole
eggs, the yolks of 4, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, ½ cup cream, ¼
teaspoonful salt and 2 yeast cake; dissolve the yeast in ½ cup warm
milk, add a few spoonfuls of the flour and mix it into a batter; set
this in a warm place to rise; in the meantime stir the butter to a
cream and add the sugar, salt and eggs by degrees; next the yeast
and sifted flour; beat the whole with your hand for 15 minutes; then
add the cream, which should be whipped to a stiff froth; butter a
large, deep tin form and cover the bottom with a round piece of
buttered paper; fill in the cake mixture, which should fill the form
¾ full, paste a piece of paper around top edge of form and let it
rise till form is nearly full; bake in a moderate oven; serve either
hot or cold. Small compiegnes are baked in small forms and dipped in
sugar syrup mixed with wine or liquor.

779. +Damp Nudels.+-- 3 cups sifted flour, 1 tablespoonful sugar, ¼
teaspoonful salt, ½ tablespoonful butter, the yolks of 2 eggs, 2
yeast cake and 1 cup warm milk; put flour into a bowl and make a
hollow in the center; mix the yeast with ½ cup warm milk, put it
into the hollow of flour and mix with a little of the flour to a
thick batter; sprinkle a little of the flour over and cover and set
in a warm place to rise, which will take about ¾ hour; then add
salt, sugar, the yolks and butter, which has been melted in the
remaining ½ cup milk; mix the whole into a soft dough and set it in
a warm place; when it has risen to double its height cut pieces off
with a tablespoon and form them with your hands into round balls;
set these onto a floured board covered with a napkin and let them
rise to double their size; then brush them over with melted butter;
put 1 cup milk, ½ tablespoonful butter and 1 tablespoonful sugar in
a pan which is large enough to hold the nudels without touching each
other and can be covered tightly; put the pan on top of stove and as
soon as the milk boils put in the nudels, cover tightly and let them
boil slowly; when the milk has boiled away and the nudels begin to
fry in the butter (which can be heard and smelt) draw them to side
of stove and let them remain for a few minutes; transfer them to a
deep dish and serve with vanilla or snow sauce; the above will make
20 nudels and will take about ½ hour to cook. NOTE.--If the nudels
are not all wanted for dessert the remaining ones can be baked in
the oven and served for tea as a substitute for biscuits.




FRUIT DUMPLINGS.

(TO BE SERVED AS DESSERT.)


780. +Baked Apple Dumplings, No. 1.+-- 1 cup butter, 4 cups sifted
flour, ½ teaspoonful salt, the yolks of 3 eggs and ½ cup cold water;
put the flour and salt onto a paste board, make a hollow in center
and put in the yolks and butter; work this into a stiff paste,
adding the water by degrees; roll it out ½ inch in thickness and
then fold it up so that 3 layers lay on top of one another; lay the
paste onto a plate and let it stand in a cool place or on ice for 1
hour; pare 9 greening or pippin apples and remove the cores without
breaking the fruit; next roll out the paste very thin and cut it in
9 squares; put an apple in center of each square and put into each
apple 1 teaspoonful apple jelly; bring the corners of the square
together, brush the tips with a little white of egg and press them
lightly together; set the dumplings into a long tin pan and bake
until apples are done; if the oven is too hot cover them with paper;
in serving put 1 dumpling for each person onto a tea plate, pour a
few spoonfuls cherry wine or lemon sauce around it and put 1
spoonful hard sauce on top of each apple; or they may be served
without sauce and dusted with sugar. Baked apple dumplings may be
made of pie crust the same way.

781. +Baked Apple Dumplings, No. 2.+-- 2 cups sifted flour, ¼ pound
lard, 3 ounces butter, ½ teaspoonful salt, the yolk of 1 egg and ½
cup ice water; put the flour and ½ the lard and salt into a bowl and
chop the lard fine with a knife; beat the yolk and ice water till it
foams, add to the flour and mix it with the knife into a smooth,
stiff paste; roll it out on a board into a square, put the remaining
lard and butter in the center, inclose it with the paste and set for
½ hour on ice or in a cool place; then roll it out 3 times as long
as wide, fold together so that 3 layers lay over one another and let
it rest for 15 minutes; roll and fold it twice more; then roll it
out to ⅛ of an inch in thickness, cut into square pieces and set in
the center of each square a peeled and cored tart apple; bring the 4
corners of square together on top, brush the dumplings over with
beaten eggs and bake till a light brown and done; serve with hard
and wine or lemon sauce. These quantities will make 5 dumplings.

782. +Baked Apple Dumplings, No. 3.+-- 1 pint flour, ½ teaspoonful
salt, ½ cup cold water and ¾ cup lard; mix flour, salt and water to
a paste and work it for a little while on a board; roll it out into
a square piece 1 inch in thickness; also shape the lard into a
square piece, but smaller than the paste; fold the paste over the
lard and set it for a little while in a cool place; then roll it out
½ inch in thickness and fold together so that it is 3 double; roll
and fold it twice more; then roll it out ⅛ of an inch in thickness,
cut into squares and finish the same as in foregoing recipe.

783. +Baked Apple Dumplings+ (with Baking Powder).--2 cups flour, 1
teaspoonful baking powder, ½ cup water or milk, ½ cup butter or lard
and ¼ teaspoonful salt; sift flour, salt and baking powder into a
bowl, put in the butter and chop it fine; then mix the whole into a
soft dough; roll it out ⅛ of an inch in thickness and cut it into
squares; put a tart apple, pared and cored, onto each square and put
into each apple a small piece of butter and a little sugar; bring
the 4 corners of paste together on top of the apple, fasten them
with a little white of egg, put in a long, shallow pan and set in a
medium hot oven to bake till done; serve with hard or wine sauce; if
the oven is too hot cover them with paper. To ascertain when
dumplings are done thrust a knitting needle into them. If it
penetrates through the apples easily they are done; if not, the
baking must be continued until they are done.

784. +Apple Dumplings (bain-Marie).+-- 1 pound flour, 1 teaspoonful
baking powder, ½ teaspoonful salt, 1 cup cream or milk and ¾ cup
butter; sift flour, salt and powder into a bowl, add the milk and
mix it into a paste; roll it out on a floured board into a square
piece about 1½ inches in thickness; form the butter into a square
piece and lay it in the center of paste; fold the paste over it,
first from the right and left side, then from you and towards you;
put it on a tin plate and set in a cool place for ½ hour; next roll
it out 3 times as long as wide, fold it together and lay one end
over the middle; then the other end over that, so the paste is 3
double; roll and fold it twice more the same way; then roll it out
thin, butter and dust 8 cups with flour and line them with the
crust; fill them with finely sliced tart apples and sugar, cover
them with the same paste and set the cups in a pan of hot water; put
them in the oven to bake; when done turn them onto a dish, dust with
sugar and serve with 2 sauces--a wine or nutmeg sauce and a hard
sauce. These dumplings can be made with any kind of fruit.

785. +Steamed Apple Dumplings.+-- Prepare a fine puff paste, cut it
into squares and inclose in each square a nice peeled and cored,
juicy apple; lay the dumplings into a steamer, cover tightly, set
the steamer over boiling water and let them steam till done, which
will take from 1 to 1½ hours; serve with brandy, hard or sherry wine
sauce. Instead of puff paste a fine pie crust may be used.

786. +Boiled Apple Dumplings, No. 1.+-- 1 cup finely chopped suet, 2
cups prepared flour, 1 egg and ¾ cup water; mix this into a stiff
dough, roll it out ⅛ of an inch in thickness and cut into squares;
brush each square over with beaten egg and sprinkle over some finely
sifted bread crumbs; put in the center of each a nice pared and
cored juicy, tart apple; bring the 4 corners of the paste together
on top of apple and press them together; brush the dumplings over
with beaten egg and dust over them some fine bread crumbs; wring out
some small, square pieces of muslin in hot water and dust them with
flour; inclose each dumpling in a cloth, pin the 4 corners together,
drop them into slightly salted boiling water and boil ¾ hour; serve
with cherry wine or nutmeg sauce, or hard or brandy sauce. Dumplings
boiled in this way are dry and light. ½ cup of lard may be
substituted for the suet.

787. +Boiled Apple Dumplings, No. 2.+-- ½ pound lard, 1 pound sifted
flour, 1 teaspoonful salt and ½ cup cold water; put flour, lard and
salt in a bowl and chop the lard fine with a knife in the flour; add
the water and mix it with the knife into a stiff paste; put the
paste on a floured board and roll it out about ½ inch in thickness;
fold it up and roll it out again about ⅛ of an inch thick; cut into
squares and lay in the center of each a pared and cored juicy, tart
apple; bring the corners of the squares neatly together and press
them lightly; inclose each dumpling in a small square cloth, bring
the 4 corners together and fasten with a pin; each cloth should be
previously dipped in hot water, wrung out and dusted with flour on
the inside before the dumpling is put into it; drop them into
boiling water which is slightly salted, boil ½ hour and serve with
cherry wine sauce. NOTE.--A good pie crust can also be used for this
purpose. Peach, plum and cherry dumplings are made the same way. The
above ingredients will make about 8 dumplings. ½ pound finely
chopped suet may be used instead of lard.

788. +Lemon Dumplings.+-- Mix 2 cups prepared flour with 2 eggs, 1
tablespoonful butter or ½ cup finely chopped suet, 1½ tablespoonfuls
sugar, the juice and half the grated rind of 1 lemon and finish the
same as Orange Dumplings; serve with cherry wine sauce or prepare a
sauce the same as for Orange Dumplings and flavor with lemon instead
of oranges.

789. +Orange Dumplings.+-- 2 cups prepared flour, 2 eggs, 2
teaspoonfuls butter, 1 tablespoonful sugar and 1 cup water; mix this
into a thick batter; pare 3 nice oranges, cut them into small pieces
and remove the pits and all the skin, so that there is nothing left
but the meat of the oranges; stir this into the batter; have a
kettle of boiling water on the stove with a little salt; next drop
the mixture with a tablespoon into the boiling water, taking care
not to put too much in at once; cover the kettle and boil the
dumplings just 10 minutes; remove them with a skimmer to a warm dish
and serve at once with the following sauce:--Stir 2 tablespoonfuls
butter with 1 cup powdered sugar to a cream and add by degrees 1
egg, 2 tablespoonfuls brandy or wine, the juice of 1 orange and a
little grated rind. These dumplings should be removed from the water
as soon as done, otherwise they will become heavy.

790. +Fruit Dumplings.+-- Stir 1 ounce butter to a cream and add by
degrees 3 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls finely
chopped almonds, a little grated lemon peel, 4 large apples peeled
and cut into small slices and ¼ pound bread that has been previously
soaked in water and pressed out in a napkin; add cup of bread
crumbs, mix all together, drop with a spoon dumplings from this
mixture into slightly salted boiling water, boil until done and
serve with wine sauce. Cherries, peaches, pears, plums, blackberries
or huckleberries may be used instead of apples.

791. +Strawberry Dumplings.+-- 1 cup beef suet freed from strings and
chopped fine, 3 cups sifted prepared flour, 1 tablespoonful sugar
and 2 eggs; mix with ¾ cup cold water to a soft dough; shape into
large balls with floured hands, put into a dumpling cloth that is
buttered and floured on the inside and fasten the 4 corners of the
cloth together with a pin; drop into slightly salted boiling water
and boil till done, which will take about ½ hour. The best way to
ascertain if dumplings are done is to thrust a knitting needle into
them. If no dough clings to it and the needle comes out clean they
are done and must be instantly removed from fire, taken from the
cloth, laid on a warm dish and served at once; serve with the same
sauce as the following recipe.

792. +Strawberry Dumplings (another way).+-- 2 cups prepared flour, 2
eggs, 1 tablespoonful butter, 1 tablespoonful sugar and 1 cup milk
or water; mix this into a stiff batter and stir in lastly 1 cup well
washed and drained berries and finish the same as Orange Dumplings;
serve with the following sauce:--Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter with 1
cup powdered sugar to a cream and add the yolks of 2 eggs and 3
tablespoonfuls white wine; when this is well mixed stir 1 cup nice,
ripe strawberries into it; put sauce into a glass dish; have the
whites beaten to a stiff froth, spread it over the top of sauce and
set nice, large strawberries around the edge of dish. These
dumplings may be made of all kinds of fruit--peaches, cherries,
plums, pears or apricots.

793. +Fine Fruit Dumplings.+-- Pare and quarter some peaches, apples
or pears and boil them in sugar syrup until done, but in such a way
that the pieces stay whole; then take them out with a skimmer and
lay on a long dish; in the meantime prepare some dumplings as
follows:--Place 1 cup milk with 1 tablespoonful butter over the
fire; as soon as it boils stir in 1 cup sifted flour and stir
constantly until it has formed into a smooth dough and loosens
itself from the bottom of saucepan; after the dough has cooled stir
1 tablespoonful butter to a cream and add by degrees the yolks of 3
eggs, the dough, 1 tablespoonful dry farina and lastly the whites
beaten to a stiff froth; form the mixture with a tablespoon into
dumplings and drop them into the boiling syrup in which the fruit
was boiled; when done take them out with a skimmer and lay in a
circle around the fruit; pour the syrup over them and serve. These
dumplings may also be made with dried fruit.

794. +Plain Suet Dumplings.+-- 1 pint bread crumbs soaked in 1 cup
milk, ½ pound suet freed from strings and chopped fine, 4 eggs
(whites and yolks beaten separately), 1 tablespoonful sugar, 1
teaspoonful salt and 1 cup prepared flour or flour with ½
teaspoonful Royal baking powder; work into a smooth dough and shape
with floured hands into dumplings; boil them inclosed in little,
square pieces of muslin or dumpling cloths that have been previously
dipped in hot water, wrung out and floured on the inside; boil 40
minutes and serve with strawberry, cherry or wine sauce; or stir any
kind of fresh fruit into ½ pint hard sauce and serve it with the
dumplings.

795. +Plain Dumplings (with stewed Apples).+-- Pare, core and cut
into quarters 6 tart apples; boil 1 cup sugar with 2 cups water to a
syrup, put in the apples and boil till tender, but do not allow them
to break; when done take the apples out with a skimmer and lay them
on a dish; mix 1 cup prepared flour with 1 egg, 1 teaspoonful butter
and a little water into a thick batter, drop a small portion of the
mixture with a teaspoon into the boiling apple syrup and boil 5
minutes; remove them, lay in a circle around the apples and pour the
syrup over them. A few slices of lemon may be boiled with the syrup.
This dish can also be made of pears, dried apples or apricots.

796. +Apple Dumplings (with Rice).+-- Place ½ pound rice in a
saucepan over the fire with cold water, boil 3 minutes and drain in
a colander, rinsing with cold water; then put it back on the fire in
the same saucepan with 1 pint milk, ½ teaspoonful salt, ½
teaspoonful sugar and a little piece of butter; boil until thick;
remove from the fire and mix it with 2 well beaten eggs; dip the
dumpling cloths in hot water, wring them out and flour well inside;
put 2 spoonfuls of the boiled rice upon each cloth, spread it out
smooth and lay in the center of each a peeled and cored apple; fill
the opening left by the removal of the core with currant jelly or
sugar; draw the 4 corners of the cloth together, bring them to the
top of the apple and fasten with pins; drop them into boiling water
and boil ½ hour; serve with sweet cream or vanilla, fruit or claret
sauces.




CAKES.


797. +Plain Cake.+-- 1 cup butter, 1 cup milk, 2 cups sugar, 3 cups
prepared flour, 4 eggs and the grated rind of 1 lemon; stir butter
and sugar to a light white cream with your right hand; then stir
with a silver spoon, add the eggs, 1 at a time, stirring a few
minutes between each addition; next add the sifted flour and milk
alternately; butter a large, round cake pan and line it with
buttered paper; pour in the cake mixture and bake in a medium hot
oven for 1 hour; to ascertain if cake is done thrust a knitting
needle into center of cake; if it comes out clean the cake is done;
if not, the baking must be continued; when done remove the cake from
oven and let it stand 10 minutes; then turn it out of pan, remove
the paper and set the cake in a cool place or put it when cold in a
tin cake box. If plain flour is used take 1½ teaspoonfuls baking
powder and sift it with the flour. Measure with a cup which holds
half a pint.

798. +Marble Cake.+-- Take the same mixture as for Plain Cake and
divide it into 3 equal parts; add to one part some red sugar or a
little prepared cochineal, to give it a fine pink tint; stir into
another part 3 tablespoonfuls grated chocolate and leave the third
part plain; butter a large cake pan and line it with buttered paper;
fill the pan about ½ inch deep with the plain batter and drop upon
this in 3 or 4 places 1 spoonful of the dark and pink batters; pour
in more plain batter; then drop in the pink and brown the same way;
continue until all is used; the pink may be omitted if the coloring
is not handy; bake the same as Plain Cake; when done ice the cake
with boiled chocolate glaze.

799. +Nut Cake.+-- Prepare a cake batter the same as for Plain Cake,
stir in 1 pint shelled walnuts broken into pieces and finish the
same as Plain Cake; or stir 3 cups freshly grated cocoanut into the
plain cake batter; or stir 1 pint shelled hickory nuts into the
plain cake batter; or almonds cut into strips; Brazil nuts may also
be used.

800. +Citron Cake.+-- Cut ½ pound citron into fine slices and prepare
a cake batter the same as for Plain Cake; butter a large, round pan
and line it with buttered paper; pour in a layer of cake batter;
then a layer of sliced citron; then batter and citron again;
continue until all is used; bake in a medium hot oven till done,
which will take about 1¼ hours; if the oven should be too hot cover
the cake with buttered paper.

801. +Lady Cake.+-- 1 cup butter, 2 cups sugar, 1 cup milk, 3 cups
prepared flour, the whites of 8 eggs and the grated rind and juice
of 1 lemon; stir butter and sugar with your hand to a light white
cream and beat the whites to a stiff froth; take a silver spoon and
stir the whites, the lemon, sifted flour and milk alternately into
the creamed butter and sugar; butter a large mould and line it with
buttered paper; pour in the mixture and bake 1 hour. NOTE.--½ pound
blanched almonds cut into strips may be stirred into the cake
mixture and flavored with vanilla; or 1 pint shelled walnuts broken
into pieces or ½ pound finely cut citron can be stirred into the
batter and flavored with essence of almonds; ice with clear icing.

802. +Dutchess Cake.+-- 1 cup butter, 1 cup milk, 2 cups sugar, 3
cups prepared flour, the yolks of 8 eggs and 2 teaspoonfuls peach
extract; stir butter and sugar with the right hand to a light white
cream; then stir with a spoon and add the yolks, 2 at a time,
stirring a few minutes between each addition; next add the
flavoring, the sifted flour and milk alternately; butter a large,
round cake pan and line it with buttered paper; pour in the cake
mixture and bake in a medium hot oven 1 hour. NOTE.--1 pint shelled
walnuts broken into pieces may be stirred into this cake mixture or
Brazil nuts may be used; also peanuts broken into pieces.

803. +Fruit Cake.+-- Prepare a cake batter the same as for Plain
Cake; remove the stones from ½ pound raisins; cut ¼ pound citron
into fine slices and mix the raisins and citron with ½ pound well
washed and dried currants; dust the fruit with flour, stir it into
the cake mixture and finish the same as Plain Cake.

804. +Rich Fruit Cake.+-- 2 pounds stoned raisins, 2 pounds seedless
raisins, 2 pounds well washed and dried currants, 1 pound finely
sliced citron, 1 pound butter, ½ pint good brandy, 1 pint molasses,
1 pound brown sugar, 2 teaspoonfuls grated nutmeg, 2 teaspoonfuls
ground cinnamon, cloves and mace, 12 eggs and 1 pound flour sifted
with 2 teaspoonfuls baking powder; dredge the fruit with flour; stir
butter and sugar with the hand to a light white cream; then stir
with a wooden spoon and add the eggs, 1 at a time, stirring a few
minutes between each addition; next add the molasses, brandy, spice
and sifted flour and lastly stir in the fruit; butter 2 large, round
cake pans and line them with brown paper; fill in the mixture and
bake in a medium hot oven from 3 to 4 hours. Great care must be
taken that the oven is just right, as the cake burns very easily.

805. +Orange Layer Cake.+-- ½ cup butter, 1 cup sugar, ½ cup milk,
the whites of 3 eggs, 1½ cups prepared flour and the grated rind of
½ orange; stir butter and sugar with your right hand to a light
white cream and add the grated orange rind; beat the whites to a
stiff froth; then add them alternately with the sifted flour and
milk to the above mixture; butter 2 large jelly cake tins and line
them with buttered tissue paper; put an equal portion of the cake
batter into each pan; spread it evenly with a broad-bladed knife
dipped in water and bake the cakes in a medium hot oven till a light
brown and done, which will take from 15 to 20 minutes; to ascertain
when cakes are done thrust a knitting needle into the center of
them; if it comes out clean the cakes are done; if any dough adheres
to it the baking must be continued; as soon as the cakes are done
remove them from the oven; lay a clean cloth or paper on the kitchen
table and dust over it some powdered sugar; turn the cakes out of
pans upside down onto the cloth and let them lay till cold; in the
meantime prepare the filling, as follows: Put in a small saucepan
the juice of 1 orange, 1 teaspoonful lemon juice, a little grated
orange peel, 1 teaspoonful butter and the yolks of 3 eggs; set the
saucepan in a vessel of boiling water and stir the contents till
they thicken; remove from the fire and when cold add ½ cup sugar;
lay one layer of cake, bottom side up, on a jelly cake dish and
spread over it the orange mixture; lay over the remaining layer,
right side up, and dust with powdered sugar; or ice the cake with
clear icing; or cover the top of cake with an orange glaze.

806. +Lemon Layer Cake.+-- 1 cup butter, 1 cup milk, 2 cups sugar, 3
cups prepared flour and the whites of 6 eggs; stir butter and sugar
with the right hand to a light white cream, then stir it with a
spoon; beat the whites to a stiff froth; add by degrees the sifted
flour, the beaten whites and milk alternately to the above mixture;
butter 4 good sized jelly tins and line them with buttered paper;
then fill in a thin layer of the cake mixture, spread it smooth with
a knife and bake in a medium hot oven to a light brown and well
done; in the meantime prepare a filling as follows:--Put in a small
saucepan the grated rind and juice of 1 lemon, the yolks of 6 eggs,
1 tablespoonful butter and 2 tablespoonfuls water; set the saucepan
in a vessel of boiling water and stir till contents thicken; remove
from fire when cold, add 1 cup sugar; when cake is done remove it
from oven, lay a clean cloth on a table, dust over some powdered
sugar and turn the cake out of pan onto the cloth; when cold put 1
layer on a jelly cake dish, bottom side up, and spread over ⅓ of the
lemon mixture; put on another layer, upside down, and spread it with
the mixture; then treat the third layer the same way; then put on
the last layer, right side up, and cover the top with a lemon glaze
or dust it with powdered sugar. NOTE.--If this cake is not wanted so
large it may be divided into 2 cakes, taking 2 layers for each cake;
or use half the quantities. Cream or jelly may be used instead of
lemon filling.

807. +Chocolate Layer Cake.+-- 4 eggs, 1 cup butter, 2 cups sugar, 1
cup milk, 3 cups prepared flour and 1 teaspoonful vanilla; stir
butter and sugar to a light white cream and add the eggs, 1 at a
time, stirring a few minutes between each addition; next add
vanilla, the sifted flour and milk alternately; bake in paper lined
jelly tins in a quick oven; make 4 layers; in the meantime prepare
the following filling:--Beat the whites of 3 eggs to a stiff froth
and add 1½ cups powdered sugar, 4 tablespoonfuls Baker’s grated
chocolate and 1 teaspoonful vanilla; mix all well together and put
it between the layers and on top; or put boiled chocolate glaze
between the layers and over the top (see Boiled Chocolate Glaze).
The top of cake may be ornamented with blanched almonds laid in a
circle around the top and some in the center.

808. +Chocolate Cream Cake.+-- 1 cup sugar, ½ cup milk, 1½ cups
prepared flour, 1 tablespoonful butter, 2 eggs and mix the same as
in foregoing recipe; bake in 2 layers in jelly tins; for the
cream:--Boil ¾ cup milk and add ½ tablespoonful butter, 2
tablespoonfuls grated chocolate, ½ cup sugar and 1 tablespoonful
cornstarch wet with a little cold water; stir and boil for a few
minutes; remove from fire and mix with 1 beaten egg and ½
teaspoonful vanilla extract; when cold lay one of the cake layers on
a flat dish and spread half the chocolate mixture over it; put on
the other layer, spread over the top the remaining chocolate cream
and decorate the top with shelled walnuts.

809. +Cocoanut Layer Cake.+-- ¾ cup sugar, ½ cup butter, 1½ cups
prepared flour, the grated rind and juice of ½ lemon, the whites of
3 eggs and ½ cup milk; stir butter and sugar to a light white cream;
beat the whites to a stiff froth and add them by degrees alternately
with the sifted flour and milk to the creamed butter and sugar;
butter 2 good sized jelly cake tins and line them with buttered
paper; put an equal portion in each tin, spread it evenly with a
broad-bladed knife dipped in water and bake them in a medium hot
oven to a delicate brown color; when done remove them from oven and
let them stand for a few minutes; then turn the cakes onto buttered
paper to cool; in the meantime grate 1 cocoanut and beat the white
of 1 egg to a stiff froth; add ¾ cup powdered sugar and the juice of
½ lemon; lay one cake layer, bottom side up, on a jelly cake dish,
spread over half the white icing and sprinkle over a thick layer of
the freshly grated cocoanut; put on the remaining layer, right side
up, spread over the rest of icing, cover with a thick layer of the
cocoanut and sift over some powdered sugar. This cake may be served
as a dessert with vanilla sauce.

810. +Lemon Cream Cake.+-- ½ cup butter, 1 cup sugar, the whites of 3
eggs, ½ cup milk, 1½ cups prepared flour and the grated rind and
juice of ½ lemon; stir butter and sugar to a cream; beat the whites
to a stiff froth and add them alternately with the sifted flour and
milk to the creamed butter and sugar; add lastly the lemon; butter 2
jelly tins and dust them with cracker dust; put in the mixture,
spread it evenly with a knife and bake a light brown; when done put
a napkin or clean cloth on the kitchen table and dust with powdered
sugar; turn the cakes upside down onto the napkin and let them lay
till cold; cream for filling:--Boil ¾ cup milk with 2 tablespoonfuls
sugar; dissolve 1 tablespoonful cornstarch in ¼ cup cold milk, stir
it into the boiling milk and boil a few minutes; add 1 teaspoonful
butter, a pinch of salt and remove it from fire; beat up the yolks
of 3 eggs with 1 tablespoonful cold milk, stir them into the
cornstarch and add 1 teaspoonful essence of lemon; when cold put 1
layer of cake, upside down, onto a plate and spread over the cream;
put the other layer over it, right side up, and dust the top with
powdered sugar.

811. +Vanilla Cream Cake+ is made the same as Lemon Cream Cake,
using vanilla flavoring instead of lemon.

812. +Jelly Cake, No. 1.+-- 3 eggs, 1 cup powdered sugar,
1 cup sifted flour mixed with 1 teaspoonful baking powder, 2
tablespoonfuls water and the grated rind of ½ lemon; stir sugar
and eggs to a cream and add alternately the sifted flour, water and
lemon; butter 3 medium sized jelly tins and dust them with finely
sifted bread crumbs; put an equal portion of the cake mixture into
each tin, spread it evenly and bake in a medium hot oven to a
delicate brown; when done remove the cakes from oven.

813. +Jelly Cake, No. 2.+-- ¾ cup butter, 2 cups sugar, 1 cup milk, 3
cups flour, 1½ teaspoonfuls baking powder, 4 eggs and 1 teaspoonful
essence of lemon; stir butter and sugar with the right hand to a
light white cream; then stir with a spoon and add the eggs, 1 at a
time, stirring a few minutes between each addition; next add the
lemon and then alternately the milk and flour; bake in 3 jelly cake
tins in a medium hot oven to a delicate brown color; the tins should
be lined with buttered paper; when cold lay the layers over one
another with jelly between and dust the top with powdered sugar or
ice it with fruit icing.

814. +Jelly Cake, No. 3.+-- Stir ¼ pound butter with ½ pound powdered
sugar to a light cream and add alternately 1½ cups prepared flour
(sifted), the whites of 4 eggs beaten to a stiff froth and 10 drops
extract of bitter almonds; butter 2 good sized jelly cake tins and
line them with buttered paper; put an equal portion of the cake
mixture into each one, spread it evenly with a knife dipped in water
and bake to a delicate brown color; when cold arrange in layers with
jelly between and sift fine sugar over the top.

815. +Wine Glazed Cake.+-- 4 eggs, 1 cup flour, ½ cup sugar, 1
teaspoonful baking powder and the grated rind and juice of ½ lemon;
stir eggs and sugar to a cream; sift the flour and baking powder
together and add them with the lemon to the above mixture; butter a
round cake pan and dust it with fine bread crumbs; pour in the
mixture and bake about ½ hour in a moderate oven; for glazing
dissolve ½ cup sugar in ½ cup cold water and put it over the fire to
boil until the sugar forms a thread between 2 fingers; then add 1
tablespoonful sherry wine, remove it from the fire and stir until a
skin forms on top; then slowly pour it over the cake.

816. +Wine Glazed Cream Cake.+-- Stir 4 eggs with ½ cup granulated
sugar to a cream and add ¾ cup sifted flour in which 1 teaspoonful
baking powder has been mixed; bake in a round pan; when done pour
over a wine glaze the same as in foregoing recipe and decorate the
top with blanched almonds, hazel or walnuts; when cold cut the cake
in half with a sharp knife; spread the under half thickly with
whipped cream, put the other layer over it and cover the top with
whipped cream. NOTE.--This mixture may be baked in a long, shallow
pan and before putting it into the oven sprinkle 2 tablespoonfuls
granulated sugar over the top. When done cut into squares; or omit
the sugar and when done glaze with boiled sugar glaze and cut into
squares.

817. +Pineapple Cake.+-- ½ pound butter, 1 pound powdered sugar, ¾
pound flour, 1 heaping teaspoonful baking powder, ½ pint pineapple
syrup, 2 whole eggs, the yolks of 4 and 1 teaspoonful essence of
vanilla; wash the butter several times in cold water and dry it in a
napkin; put butter and sugar in a mixing bowl and stir with the
right hand to a light white cream; then stir with a spoon and add
the 2 whole eggs, 1 at a time, stirring a few minutes between each
addition; next add the yolks, 1 at a time; sift flour and baking
powder together; add the flour and pineapple syrup alternately to
the above mixture; butter 3 large, deep jelly cake tins and dust
them with flour; put an equal portion of the cake batter into each
pan, spread it evenly with a broad-bladed knife dipped in water and
bake the cakes in a medium hot oven to a delicate brown; when done
remove the cakes from the oven; lay a napkin on a pastry board and
dust over some powdered sugar; turn the cake out, upside down, onto
the napkin; when cold put one cake, bottom side up, on a cake dish
and spread over a layer of pineapple marmalade; put on the last
layer, right side up, and cover the top with pineapple glaze made as
follows:--Stir ½ pound powdered sugar with 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls
pineapple syrup and a few drops of prepared saffron to a stiff
sauce; set it for a few minutes over the fire, stirring constantly
until lukewarm; then pour it by spoonfuls over the cake and lay some
preserved pineapple slices in a circle around the cake; or use
candied pineapple.

818. +Wild Rose Cake.+-- 1 pound powdered sugar, ¾ pound flour, ½
pound butter, 1 teaspoonful baking powder, the whites of 8 eggs and
1 cup white brandy; sift flour and baking powder together; wash the
butter in cold water, to remove the salt, and dry it in a napkin;
put butter and sugar in a mixing bowl and stir it with the right
hand to a light white cream; beat the whites to a stiff froth and
stir them with a spoon in small portions alternately with the flour
and brandy into the creamed butter; divide the mixture into 4 equal
parts; add to one part a little prepared cochineal, to color it a
delicate pink, and flavor with 2 teaspoonfuls rose water; stir into
the second part 2 tablespoonfuls cocoa and 1 teaspoonful vanilla
sugar; add to the third part the yolks of 2 eggs and ½ teaspoonful
essence of bitter almonds; leave the fourth part white and flavor it
with 1 teaspoonful essence of lemon; take some large, deep jelly
cake tins, rub them well inside with butter and dust with flour; put
each part of cake mixture into a separate pan and spread the batter
smooth with a broad-bladed knife; then bake in a medium hot oven to
a delicate brown and well done; lay some clean brown paper or a
napkin on a table and dust over some powdered sugar; as soon as one
cake is done remove from the oven and let it stand 3 minutes; then
turn the pan upside down onto the paper; treat the remaining cakes
the same way; as soon as the cakes are cooled off prepare a meringue
as follows:--Beat the whites of 5 eggs to a stiff froth and mix them
with ½ pound powdered sugar; have ready ½ pound blanched almonds, ½
pound blanched walnuts and ½ pound blanched Brazil nuts; chop the
nuts fine; when all is prepared put the cakes together and put the
white layer upside down on a jelly dish; spread over the layer ⅓ the
meringue and sprinkle over ⅓ the chopped nuts; then put on the dark
layer; spread again with meringue and sprinkle with nuts; next put
on the yellow layer; spread over the remaining meringue and sprinkle
over the nuts; lay the pink layer on top, with the right side up,
and cover with the following glaze:--Mix ½ pound powdered sugar with
a few spoonfuls red fruit juice or fruit syrup, such as red cherry,
raspberry or strawberry syrup; stir the sugar to a thick sauce, set
it over the fire and stir constantly until the sugar is lukewarm;
then pour it by spoonfuls over the cake; lay blanched almonds and
blanched walnuts in a circle around the edge of cake and a few in
the center.

819. +Biscuit au beurre.+-- ½ pound powdered sugar, ¼ pound sifted
flour, ¼ pound cornstarch, ½ pound melted butter, 7 eggs and the
grated rind of 1 lemon; beat the 7 whites to a stiff froth and add
by degrees the yolks and sugar; set this on a hot stove and beat
till it is warm; then remove it and continue the beating until
nearly cold; strain the melted butter into a cup and continue the
beating with the right hand; hold the cup with the melted butter in
the left hand; pour butter into the mixture gradually; next stir in
the sifted flour and cornstarch; butter a round cake pan and line it
with buttered tissue or waxed paper; pour in the mixture; cover the
bottom of a pie plate with salt, set the pan with cake onto this and
bake ¾ hour in an oven not too hot; if it browns too much put paper
over it.

820. +Fine Sponge Cake.+-- 1 pound powdered sugar, 12 eggs and not
quite 1 pound (about 2 tablespoonfuls less) of flour; then add the
grated rind and juice of 1 lemon; put the flour into a tin pan and
set it in front of oven to get warm; put the eggs, sugar and lemon
into a deep stone mixing bowl; set the bowl into a large dishpan of
hot water in such a way that the bowl is half covered with water;
beat the contents of bowl with an egg beater for ¾ hour; then slowly
add the flour, continue the beating for a few minutes longer and
pour the mixture into a large round pan or 2 medium sized ones; the
pan should be previously well buttered and lined with fine brown
buttered or waxed paper; bake 1 hour in a slow oven. Sponge cake
made according to this recipe is elegant, but care must be taken to
follow the instructions exactly. Half these quantities will make a
good sized cake. If the oven should be rather hot at the bottom put
in a large pie plate with salt, set the pan with cake onto it and
bake.

821. +Delicate Sponge Cake.+-- 9 eggs, 1½ small cups granulated
sugar, 1½ small cups flour (sifted 3 times) and the grated rind and
juice of 1 lemon; put the 9 yolks in a bowl and the whites into a
deep dish; add to the yolks ½ the sugar and stir them to a cream;
beat the whites to a stiff froth and add the remaining sugar,
beating constantly; then add slowly, in small portions, the creamed
yolks; next the lemon; continue the beating with an egg beater until
all is well mixed; then stir in lightly the sifted flour; butter a
long, shallow pan and line it with buttered paper; pour in the
mixture and bake in a slow oven ¾ hour to a delicate brown; when
done carefully remove the cake from oven and let it stand for a few
minutes before taking out of the pan. This cake may be iced either
with clear icing or wine or fruit glaze.

822. +Marguerites.+-- ¼ pound flour, ¼ teaspoonful salt, ¼ pound
sugar, 1 whole egg, the yolk of 1 egg, 1 heaping teaspoonful anise
seed, the grated rind of ½ lemon, ½ cup lukewarm water and 2
tablespoonfuls melted butter; measure after the butter is melted;
sift the flour in a bowl, add salt, sugar, grated lemon peel, the
eggs and mix the whole with the water into a batter; lastly add the
butter and anise seed; put a wafer iron over the fire; when hot
brush it over with melted lard; put 1 teaspoonful of the batter in
the center of wafer iron, close it and bake the cake a light brown
on both sides; as soon as one is done take it from the iron and roll
up like a tube; continue to bake the remaining batter the same way;
these quantities will make 50 cakes. 2 teaspoonfuls of vanilla sugar
may be used instead of anise seed. These cakes may be served either
with ice cream, wine or coffee.

823. +Macaroons.+-- Scald ½ pound sweet almonds with a few bitter
ones, remove the brown skins and spread the nuts out on paper to
dry; then pound them in a wedgewood mortar to a paste with the
whites of 2 eggs and add 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla sugar or the grated
rind of 1 lemon; mix it with ½ pound powdered sugar and 2
tablespoonfuls clear icing made as follows:--Take ½ the white of 1
egg, mix it with 2 tablespoonfuls sifted powdered sugar and stir for
a few minutes; then add it to the almonds; mix the whole into a firm
paste and form with the hands into small round balls the size of a
hickory nut; line some shallow tin pans with brown paper (such as is
used for wrapping paper), but do not butter it; set the balls in
even rows, one inch apart, on the paper, flatten each one a little
with a wet finger and bake them in a medium hot oven to a golden
color; when done wet a pastry board with cold water and lay the
macaroons on the wet board with the paper side towards the board;
after 5 minutes the macaroons may be lifted from the paper, as the
dampness loosens them; the above quantities will make 50 macaroons.
Great care should be taken to use the exact amount of ingredients
here stated.

824. +Cookies.+-- 1 cup butter, 2 cups sugar, 2 eggs, the grated rind
of 1 lemon and 1 teaspoonful baking powder; stir the butter and
sugar to a light white cream and add the eggs 1 at a time; sift the
powder with 2 cups flour, add it to the mixture and work the whole
with sufficient flour into a stiff dough; roll it out ⅛ inch in
thickness, cut with a cake cutter into rounds and bake them a light
brown in well buttered shallow tin pans.

825. +Butter Cakes.+-- 1 yeast cake 1 quart sifted flour, 1½ pints
warm milk or water and 1 teaspoonful salt; dissolve the yeast in a
little warm water; sift the flour and salt into a mixing bowl, make
a hollow in center, pour in the yeast and water, mix into a batter
and let it stand over night (this is called setting a sponge); next
morning stir 1 cup sugar with ½ cup lard and ½ cup butter to a cream
and add 2 eggs, 1 at a time, stirring a few minutes between each
addition; then add the grated rind of 1 lemon and a very little
powdered cardamon; mix this thoroughly with the sponge, add
sufficient sifted flour to make a soft dough, cover it with a clean
cloth and set in a warm place to rise to double its height; then
butter 4 long, shallow tin pans (12 inches long, 8 inches wide and 1
inch deep) and dust each one with flour; when the dough has attained
the desired lightness divide it into 4 equal parts; roll each part
out on the pastry board, put it into the pan, press evenly all over
and again set it to rise to top of pan; when ready to bake brush
each cake over with melted butter, sprinkle over 2 tablespoonfuls
granulated sugar mixed with a little cinnamon and bake in a quick
oven to a light brown; as soon as done remove the cakes from the
pans and lay them on a long platter, one over the other, with the
sugared sides together; when cold serve with coffee.

826. +Butter Cakes (with Baking Powder).+-- 2 cups sifted flour, 2
eggs, 1½ teaspoonfuls baking powder, 1 tablespoonful melted butter,
1 cup milk, ½ teaspoonful salt, the grated rind of 1 lemon and ½ cup
well washed currants; sift flour, salt and baking powder into a
mixing bowl, make a hollow in center, put in the 2 whites and 1 yolk
of eggs well beaten, add the lemon, the melted butter and mix it
with the milk into a thick batter; lastly stir in the currants;
spread the mixture into 2 well greased, shallow tin pans; first
brush them over with the remaining yolk, then with 2 tablespoonfuls
melted butter; mix 3 tablespoonfuls granulated sugar, 2
tablespoonfuls finely cut citron, ½ cup finely chopped almonds
together, sprinkle this over the 2 cakes and bake immediately in a
quick oven till done and a light brown. Prepared flour may be
substituted for baking powder.

827. +Apple Cake.+-- Prepare a dough the same as for Butter Cakes and
divide it into 6 parts, as the dough for Apple Cake has to be
thinner than for Butter Cakes; line 6 shallow tin pans with the
dough and set it to rise to double its height; in the meantime pare,
core and cut into eighths some large, tart apples and lay them
together closely in long rows over the cake; drop 1 tablespoonful
melted butter over each cake, sprinkle over some granulated sugar
and bake in a hot oven; when done dust with powdered sugar.

828. +Cheese Cake.+-- Dissolve ½ yeast cake in ½ pint warm milk and
add 1 pound sifted flour, 2 eggs, ½ teaspoonful salt, 2
tablespoonfuls butter and ½ tablespoonful sugar; work this into a
soft dough and set it in a warm place to rise to double its height;
then roll it out ⅛ of an inch in thickness; butter 2 large cheese or
pie plates, cover them with the dough, ornament the edge and let it
rise again until light; mix 1 pound fresh pot cheese with 1½ cups
thick sweet or sour cream, ¾ cup sugar (or sweeten to taste), 3 eggs
and ½ cup currants; when this is well mixed together brush the dough
over with melted butter and fill the plate with the cheese mixture;
bake in a medium hot oven.

829. +Chrysanthemum Cake.+-- ½ pint butter, 1 pint sugar, 1½ pints
flour sifted with 1½ teaspoonfuls baking powder, the grated rind of
1 orange, ½ pint milk and the whites of 8 eggs; stir butter and
sugar with your right hand to a light white cream; beat the whites
to a stiff froth, add them to the creamed butter and mix well
together with a spoon; add alternately the flour and milk; then add
the grated orange peel and a few drops of cochineal, to color the
mixture a delicate pink; butter 3 large jelly tins, dust them with
fine bread crumbs, fill in the mixture in equal parts and bake in a
medium hot oven; when done remove the cakes from the pans and lay
them aside to cool; mix ½ cup powdered sugar with the beaten whites
of 2 eggs; spread this icing over the layers and sprinkle them
thickly with freshly grated cocoanut; lay the layers over one
another, cover the top with pink icing and sprinkle over some
cocoanut.

830. +Snowflake Cake.+-- 2 cups sugar, 1 cup butter, 1 cup milk, 3
cups prepared flour, the grated rind of 1 lemon and the whites of 6
eggs; stir the butter and sugar to a light white cream; beat the
whites to a stiff froth, add them to the creamed butter and add the
lemon; then add alternately the milk and sifted flour; bake in 3
layers in large jelly tins; when done remove the cakes from the tins
and set aside to cool; beat the whites of 2 eggs to a froth and add
½ cup powdered sugar; spread this over each layer and sprinkle them
thickly with freshly grated cocoanut; lay the layers over one
another, spread the top layer with the icing, cover it thickly with
cocoanut and dust over some powdered sugar.




ROLLS AND BREAD.


831. +Parkerhouse Rolls.+-- 2 cups warm milk, 1 yeast cake, 2 cups
sifted flour, 1 teaspoonful salt, 2 teaspoonfuls sugar, 2
tablespoonfuls melted butter and 1 egg; dissolve the yeast in a
little warm milk; sift the flour into a bowl, add sugar and salt,
make a hollow in center and put in the yeast and some of the milk;
commence mixing it with the right hand; next add the egg, butter and
the remaining milk; set it in a warm place till very light; then
work with sufficient sifted flour into a soft dough and let it rise
again till very light; then roll it out 1 inch in thickness and cut
into rounds with a cake cutter; brush the rounds with melted butter,
double them over and set in buttered pans 1 inch apart; let them
rise to double their size and bake to a fine golden color; while hot
brush them over with melted butter.

832. +Bread.+-- 2 quarts flour, 1 teaspoonful salt, 2 teaspoonfuls
sugar, small tablespoonful lard or butter, 1½ pints lukewarm water,
1 of Fleischmann’s yeast cakes. Break the yeast cake into a cup, add
1 teaspoonful sugar and sufficient lukewarm water to fill the cup,
set it in a warm place till the yeast rises to the surface. Sift
flour, sugar and salt into a bowl, add the lard or butter and rub it
fine in the flour; then make a hollow in centre of flour, pour in
the yeast and the remaining water, stir it with a spoon into a stiff
dough, turn it on to a floured board and work it with the hands and
some flour until it does not stick to the hands; return the dough to
the bowl, cover and let it stand in a warm place to rise. When the
dough has risen to double its size, butter 2 brick-shaped pans or
use the crusty bread pans, dust them with flour, divide the dough
into 2 equal parts, mould them into loaves on the board, put them
into the buttered pans, cover and let stand till the dough is to top
of pan, place it in medium hot oven and bake 1 hour. If the bread is
to be mixed at night take only ½ yeast cake, otherwise proceed the
same as above.




COFFEE.


833. +How to Make Coffee.+-- Coffee should always be bought in the
bean and ground when wanted. It should never be allowed to boil, as
all the fine aroma is thereby lost. The finest, quickest and most
economical way to make coffee is by making it in a bag made as
follows:--Take a piece of coarse unbleached muslin, about ⅜ yard
long and ⅜ yard wide, costing about 5 cents per yard; fold on the
bias to a point, sew it together in such a way that the bag has the
shape of a funnel and hem it on the top; then place the bag in the
coffee pot; let the point hang so that it does not quite reach the
bottom; let the top of bag lay over the outside of the coffee pot;
then put in 1 cup freshly ground coffee, pour over ½ pint boiling
water and let it stand 1 minute; then add 1 quart boiling water and
let it stand about 3 minutes on side of stove; have ready the urn in
which the coffee is to be served, which should be well rinsed with
boiling water, pour in the coffee and serve at once; pour more
boiling water over the coffee grounds and let it stand on side of
stove for a short while; then serve the same way; the second coffee
will be found nearly as good as the first. If the coffee is too
strong add more water; if not strong enough add less water, as some
like it strong and others do not. Another way is to take 3 heaping
tablespoonfuls freshly ground coffee and 6 cups boiling water; grind
the coffee as fine as possible; rinse out the coffee pot with
boiling water, put in the coffee and pour on enough boiling water to
cover it well; let it stand in a warm place for 5 minutes, but do
not allow it to boil; then add the remaining boiling water, let it
stand for a few minutes and either serve in the same coffee pot in
which it was made or strain through a fine sieve into a hot silver
or china coffee urn and serve at once. This is also an easy and
economical way of making good coffee, but the first-named method is
the best.




FRUIT SALADS.


834. +Watermelon Salad.+-- Cut a watermelon in two, remove the seeds
and break the red part into pieces with a silver fork; put it in
layers in a glass dish, sprinkle each layer with sugar and place the
dish on ice for 2 hours; when ready to serve pour over ½ pint
claret. If objected to the wine may be omitted.

835. +How to Serve Watermelon.+-- Cut a watermelon in half
lengthwise; then cut each half first in two and then into long
pieces about 2 inches in thickness; arrange the pieces nicely on an
oblong plate and serve. The melon should lay for several hours on
ice before being cut, as it is not nice unless cold.

836. +Plum and Peach Salad.+-- Choose 1 dozen large egg plums, cut
them in two and remove the pits; pare and quarter ½ dozen large,
ripe peaches and put them in layers alternately with the plums in a
glass dish with 1 cup sugar sprinkled between; place the dish on ice
for ½ hour before serving.

837. +Orange and Cocoanut Salad.+-- Pare and cut some nice oranges
into pieces and remove the seeds; put a layer of the oranges
sprinkled with sugar into a glass dish, then a layer of freshly
grated cocoanut and next a layer of apple or currant jelly; then
oranges again; continue in this way until the dish is filled; place
the dish on ice for 1 or 2 hours and serve. If not handy the jelly
may be omitted.

838. +Peach and Pear Salad.+-- Pare and cut into fine slices 4 large,
ripe Bartlett pears; pare and cut into quarters ½ dozen large, ripe
peaches; put them with the pears into a glass dish with a layer of
whipped cream and sugar between and serve at once.

839. +Peach Salad.+-- Pare and cut 1 dozen peaches into quarters, put
them into a glass dish, sprinkle sugar between and over them and
place the dish on ice for ½ hour before serving.

840. +Banana Salad.+-- Cut the fruit into slices, put it into a glass
dish with sugar sprinkled between, squeeze over some lemon juice and
pour over 1 glass claret; place the dish on ice for 1 or 2 hours
before serving.

841. +Raspberry and Currant Salad.+-- Remove the stems from 1 pound
currants and wash and drain them; also wash and drain 1 quart
raspberries and put them into a glass dish with 1½ cups sugar; cover
and let them stand for 3 or 4 hours before serving.

842. +How to Serve Blackberries.+-- Put blackberries into a colander,
let cold water run over them and set colander for a few minutes into
a dishpan to drain; put the berries into a glass dish with powdered
sugar. Huckleberries are prepared the same way.

843. +Banana and Orange Salad.+-- Remove the skins from 4 bananas and
cut the fruit into slices; pare and cut ½ dozen oranges into small
pieces and remove the seeds; put oranges and bananas alternately
into a glass dish with sugar sprinkled between, set them on ice for
1 hour and then serve.

844. +Pineapple Salad.+-- Pare and quarter 1 ripe pineapple, remove
the hard part in center and cut each quarter into fine slices or
dice; pare and cut ½ dozen oranges into small slices and remove the
pits; put oranges into a glass dish in alternate layers with
pineapple with plenty of sugar sprinkled between and place them on
ice for 1 or 2 hours before serving. Strawberries with pineapple are
prepared the same way.

845. +Cherry Salad.+-- Remove the pits from 1 pound cherries,
sprinkle with sugar and let them stand for 1 hour; then put them
with 1 pint ripe strawberries and a little more sugar into a glass
dish, set them on ice for 10 minutes and serve.




SALADS.


846. +Fine Mayonaise, No. 1.+-- The yolks of 4 eggs, 8 tablespoonfuls
salad oil, 4 tablespoonfuls white vinegar, 1 teaspoonful salt, 2
teaspoonfuls sugar, from 1 to 2 tablespoonfuls French mustard and ½
pint whipped cream or 3 tablespoonfuls condensed milk which is not
sweet; put the yolks in a small saucepan and stir them to a cream;
then slowly add, stirring constantly, 4 tablespoonfuls oil; when
this is well mixed add the 4 spoonfuls vinegar, set the saucepan in
a vessel of boiling water and stir over the fire till contents of
saucepan begin to thicken; then instantly remove and continue the
stirring until cold; then slowly add the remaining 4 spoonfuls oil,
stirring constantly; next add the salt and sugar; then the mustard
and lastly the cream or condensed milk. This mayonaise is excellent
if made exactly according to recipe. These quantities will make a
mayonaise sufficient for 10 persons. If the mayonaise is not all
wanted at one time fill it into jelly glasses without the cream. It
will then keep for some time. The cream can be added when wanted for
use.

847. +Mayonaise, No. 2.+-- 2 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls oil, 2
tablespoonfuls vinegar, 1 teaspoonful sugar, ½ teaspoonful salt, 2
tablespoonfuls French mustard and 4 tablespoonfuls whipped cream or
1 tablespoonful condensed milk which is not sweet; put the yolks
into a small vessel and stir them to a cream; add by degrees the
oil, stirring constantly; then slowly add the vinegar, set the
vessel in a saucepan of boiling water and stir and boil till the
contents of saucepan begin to thicken; then remove from fire and
stir until cold; add the salt, mustard, sugar and vinegar; beat the
whites to a stiff froth and slowly add them to the above mixture;
stir in the cream or condensed milk just before the salad is to be
dressed. These quantities will make a salad sufficient for 8
persons. If it is not to be all used at one time put it into a small
glass or stone jar (without the cream or milk) and cover tightly to
exclude the air. If kept in a cool place it will keep for some time.
When wanted for use add the cream. This mayonaise is both cheap and
excellent.

848. +Plain Mayonaise.+-- Put some cracked ice into a dishpan and
place a bowl in the center of the ice; put the yolks of 4 eggs into
a bowl and stir them well with a wooden spoon for 5 minutes; then
slowly add ½ bottle best olive oil; add only a few drops at a time
and stir constantly; if too much oil is added at one time it will
not mix together; if the sauce gets too thick add a little vinegar
and lastly a few tablespoonfuls whipped cream, salt and vinegar to
taste. Another way is to rub the yolks of 2 hard boiled eggs fine
and mix them with 2 raw yolks; otherwise finish the same as
foregoing recipe.

849. +Sauce Tartare.+-- Mix 1 pint mayonaise made as in preceding
recipe with 1 tablespoonful French mustard and 1 teaspoonful English
mustard mixed, 3 anchovies freed from skins and bones and pressed
through a sieve, some finely chopped parsley, small, chopped onion,
4 tablespoonfuls chopped capers, some vinegar and pepper; this sauce
is mostly served with cold meat.

850. +Mayonaise without Eggs (economical).+-- 1 teaspoonful
cornstarch, ½ cup boiling water, 6 tablespoonfuls oil, 3
tablespoonfuls French mustard, 1 teaspoonful salt, 2 teaspoonfuls
sugar, 4 tablespoonfuls vinegar and 1 tablespoonful condensed milk
which is not sweet; mix the cornstarch with a little cold water, add
the ½ cup boiling water and stir and boil for a few minutes; then
set aside to cool; put the mustard into a bowl and gradually add the
oil, stirring constantly; next add the sugar, salt and vinegar; then
the cornstarch and lastly the milk.

851. +Salad Dressing without Oil, No. 1.+-- 2 ounces butter, 2 eggs,
2 tablespoonfuls vinegar, 1 teaspoonful sugar, ½ teaspoonful salt
and 2 tablespoonfuls French mustard; melt the butter in a cup by
setting it into hot water for a few minutes and then set it aside to
cool; stir the yolks in a small vessel with salt and sugar to a
cream and add the melted butter, a little at a time, stirring
constantly; next slowly add the vinegar, set the vessel in a
saucepan of hot water and stir until the contents begin to thicken;
then remove, stir until cold and slowly add the other ingredients;
beat the whites to a stiff froth and mix them with the sauce; if
handy add a few tablespoonfuls cream; if English mustard is used
take 1 teaspoonful mixed with cold water.

852. +Salad Dressing without Oil, No. 2.+-- 1 teaspoonful flour, ½
cup boiling water, 1 tablespoonful butter, 2 tablespoonfuls vinegar,
1 teaspoonful sugar, ½ teaspoonful salt and 2 tablespoonfuls French
mustard; mix the flour with a little cold water, add the boiling
water, boil 2 minutes and add the butter in small pieces; remove
from fire and mix by degrees with the vinegar, then the mustard and
the other ingredients; to this sauce the yolks of 2 eggs may be
added and also the 2 whites beaten to a stiff froth; or the yolks of
2 hard boiled eggs rubbed through a sieve and the whites chopped
fine and sprinkled over the salad.

853. +How to Prepare Lettuce for Salad and for Garnishing.+-- Cut off
the stalks from 3 or 4 heads of lettuce, pick off all the decayed
and withered leaves, break the tender green leaves apart one by one
and remove the thick veins; put the lettuce into cold water, rinse
well and let it lay in ice water for ½ hour or longer; shortly
before serving drain the lettuce in a colander; then put it in a
napkin, shake out well and use as directed.

854. +Lettuce Salad (plain).+-- Prepare the lettuce as in foregoing
recipe, lay it into a salad dish and pour over 2 or 3 tablespoonfuls
salad oil and a little pepper and salt; add to ½ cup white vinegar 4
tablespoonfuls water and pour it over the salad; mix it up well with
2 salad forks, sprinkle over a little cracked ice and serve at once.
If ice is not handy the salad will have to be prepared without it,
but it adds greatly to the crispness of the lettuce. If you rub a
piece of garlic over the salad dish just before putting in the
lettuce it will give the salad a fine flavor without really tasting
of garlic. A small spoonful of sugar may be sprinkled over the
lettuce if liked. Finely shaved onions may also be added.

855. +Lettuce Salad with Mayonaise.+-- Prepare the salad as directed,
put it into a salad dish and pour over a mayonaise dressing. Finely
shaved onions may be added if liked.

856. +Lettuce Salad with Sweet Egg Sauce.+-- Cut 2 ounces fat pork
into very small dice and fry them a light brown; beat 2 or 3 eggs
until very light and slowly add the pork, 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls
vinegar and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; mix this well together and pour
it over the salad. This recipe will make a sufficient quantity to
dress 3 heads of lettuce. More vinegar diluted with a little water
may be added; also more or less sugar.

857. +Lettuce Salad with Syrup Sauce (North German art).+-- Mix 1
tablespoonful flour in a small saucepan with a little cold water
until all lumps are dissolved, add 1 cup boiling water and stir and
boil for a few minutes; add 1 tablespoonful butter and continue
boiling for a few minutes longer; then transfer it to a bowl and set
aside; when nearly cold add ½ cup syrup, a pinch of salt, 2
tablespoonfuls vinegar and 1 tablespoonful sugar; set this sauce on
ice or in a cool place for 5 minutes before serving; put the
prepared lettuce in a dish and pour the sauce over it; sufficient
for 4 large heads of lettuce. Salad prepared in this way is served
in North Germany with German pancakes instead of butter. Fat pork
cut fine and fried to a crisp may be used.

858. +Lettuce Salad with Cream Sauce (North German art).+-- Prepare
the lettuce as directed for 3 or 4 large heads of salad; take 1 pint
thick, sour cream and add 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, a pinch of
salt and 1 or 2 tablespoonfuls vinegar; mix this together and pour
over the salad; then serve at once.

859. +Lettuce Salad with Cream.+-- Put the prepared lettuce in a dish
and pour over some sweet cream to which a little sugar has been
added. Some people add a little vinegar and a pinch of salt. Salad
prepared with this sauce is often served with large German pancakes.

860. +Beet Salad.+-- Wash and put ½ dozen beets in a saucepan with
boiling water and cover and boil them till tender; when done put the
beets into cold water, remove the skins and cut them while still
warm into thin slices; also cut 1 medium sized onion into thin
slices; put the beets and onion in alternate layers into a dish and
sprinkle between 1 teaspoonful salt, ¼ teaspoonful pepper and 2
teaspoonfuls sugar; pour over an equal quantity of vinegar and water
(enough to nearly cover the beets) and let them stand 1 hour before
serving. Omit the onion if its flavor is not liked.

861. +Salad Macédoine.+-- Take equal quantities of boiled white
beans, boiled potatoes, celery roots, beets and string beans (the
last 4 boiled in salt water) and cut into fine slices; put into a
bowl 2 or 3 tablespoonfuls oil, vinegar and salt, pepper and some
sugar; put in all the ingredients, add some finely chopped parsley
and chervil and mix the whole together thoroughly; put the salad
into a dish and garnish with lettuce leaves. If the vinegar is too
sharp dilute it with water.

862. +Salad à la russe.+-- Boil 6 medium sized potatoes with the
skins on, 2 beets and 3 celery roots; when cold remove the skins and
cut them into small dice; also cut into dice 2 pickles and 1 dozen
anchovies or 3 herrings previously soaked in water, freed from skins
and bones and cut fine; add to this 2 tablespoonfuls capers, ½ cup
grated horseradish and mix the whole with a fine mayonaise; put the
salad on ice for 1 hour before serving; when ready to serve put the
salad onto a round dish, pile up high in center and garnish with
hard boiled eggs; chop fine the yolks and whites separate; also chop
beets and green pickles fine, lay them in small clusters all over
the salad and garnish the edge with green lettuce leaves or shaved
pink and white horseradish. Pink horseradish is made by pouring a
little cochineal over it and mixing well.

863. +Cucumber Salad.+-- Select 3 medium sized cucumbers with small
seeds, pare and cut a small piece from each end and lay the
cucumbers in strongly salted ice water for 1 hour or longer; 10
minutes before serving take them out of water, wipe dry and cut on a
board with a sharp knife into fine slices; put them into a salad
dish, sprinkle over a little salt and pepper, pour over 2
tablespoonfuls salad oil and mix it with the cucumbers; then pour
over ½ cup white vinegar to which a little water and a pinch of
sugar has been added; if onions are liked cut a medium sized one
into thin slices and put them between the cucumbers; some finely
chopped parsley may also be added if the flavor is liked.

864. +Salad de laitue romaine.+-- Take several heads of young, green
lettuce; do not wash them; put them into a dish, add some coarsely
cut chervil, tarragon and pimpernel and dress it either with salt,
pepper, oil and vinegar or with mayonaise.

865. +Salad of Oyster Plant.+-- Scrape and wash 2 bunches oyster
plant and drop as you clean it into cold water to which 1 cup
vinegar and 1 tablespoonful flour have been added; put a saucepan
over the fire with boiling water, add ½ cup vinegar, ½ tablespoonful
flour wet with a little cold water, put in the oyster plant and boil
till tender; when done drain in a colander and when cold cut it into
lengths 2 inches long; arrange it nicely in a dish and pour a
mayonaise over; or dress the oyster plant with oil, vinegar, pepper
and salt.

866. +Asparagus Salad.+-- Pare and cut into 2 inch lengths 1 bunch
asparagus and boil it in salt water till tender; when done drain in
a colander and when cold put the asparagus into a salad bowl; dress
it either with mayonaise or pepper, salt, oil and vinegar.

867. +Carrot Salad.+-- Scrape and wash ½ dozen medium sized carrots,
put them in a saucepan over the fire with boiling water, add 1
tablespoonful sugar and boil till tender; when done take them out of
water and set aside to cool; shortly before serving cut the carrots
into fine slices, put them into a salad dish and pour over a
mayonaise dressing; or dress the carrots with pepper, salt, oil and
vinegar. If very large carrots are used first cut them in quarters
and then into slices or dice.

868. +Carrot Salad with Asparagus.+-- Prepare ½ dozen medium sized
carrots the same as for Carrot Salad; when cold cut them into dice;
boil the heads of 1 bunch asparagus in salt water till done, but not
too soft; drain it in a colander and set with the carrots in the ice
box for 1 hour; shortly before serving put the carrots and asparagus
heads, in alternate layers, into a salad dish, pour over a mayonaise
and garnish the dish with hard boiled eggs cut into slices and young
lettuce leaves; sprinkle a few capers over the top.

869. +Carrot Salad with Onions.+-- Prepare the carrots the same way
as in foregoing recipe; cut 3 or 4 medium sized onions on a board
with a sharp knife into slices as thin as wafers, put them in
alternate layers with the carrots into a dish and pour over a
mayonaise dressing; or dress with oil, vinegar, pepper and salt; add
to vinegar a little water and sugar.

870. +Carrot Salad with Peas.+-- Boil the carrots the same as for
Carrot Salad and cut them into small dice; put 1 pint fresh green
peas in a saucepan, cover with boiling water and add 2 teaspoonfuls
sugar.

871. +Celery Root Salad.+-- Boil ½ dozen celery roots; when done take
them out of water and when cold pare and cut into quarters; cut each
quarter into thin slices, put them into a salad dish and season with
salt and pepper; add 2 or 3 tablespoonfuls salad oil and ½ cup
vinegar; mix this well together and pour over ½ cup boiling water;
or dress the salad with mayonaise and garnish with green lettuce.

872. +White Celery Salad.+-- Take the white part of 1 or 2 bunches of
celery and lay it for 1 hour in ice water; shortly before serving
cut the celery into small pieces ½ inch in length, put it in a salad
dish and pour over a mayonaise dressing; let it stand on ice for 15
minutes before serving. Some people use all of the celery except the
leaves, but the salad is finer when made of the white part only.

873. +Cabbage Salad.+-- Remove the outer leaves from a firm head of
cabbage, shave it as fine as possible and put in ice water for 1
hour; before serving drain the cabbage in a colander, put it in a
salad dish and mix with mayonaise; set it on ice until wanted; or
dress the cabbage with oil, pepper, salt and vinegar; add to the
latter before pouring it over the cabbage 1 spoonful sugar.

874. +Salad of Red Cabbage.+-- Cut the cabbage as fine as possible,
put it in a saucepan, pour over boiling water, cover and boil 3
minutes; drain in a colander and when cold dress it with oil,
pepper, salt, a small spoonful sugar and some vinegar; the latter
should be diluted with water.

875. +Hot Slaw.+-- Cut a small, firm head of cabbage as fine as
possible and put it in a large bowl; place a saucepan with 1 cup
vinegar, 1 tablespoonful butter and 1 teaspoonful sugar over the
fire and let it come to a boil; then pour it over the cabbage and
season with pepper and salt; at the same time put 1 egg with 1 cup
milk into another saucepan; beat these 2 ingredients together
thoroughly and stir them over the fire till just about to boil; pour
it over the cabbage and serve at once. Sweet cream may be used
instead of milk.

876. +Radish Salad.+-- Select 3 or 4 bunches nice, sound radishes,
trim them neatly and lay for 1 hour in ice water; 10 minutes before
serving wipe the radishes dry and cut them into fine slices; also
cut 2 medium sized onions into fine slices like wafers; put a layer
of radishes into a salad dish, sprinkle over a little salt and white
pepper and put over a layer of onions with very little salt and
white pepper; continue in this way in alternate layers until all is
used; then pour over the whole a mayonaise dressing and garnish with
green parsley leaves. The onions may be omitted if their flavor is
not liked, but the salad is much finer with them. Instead of
mayonaise the salad may be dressed with oil, pepper, salt and
vinegar; the latter should be diluted with ⅓ water and a small
spoonful sugar added to it before pouring over the salad.

877. +White Bean Salad.+-- Wash and pick over 1 pint dry beans, put
them over the fire in a saucepan, cover with cold water, add ½
teaspoonful carbonate of soda and boil 10 minutes; pour the beans
into a colander and rinse with cold water; return them to saucepan
again, cover with cold water, put a small piece of salt pork into
the beans and slowly boil till the beans are tender; remove them
from the fire and drain in a colander; when cold put them in a dish
and season with pepper and a little salt; add 2 tablespoonfuls oil
and 1 cup vinegar mixed with ½ cup water and a small spoonful sugar;
shake all well together; add 2 tablespoonfuls finely chopped parsley
and, if liked, a finely sliced onion; or dress the beans with
mayonaise.

878. +String Bean Salad.+-- Choose 1 quart young string beans, string
and cut them into halves and boil in salted water until tender; when
done drain them in a colander and when cold mix them with pepper, 2
or 3 tablespoonfuls oil, 1 cup vinegar mixed with a little sugar and
½ water and 1 finely cut onion; set the salad on ice 1 hour before
serving. Butter bean salad is made the same as String Bean Salad, or
dress with mayonaise.

879. +Crab Salad.+-- Take 1 pint crab meat, sprinkle the juice of 1
lemon and 2 tablespoonfuls oil over it, mix well and set aside;
shortly before serving put the crab meat on a salad dish with hard
boiled eggs cut into small pieces; have some lettuce laying in ice
water, drain it in a colander, shake dry in a napkin, cut through
with a knife once or twice, mix some with the crab meat and use some
for garnishing the dish; pour over the whole a mayonaise dressing
the same as for Lobster Salad and serve.

880. +Pike Salad.+-- Take a large sized fish, clean, wash, dry and
cut it into 4 pieces; put it in salted boiling water and vinegar and
add some onions and 1 bouquet; bring it to a boil quickly; then set
the kettle aside and let it simmer till the fish is done; as soon as
the fish is tender take it out and when cold remove skin and bones;
cut each piece into 9 small pieces, lay them in a dish and pour over
some sweet salad oil, tarragon, vinegar and sprinkle over a little
salt and pepper; after the fish has laid 2 hours pour into a salad
dish some mayonaise, lay in some fish pieces and pour over
mayonaise; lay in the rest of fish and pour over the remaining
mayonaise; garnish the dish with aspic or green lettuce and hard
boiled eggs.

881. +Tomato and Potato Salad.+-- Boil 6 large potatoes with the
skins on; when cold pare off the skins and cut the potatoes into
quarters; then cut each quarter into fine slices; lay 4 large, ripe
tomatoes for ½ hour on ice; then cut them into small slices; cut 2
onions into fine slices, put them in alternate layers with the
potatoes and tomatoes into a salad dish and sprinkle over each layer
some pepper, salt and ½ tablespoonful oil; mix ¾ cup vinegar with 1
tablespoonful sugar and ¾ cup cold water, pour it over the salad and
let it stand 15 minutes; then serve. The onions may be omitted and
green peppers used instead of them.

882. +Tomato Salad with Lettuce.+-- Lay 4 medium sized sound tomatoes
for ½ hour on ice or in ice water; also the leaves of 2 large heads
of lettuce; 10 minutes before serving wipe the tomatoes dry and cut
them on a board with a very sharp knife into thin slices; shake the
salad in a napkin; put into a salad dish first a layer of lettuce
leaves and then a layer of tomatoes; continue in this way in
alternate layers until all is used; pour over a mayonaise dressing
and serve. 2 hard boiled eggs chopped fine may be sprinkled over the
top.

883. +Tomato Salad.+-- Lay ½ dozen sound, ripe tomatoes for 1½ hours
on ice or in ice water; shortly before serving wipe the tomatoes dry
and cut them on a board with a sharp knife into thin slices; also
cut 2 medium sized onions into fine slices; put them in alternate
layers with the tomatoes into a salad dish and sprinkle over each
layer ¼ teaspoonful salt, ¼ teaspoonful sugar and half that quantity
of white pepper; mix ¾ cup vinegar with ¾ cup water, pour it over
the whole and serve at once. 2 tablespoonfuls oil may be added to
the salad if liked, but many people object to it on tomato salad.

884. +Tomato Salad with Mayonaise.+-- Lay 8 or 10 sound, ripe
tomatoes for 1½ hours on top of ice; shortly before serving wipe the
tomatoes dry and cut them on a board with a sharp knife into fine
slices; put them into a salad dish, pour over a mayonaise dressing
and sprinkle over the top 2 tablespoonfuls capers; serve as soon as
made.

885. +Tomato and Cucumber Salad.+-- Prepare the cucumbers the same as
for Cucumber Salad, put them in alternate layers with the sliced
tomatoes into a salad dish and dress with mayonaise.

886. +Tomato Pepper Salad.+-- Lay 6 sound, ripe tomatoes for 1 hour
on ice or in ice water; remove the seeds from 2 green peppers and
throw the seeds away; lay the peppers for 1 hour in ice water; 15
minutes before serving wipe the tomatoes and peppers dry, cut the
tomatoes into fine slices and cut the peppers into small pieces; put
a layer of tomatoes in a salad dish and sprinkle over some of the
finely cut peppers; then tomatoes again; continue in this way until
all is used; pour over a fine mayonaise and serve at once.

887. +Tomato Farce (à la Mayonaise).+-- Prepare 2 heads of lettuce as
directed and lay them in ice water; select 6 medium sized ripe
tomatoes and lay them for 1 hour on ice; shortly before serving cut
a thin slice off the blossom side of the tomatoes, scoop out the
insides, chop fine with some white celery and the whites of 2 hard
boiled eggs and mix with a few spoonfuls mayonaise; fill each tomato
with this mixture; take 6 small dessert plates and put 1 tomato on
each with 3 or 4 lettuce leaves around it; pour 1 tablespoonful
mayonaise over each one and serve 1 to each person.

888. +Potato Salad.+-- Wash and boil 12 medium sized potatoes with
the skins on; when done drain off the water and pare off the skins;
put into a deep bowl 2 finely cut onions, ½ cup white vinegar, 3 or
4 tablespoonfuls salad oil, 1 teaspoonful salt and ½ teaspoonful
pepper; cut the potatoes while hot into fine slices and put them
into the dish with the vinegar, oil and onions; pour over ½ cup
boiling water; shake up the salad well in the bowl (do not stir it)
and pour it into a salad dish; cover and let it stand for 1 hour;
when ready to serve garnish the dish with finely cut beets and
lettuce leaves. 2 tablespoonfuls finely chopped parsley may be mixed
with the salad. Potato salad dressed with mayonaise is very nice.

889. +Potato Salad (another way).+-- Wash and pare 12 medium sized
potatoes and boil them in salted water till done; drain off the
water and turn the potatoes into a dish; when cold cut them into
slices; cut 2 good sized onions into fine slices as thin as a wafer;
mix ¾ cup vinegar with ½ cup water and 1 teaspoonful sugar; put a
layer of potatoes into a dish, then a layer of onions; sprinkle over
some pepper and pour over 1 tablespoonful oil; put in another layer
of potatoes and onions; continue in this way in alternate layers
until all is used; pour the vinegar over the whole and cover and set
in a cool place for 2 hours before serving.

890. +Potato Salad without Oil.+-- Wash and boil the potatoes; when
done drain off the water, pare off the skins and cut potatoes into
slices; take for a soupplateful of sliced potatoes 2 finely cut
onions and ¼ pound fat salt pork cut into small dice and fried a
light brown; put potatoes, onions and pork into a deep bowl and
season with pepper and salt; mix ½ cup vinegar with ½ cup boiling
water and pour it over the potatoes; shake this well together and
pour it into a salad dish; let it stand 1 hour or more before
serving.

891. +Potato Salad without Onions.+-- Wash the potatoes in several
cold waters and boil them with the skins on; when done remove the
skins and cut potatoes into slices; season them with salt and
pepper, pour over an equal quantity of boiling water and vinegar and
let them stand till cold; then add some sweet oil; mix it well and
serve.

892. +Fine Potato Salad.+-- Boil 10 medium sized potatoes with their
skins on; when done remove the skins and set the potatoes aside to
cool; stir the yolks of 2 eggs to a cream and slowly add ½ cup salad
oil, 1 teaspoonful salt, ½ teaspoonful pepper, ½ cup white vinegar
and 2 white onions chopped very fine; cut the potatoes into fine
slices; put a layer of potatoes into a salad dish and pour over some
of the sauce; then put in another layer of potatoes and sauce;
continue in this way until all is used; then pour over ½ cup boiling
water, cover and let it stand for 2 hours and then serve. The dish
may be garnished with cresses or young lettuce leaves; or lettuce
leaves and boiled beets cut into fancy shapes.

893. +Salad Endive.+-- Take only young and fresh endive; remove the
outer leaves, cut the endive into 1 inch pieces and wash and drain
it; then dress it with oil, vinegar, pepper and salt, or with
mayonaise.

894. +Beet and Cabbage Salad.+-- Cut the white leaves of a savoy
cabbage into shreds; remove the skins from 4 boiled beets and cut
them into fine slices; chop a medium sized onion very fine; put the
cabbage and beets in alternate layers into a salad dish, sprinkle
between the onions, some pepper and salt, pour over ½ pint vinegar,
cover and let it stand 1 hour; then drain off the vinegar and add 4
tablespoonfuls sweet oil; mix it well with 2 salad forks, put in a
salad dish and serve.

895. +Vegetable Salad.+-- Cut with a tin tube some carrots and white
turnips into small pieces and boil them separately in salted water;
when done drain them in a colander; also boil small roses of
cauliflower, green peas, beets and potatoes cut into small dice and
some boiled string beans cut into small pieces; mix all the
ingredients together and add 1 onion chopped very fine, some chopped
parsley and chervil; add pepper, salt, oil and vinegar; put the
salad into a salad dish and set it on ice for 1 hour.

896. +Beet and Potato Salad.+-- Prepare a potato salad and mix it
with half the same quantity of boiled beets cut into fine slices.

897. +Green Pepper Salad.+-- Scoop out the insides of 2 green peppers
and lay them for 1 hour in cold water; in the meantime prepare a
mayonaise as follows:--Stir the yolks of 3 eggs to a cream and add
by degrees 3 tablespoonfuls oil, stirring constantly; when this is
well mixed add 3 tablespoonfuls vinegar; set this in a saucepan of
hot water and stir and boil till the contents begin to thicken; then
remove and stir until cold; slowly add 3 tablespoonfuls more oil, ¾
teaspoonful salt, 1½ teaspoonfuls sugar and 1 tablespoonful English
mustard; shortly before serving add 1 tablespoonful condensed milk
which is not sweet; chop fine 1 pound roast veal, lamb or boiled
tongue, or 2 kinds of meat, 3 hard boiled eggs and 1 large onion;
also chop the peppers very fine; mix all together, pour over the
mayonaise, mix it well and set the salad on ice for 1 hour; in
serving arrange it neatly on a salad dish, sprinkle over 1
tablespoonful capers and garnish with green lettuce leaves.

898. +Tripe Salad.+-- Boil 2 pounds honeycomb tripe in salt water
till tender; when done drain off the water, cut the tripe into 1
inch square pieces and mix it with mayonaise; put the salad into a
dish and let it stand in a cool place for 1 hour before serving.
A few hard boiled eggs cut into slices may be added to this salad;
also finely cut celery and lettuce leaves.

899. +Herring Salad.+-- Lay 6 herrings for 24 hours in cold water,
take them out, remove skins and bones, wipe dry with a towel and cut
them into small square pieces; cut in the same manner 3 boiled
beets, 2 white onions, 1 pound roasted veal, 3 sour apples and 5
small pickles; mix these ingredients together and prepare the
following sauce:--Stir the herring milk to a cream and slowly add 1
cup salad oil, 2 teaspoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 4 eggs, ½ cup
vinegar, 2 tablespoonfuls stewed cranberries, a pinch of cayenne
pepper and 4 tablespoonfuls French mustard; when all are well
blended together mix the sauce with the herring and other
ingredients and let it be ready 2 hours before serving; shortly
before serving put the salad into a dish and garnish with small
girkins, beets cut into fancy shapes, salted olives, hard boiled
eggs and capers or mixed pickles.

900. +Salad à L’italienne.+-- Soak 6 Dutch herrings for 12 hours in
cold water; then take them out, remove the skins and bones and cut
the meat into small long strips a little wider than a straw and ¾
inch in length; also cut 1 pound cold boiled beef tonge, 1 pound
cold roasted veal, 3 greening apples and 6 small pickles; after the
ingredients are all cut the same way mix them well together and mix
them with a fine mayonaise; set the salad on ice for several hours;
when ready to serve put the salad into a dish and garnish with
finely chopped hard boiled eggs and salted olives; sprinkle over a
few capers and serve.

901. +Chicken Salad.+-- Select a plump 1-year old chicken for this;
singe and draw it, wash in cold water and put the chicken in a
kettle; cover with boiling water, add ½ tablespoonful salt and 2
onions; cover and boil slowly till tender; when done remove the
kettle from the fire and let the chicken remain in the broth till
cold; then take it out, remove the skin and bones and cut the meat
into small pieces; take the white part of 1 nice bunch celery and
cut it very fine; add it to the finely cut chicken, pour over
Mayonaise No. 1 and set it on ice for 2 hours before serving; when
ready to serve put the salad into a salad dish and garnish with the
small celery tops, which should lay for 1 hour in ice water; stick
them all around in the salad and sprinkle ½ cup capers all over the
salad. Some freshly grated cocoanut sprinkled over this salad is a
great improvement; or garnish to taste.

902. +How to Boil Lobster.+-- Select a good sized lobster, put it
into a kettle of boiling water, head first, add a small handful salt
and boil till the lobster has attained a bright red color, which
will take from 20 to 30 minutes; when done take the lobster out and
plunge it into cold water; let it lay in the cold water for 5
minutes; then take it out and when cold put the lobster away in a
cool place till wanted.

903. +Lobster Salad.+-- Split open the body and tail of a boiled
lobster and crack the claws; pick out all the meat and cut it into
pieces about ¾ inch in size; put the meat into a salad dish and pour
over Mayonaise No. 1; let it stand in a cool place or on ice for ½
hour; then garnish the dish; lay a border of young lettuce leaves
around the dish; lay over them some hard boiled eggs cut into
quarters and sprinkle over the salad 1 spoonful capers. Canned
lobster may be used for this salad. Another way is to cut white
celery into small pieces, put it into a salad dish and mix well with
a fine mayonaise; then add the lobster meat cut into small pieces
and let the salad stand on ice or in a cool place for 1 hour before
it is served; chop coarsely a few hard boiled eggs and sprinkle them
over the salad.

904. +Salmon Salad.+-- Select a nice piece of salmon weighing about 2
pounds; place a saucepan with boiling water over the fire and add a
bunch of parsley with 2 bay leaves, 2 blades mace and a sprig of
thyme; add 1 onion with 4 cloves stuck in it, 1 tablespoonful salt
and ½ cup vinegar; when this boils put in the salmon and let it boil
3 minutes; then draw the kettle to side of stove and let it simmer
until tender; as soon as done remove the fish and set it in a cool
place; when cold remove the bones and break the meat into pieces;
put it into a salad dish, pile up high in the center, pour over a
fine Mayonaise No. 1 and garnish the dish with young lettuce leaves
or cresses; chop some hard boiled eggs and sprinkle them with a few
capers over the salad. It is best to let the salad stand on ice for
1 hour before it is garnished and served. Canned salmon can be used
instead of fresh salmon.

905. +Shrimp Salad.+-- Extract the meat from some freshly boiled
shrimp, put it into a dish, squeeze over some lemon juice, pour over
a few spoonfuls fine oil and let it stand in a cool place for 1
hour; 1 hour before serving put the shrimp into a salad bowl, pour
over a fine mayonaise (see Mayonaise) and garnish with cresses or
lettuce leaves and hard boiled eggs cut into quarters.

906. +How to Boil Shrimp.+-- Put the shrimp alive into the salted
boiling water, allowing ¼ pound salt to 1 gallon water; boil them
from 5 to 8 minutes; when they change color they are done; serve
them with vinegar and oil.

907. +Halibut Salad.+-- Put a piece of halibut into salted boiling
water with ½ pint vinegar and add 1 or 2 onions, a bunch of parsley,
a sprig of thyme, 1 bay leaf, 6 cloves and 2 blades mace tied
together; bring it to a boil quickly; draw the kettle to side of
stove and let the fish simmer until tender; when done take the fish
out of the water and when cold cut it into 1 inch pieces; put the
pieces into a dish high up in center and pour over it a mayonaise;
garnish with green lettuce and hard boiled eggs.

908. +Oyster Salad.+-- To make a salad for 6 persons take 2 dozen
large oysters, put them with their liquor over the fire and let them
boil 1 minute, but no longer; take them out with a skimmer and lay
in a dish; when cold squeeze over the juice of 2 lemons and place
the dish on ice for 1 hour; shortly before serving put the oysters
into a salad dish, lay some young lettuce leaves between them and
pour over Mayonaise No. 1; lay young lettuce leaves in a circle
around the dish, put some hard boiled eggs cut into slices between
the lettuce and serve at once. Another way is to mix the oysters
with finely cut white celery, dress them with the same mayonaise and
ornament the salad with the tops of young celery; hard boiled
chopped eggs may also be sprinkled over with 1 spoonful capers.

909. +Oyster and Chicken Salad.+-- Remove the skin and bones from 1
cold, roasted chicken and cut the meat into pieces 1 inch in size;
put it into a dish, sprinkle over a little salt, the juice of 2
lemons and pour over a few spoonfuls fine salad oil; then place the
dish on ice; in the meantime scald 1½ dozen large oysters in their
own liquor, take them out and put the oysters in a dish with some
cracked ice; have prepared 2 quarts sour jelly (aspic) and pour a
few spoonfuls of it onto a large, shallow tin pan; when firm trim
the oysters so that there is nothing left but the eye; lay them over
the jelly (not too close together), pour over a little more cold
jelly and when firm pour over sufficient cold jelly to entirely
cover the oysters; let it stand in a cool place till firm; 10
minutes before serving wipe the chicken meat dry with a napkin; pour
some fine mayonaise into a salad dish, lay over a layer of the
chicken meat and cover with mayonaise; continue in this way till all
is used; cover the whole with mayonaise in such a way that none of
the chicken is seen; then lay a border of cresses around it; cut the
oysters into rounds with a fluted cutter a little larger than the
oysters, lay them on the cresses and serve. Lettuce may be used
instead of cresses.

910. +Tomato Jelly.+-- Stew for ½ hour 1 can tomatoes with 1
teaspoonful salt, 1 teaspoonful sugar, as much cayenne pepper as you
can hold on the point of a knife and 2 tablespoonfuls vinegar; then
press them through a sieve; in the meantime soak 1 ounce gelatine in
½ cup cold water for 15 minutes, add it to the tomatoes, put over
the fire and stir till the gelatine is dissolved; then strain
through a flannel jelly bag; fill the jelly into small patty forms
and set them in a cool place till firm.

911. +Tomato Jelly Salad.+-- Prepare a tomato jelly the same as in
foregoing recipe; turn it out of the small forms, lay into a salad
dish, stick small pieces of white celery into each one, put a border
of young lettuce leaves around it, pour over a mayonaise and serve
at once. Tomato jelly may be made in one large form and when hard
chopped coarsely and used for garnishing dishes of cold meats or
salads.

912. +Egg Salad.+-- Put ½ dozen eggs in a saucepan, cover with cold
water and boil them 10 minutes; transfer the eggs to cold water and
let them lay till cooled off; when cold remove the shells and cut
the eggs into quarters; put them into a salad dish with young
lettuce leaves, pour over a mayonaise dressing and garnish with
lettuce leaves.

913. +Eggs with Mayonaise.+-- Boil ½ dozen eggs 10 minutes; then
transfer them to a pan of cold water and when cold remove the
shells; take 6 small plates, put 2 lettuce leaves on each plate and
put an egg in the center of the 2 leaves in such a way that the
leaves stand round the egg like a tulip; pour over each egg 1
tablespoonful mayonaise and sprinkle over a few capers; serve a
plate to each person.

914. +Onion Salad.+-- Take 2 large Bermuda or California onions, peel
and cut them with a sharp knife into fine slices, put a layer of the
slices into a salad dish and pour over some fine mayonaise; then put
over some cresses and pour over more mayonaise; continue in this way
until all is used; cover with mayonaise, lay some cresses in a
circle round the dish and let it stand on ice for 10 minutes; then
serve.

915. +Alligator Pear Salad.+-- Take 2 alligator pears, cut them into
slices and put them into a salad dish; remove the shells from 4 hard
boiled eggs, break the yolks into small pieces and sprinkle them
over the sliced pears; cut the whites into fine strips, lay them in
a circle round the dish close to the pears, pour over a fine
mayonaise and lay a border of tender lettuce leaves round the edge
of dish.

916. +Jerusalem Artichoke Salad.+-- Scrape the artichokes carefully
and drop them into vinegar and water; mix ½ tablespoonful flour with
a little cold water, stir it into a quart of boiling water and add 1
cup vinegar; as soon as this boils put in the artichokes and boil
them till done, but not too tender; when done remove them from the
water and set in a cool place; when cold cut the artichokes into
pieces, put them into a salad dish, pour over a mayonaise, set some
shrimp around the salad and set the dish on ice for 1 hour; when
ready to serve lay a border of lettuce leaves round the edge of
dish.

917. +Sour Jelly (Aspic).+-- Soak 2 ounces gelatine in ½ pint cold
water 15 minutes; then put it over the fire with 1 quart good meat
stock and sufficient vinegar to give it a nice sour taste; add a few
cloves, 2 blades mace and 1 bay leaf; stir this over the fire till
the gelatine is dissolved; beat the whites of 2 eggs till light and
add the juice of 1 lemon and a little cold water; stir it with an
egg beater into the jelly and stir and boil for a few minutes; then
draw the saucepan to side of stove and let it stand 5 minutes; then
strain through a jelly bag; or turn a chair upside down on a kitchen
table; then take a square piece of unbleached muslin and tie a
corner over each of the upturned legs of the chair; set a bowl
underneath and pour the jelly onto the cloth a little at a time and
keep the saucepan on the side of stove, to keep the jelly warm. If
meat stock is not handy dissolve 2 teaspoonfuls Liebig’s beef
extract in 1 quart boiling water and use it instead of meat stock.
Another way is to boil 4 calves’ feet till they fall apart; then
strain off the liquor, set it aside and when cold remove all the
fat; boil the liquor down to 2 quarts; then beat the whites of 4
eggs to a froth and add the juice of 1 lemon and a little water; add
to the broth sufficient white vinegar to give it a nice sour taste;
also add a little salt, some whole pepper corns, a few blades mace,
4 cloves and 1 bay leaf; stir in the beaten whites, continue
stirring, let the contents boil for a few minutes and let it stand 5
minutes; then draw to side of stove, let it stand 5 minutes and
strain through a flannel jelly bag. Pigs’ feet or the skin of fresh
pork may be used instead of calves’ feet. Sour jelly is used for
garnishing dishes of meat and salads. It is either chopped with a
knife or put into small fancy forms and when firm turned out and
laid around the dishes with cresses, lettuce or celery between. If
the jelly is not dark enough add a little sugar color (see Sugar
Color). If the jelly is white it may be colored green with green
spinach color or pink with cochineal.

918. +Garnishing.+-- The articles which are mostly used in garnishing
are:--Lettuce, cresses and hard boiled eggs (either cut into slices
or quarters or chopped fine, the yolks and whites separately, and
laid alternately in small clusters all over the salad); or cut green
pickles in slices and lay them in a circle around the salad with
small clusters of finely chopped beets and chopped eggs; small
girkins, capers, olives and very small, white pickled onions are
also used for garnishing. Another way is to cut boiled carrots,
white turnips and beets into fancy shapes, such as half moons,
stars, leaves and roses, with a vegetable cutter; anchovies are also
largely used in garnishing. They are freed from skins and bones and
then rolled up and laid in a circle around the dish with small white
onions, pink horseradish and olives or girkins.

919. +Horseradish for Garnishing.+-- Remove the outside black skin
from a large root of horseradish and wash it clean; then shave it
off with a knife in long narrow strips so they curl up; color ½ the
shavings with prepared cochineal and leave the other ½ white; then
use for decorating dishes of meats or salads by laying it in small
clusters around the dish.

920. +Cocoanut for Garnishing Salads.+-- Grate cocoanut and sprinkle
it over the top of salad. Especially nice over chicken, shrimp and
fish salads; also on potato, tomato and egg salads. Grated cocoanut
lends a handsome appearance to any salad.




ICES AND GLAZES.


921. +How to Use Icing.+-- Over large cakes pour the icing by
spoonfuls near center on top of cake and spread it with a
broad-bladed knife dipped in cold water all over the cake as
smoothly as possible; set it in a cool oven for a few minutes, then
in a dry, airy place, free from dust, to dry. Some icing does not
need to be put in the oven, as it dries immediately, as will be seen
from the directions given in following recipes. Small cakes are
dipped into the icing or into glaze and then laid on paper or tins
to dry. If the cake is to be ornamented make a paper funnel as
follows:--Take a piece of brown paper, not too thick, or white tea
paper 12 inches square and cut it through on the bias in two pieces
from one corner to the other; take one piece in your right hand, the
bias side from you, roll with the left hand, the bias side towards
you, and form the paper into a funnel; bend the end where it closes
near the top over to the inside, clip a small piece from the end of
funnel with a scissors and slip a small tube inside it to the end
opening; then put in the icing and bend the top of funnel in all
around the same way as ¼ pound tea is put up in those small
funnel-shaped bags; next press the icing down towards the end and
commence to squirt it onto the cake. The cake may be ornamented with
a border and a harp in the center, or an anchor or any kind of a
pattern that may be desired. Flowers and leaves may be bought at any
confectionery and pasted on with a little icing.

922. +White Icing.+-- Sift ½ pound powdered sugar into a bowl, add
the whites of 2 eggs and stir 20 minutes; add a few drops lemon
juice while the stirring is going on; drop a little icing onto
paper; if the icing stands without running it is stiff enough; if it
shows the least tendency to run more sugar must be added. This icing
is used for ornamenting cake and serves as a kind of paste to stick
flowers and leaves onto top of cake.

923. +Clear Icing.+-- Sift ½ pound powdered sugar into a bowl, add
the whites of 2 eggs and stir for 5 minutes; add a few drops lemon
juice and stir 5 minutes longer; then spread it over the cake; set
the cake for 2 or 3 minutes in a cool oven, take out and let it dry
for a few hours in a dry place which is free from dust.

924. +White Icing with Wine or Liquor.+-- Mix ½ pound sifted powdered
sugar with the white of 1 egg and add 3 tablespoonfuls maraschino,
Madeira or sherry wine, kirsch, rum or brandy; before this icing is
put on cover the cake with a layer of jelly; then put the icing over
it and set the cake for 1 minute in the oven; then set it in a dry
place which is free from dust to dry. To make pink icing add a few
drops prepared cochineal or strawberry syrup. Yellow icing is made
by adding prepared saffron. Essence of lemon or the grated rind of 1
orange may be used instead of vanilla flavoring.

925. +Almond Icing.+-- Pound 3 ounces blanched almonds with the white
of 1 egg in a wedgewood mortar to a paste, mix them with ¼ pound
powdered sugar, the white of ½ egg and ½ teaspoonful vanilla extract
and stir for 5 minutes; dip small pieces of cake into the icing;
pour and spread it over whole cakes with a broad-bladed knife. Hazel
nuts and walnuts may be used the same way as almonds, as can also
pistachio nuts. To the latter add a few drops spinach green.

926. +Fruit Icing.+-- Mix ½ pound sifted powdered sugar with the
white of 1 egg and add 3 tablespoonfuls fruit juice--either
raspberry, strawberry, currant, pineapple or peach; if lemon or
orange juice is used add a little grated rind; spread the icing over
the cake and set it for a few minutes in a cool oven; then set it in
a dry place which is free from dust to dry.

927. +Sugar Glaze.+-- Mix 1 cup powdered sugar with 2 tablespoonfuls
water and put it over the fire to get lukewarm; pour over the cake
and let it dry, which will take but a few minutes; dip small pieces
of cake into it. Glazes of raspberries, strawberries, pineapples,
peaches, wine, maraschino or rum are made the same way. Omit the
water and use 2 tablespoonfuls fruit juice or wine, whichever kind
is wanted.

928. +Maraschino Glaze.+-- Mix 1 cup sifted powdered sugar with 1
tablespoonful water and 1 tablespoonful maraschino, let it get warm
on the fire and pour while warm over the cake. It will get hard in a
few minutes. Rum glaze is made the same as Maraschino Glaze.

929. +Orange Glaze.+-- Mix 2 tablespoonfuls orange juice with 1 cup
powdered sugar, add a little grated rind, set over a slow fire to
get lukewarm and use it at once.

930. +Lemon Glaze.+-- Stir 1 cup sifted powdered sugar with 1
tablespoonful lemon juice, 1 tablespoonful water and a little grated
rind; let it get lukewarm; then spread it over the cake and set in a
dry place which is free from dust to dry.

931. +Coffee Glaze.+-- Mix 1 cup powdered sugar with 2 tablespoonfuls
strong coffee, let it get lukewarm and use at once.

932. +Wine Glaze.+-- Boil 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water until it
forms a thread between 2 fingers; remove it from fire, add 2
tablespoonfuls sherry or Madeira wine and stir for 1 or 2 minutes;
then quickly pour it over the cake and let it stand in a dry place
which is free from dust to harden.

933. +Boiled Cinnamon Glaze.+-- Boil 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water and
1 teaspoonful powdered cinnamon until it forms a thread between 2
fingers; remove it from fire, stir for a few minutes and use at
once.

934. +Chocolate Glaze.+-- Melt 2 tablespoonfuls grated chocolate in
the oven and mix it with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar syrup; mix 1 cup
sugar with 1 tablespoonful water, add the chocolate, set it over a
slow fire to get lukewarm and use at once.

935. +Cinnamon Glaze.+-- Mix 1 cup sifted powdered sugar with 1
teaspoonful cinnamon, add 2 tablespoonfuls water, set it over a slow
fire, stir until lukewarm and use at once.

936. +Cold Sugar Glaze.+-- Mix 1 cup sifted powdered sugar with 2
tablespoonfuls cold water and add 1 teaspoonful lemon or vanilla
extract; spread glaze over the cake and set it for 1 or 2 minutes in
a cool oven to obtain a glaze; then remove and set in a dry place
which is free from dust to dry. NOTE.--Instead of water any kind of
fruit juice syrup, wine, rum or Cognac may be used. If lemon juice
is used take ½ water, ½ juice and a little grated rind. For orange
use a little rum and 2 tablespoonfuls orange juice. For coffee use
instead of water 2 spoonfuls strong coffee. For chocolate stir in 2
tablespoonfuls grated chocolate or cocoa the same way, or melt the
chocolate in the oven and then add it to the sugar.

937. +Boiled Chocolate Glaze.+-- Place a small saucepan with ½ pound
sugar, ½ pound grated chocolate and ½ pint water over the fire and
stir and boil till it forms a thread between 2 fingers; remove from
fire and stir until a thin skin forms on top of glaze; then use it
at once; spread it evenly all over the cake and set for a few
minutes in a cool oven. If the glaze should become too cold before
it is all used return it to the fire and repeat again. The glaze
when done should shine like a mirror.

938. +Transparent Glaze.+-- Boil 1 cup sugar with ¾ cup water until
it forms a thread between 2 fingers; remove it from fire, stir for a
few minutes and then quickly use; dip small pieces of cake into the
glaze, pour over large pieces and spread it apart; let it dry in an
airy room which is free from dust.

939. +Rose Glaze.+-- Boil 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water till it forms
a thread between 2 fingers; remove at once and add 2 tablespoonfuls
rose water and a little prepared cochineal, to color it to a
delicate pink; stir for a minute and then pour it over the cake.
Small cakes may be dipped into the glaze and set in a dry place
which is free from dust to dry.

940. +Spinning Sugar.+-- Put ¾ pound loaf sugar in a small copper
kettle, add sufficient cold water to half cover the sugar and stir
until it is melted; then place the kettle over a strong fire and
boil the sugar to a crack (the 6th grade); add a few drops vinegar,
remove the kettle, dip it for a few minutes into cold water and let
it cool off a little; if the sugar is spun when too hot the threads
will be too thin and lumps will form; then place the kettle in a pan
of hot water, or on the side of stove, to keep the sugar warm; take
a large knife in the left hand and hold it out straight before you;
take a silver spoon in the right hand, dip it into the sugar without
touching the bottom of kettle and let some of the sugar run off from
the spoon; then spin long threads back and forth over the knife from
right to left; after a considerable amount of sugar is spun in this
way take it from the knife, lay on clean paper and spin the rest in
like manner; when all is spun form the sugar into pompoms, garlands,
bouquets, etc. Half the sugar may be colored with cochineal to a
delicate pink. The sugar should be spun in a place free from
draughts and in clear and dry weather. This sugar is used for
decorating and trimming dishes.

941. +Boiling Sugar.+-- Put 1 pound sugar into a kettle with ½ pint
water and let it stand for a few minutes; then put it over the fire
to boil; while the boiling is going on dip a small brush into cold
water and wipe off the sides and edge of kettle; the different
grades the sugar goes through in boiling are as follows:--1st grade,
broad run; 2d grade, small pearl; 3d grade, large pearl; 4th grade,
the small blubber; 5th grade, the large blubber; 6th grade, to a
crack; 7th grade, caramel; boil the sugar for a few minutes and dip
the point of a spoon into it; if the sugar falls in large drops from
the spoon it has reached the 1st grade; continue the boiling for a
few minutes longer; dip your first finger into it and press the
finger against the thumb; then open the fingers and if the sugar
forms a thread between the 2 fingers it has reached the 2d grade;
after boiling a little longer dip in a spoon and if a pearl hangs
onto a long thread of the spoon the sugar has reached the 3d grade;
after a few minutes longer boiling take a little in a spoon, blow it
and if the sugar falls from the spoon in blubbers it has reached the
4th grade; after a few minutes longer take a little of the sugar
between your fingers and quickly dip into cold water; if the sugar
can be formed into a ball it has reached the 5th grade; after a few
minutes longer dip the finger into the sugar and then quickly into
cold water; if the sugar can be broken it has reached the 6th grade;
then set the saucepan in cold water; if it boils a few minutes
longer it will have reached the 7th grade, or caramel. The principal
care in boiling sugar is to use the exact amount of water. With too
little water the sugar will curdle before it has boiled enough. If
too much water is used the sugar will have to boil too long and will
turn yellow. It should boil quickly and only for a short time. It
will then stay white.

[Decoration]




APPENDIX.

CAKES.


+Cheese Torte.+-- One pound fresh pot cheese, ½ pint sour cream, 1½
ounce sweet almonds, 1½ ounce bitter almonds, 1 cup seedless
raisins, 2 tablespoonfuls flour, 1 cup sugar, 1 tablespoonful
butter, 6 eggs, ¼ teaspoonful salt. Blanche and grind the almonds
fine or grate them on a nutmeg grater; stir sugar, butter, and yolks
to a cream, add all the ingredients, and last the beaten whites; mix
well and set aside till following paste is made: Sift 1 pint of
flour with 1 teaspoonful baking powder into a bowl, add 2
tablespoonfuls sugar, ½ teaspoonful salt, and 1 tablespoonful
butter. Rub the butter fine in the flour, add 1 cup of milk and 1
egg, mix together into a firm dough, work it lightly on a board till
it does not stick to the hands, then roll it out thin. Butter a
large cheesecake pan, dust it with flour, and line the pan with the
dough; pour in the cheese preparation, and bake in medium-hot oven
till nearly done. In the meantime stir the yolks of 2 eggs with 3
tablespoonfuls granulated sugar to a cream, add 1 teaspoonful lemon
juice and little grated rind, add the 2 beaten whites, and stir the
whole 10 minutes; add last 3 level tablespoonfuls flour. When the
cake is firm to the touch remove it from the oven, pour over this
last mixture, and bake till done. Serve cold, dusted with sugar. The
bitter almonds may be omitted if objected to, and the cake pan may
be lined with puff paste or fine pie crust.

+Pistachio Torte.+-- Four ounces almond paste, 4 ounces ground
pistachio nuts or almonds, the yolks of 16 eggs, the whites of 8
eggs, 3 ounces flour, ½ pound sugar, ½ teaspoonful extract of
pistachio; rub the almond paste with the white of 1 egg fine; add
the 16 yolks and sugar; stir 15 minutes, then add the ground
pistachio nuts or almonds; continue the stirring 10 minutes; add the
extract; beat the whites to a stiff froth; add the yolk mixture to
the whites while beating constantly; beat the whole together 5
minutes; add the sifted flour; stir the flour in lightly; butter 2
large deep jelly-cake tins and dust them with the flour; fill in the
mixture and bake in a slow oven. FILLING: Boil ½ cup of sugar, with
½ cup water to a caramel, then add it slowly to the beaten whites of
2 eggs; beat until cold; add ½ teaspoonful vanilla sugar, ½ cupful
fine-cut candied pineapples, ½ cupful fine-chopped pistachio nuts or
almonds; spread this filling over one layer, put on the remaining
layer. Ice the cake with pistachio icing made as follows: Mix 1½ cup
sifted powdered sugar with 3 tablespoonfuls boiling water and a
little green coloring and pistachio flavoring; pour over the cake
and let stand till firm.

+Kugelhupf+, also called +Bunt Kuchen.+-- One pound flour, 10 ounces
butter, 2 yeast cakes, 6 whole eggs and 6 yolks, ¾ cup of sugar, ½
teaspoonful salt, 1 cupful seeded raisins; break the yeast into a
small bowl, add ½ cupful lukewarm milk and 1 teaspoonful sugar; let
it stand till the yeast rises to the surface, then add ½ cupful of
flour, mix to a stiff batter; cover and let stand till it is a light
sponge. In the meantime stir butter and sugar to a cream; add the
yolks one at a time, then alternately a little flour and 1 whole
egg, till all are used; beat this with the right hand 10 minutes;
add the raisins, and last the sponge; continue to beat 5 minutes;
butter a large ribbed form with tube in the center; dust with
powdered sugar, pour in the cake mixture; set the form in a warm
place till the contents has risen to double its size; then place the
form on a tin with salt and bake in a medium-hot oven about 45
minutes. When done, take it out of the oven, let it stand a few
minutes, then turn the cake out of the form, dust it with sugar, and
serve when cold.

+Jelly Roll.+-- One half pound sugar, 9 ounces flour, 1 teaspoonful
baking powder, 1 gill of milk (½ cupful), 3 eggs, ½ teaspoonful
lemon extract; sift flour, sugar, and powder into a bowl and make a
hollow in the center; put in milk, eggs, and lemon extract, mix all
together; butter a large shallow tin pan, cover with paper, spread
on the mixture thin and evenly, bake in slow oven. When done, remove
the pan, let it stand a few minutes to cool off a little, then turn
it upside down on a clean piece of paper, remove the paper carefully
from the cake which has laid in the pan, spread some currant jelly
over the surface, roll the cake up like a music roll, let it lie
rolled in the paper till cold. This preparation is also nice for
lady fingers.

+Election Cake.+-- One and a half pint lukewarm milk, 1 pound sugar,
½ pound lard, ½ pound butter, 2 pounds flour, the whites of 4 eggs,
1 pound citron, 1 pound seeded raisins, 1 teaspoonful mace, ½ cupful
rum, 3 yeast cakes. Break the yeast into a cup of lukewarm milk, add
1 teaspoonful sugar, set the cup in a warm place till the yeast
rises to the surface, put 1 cupful flour into a bowl, add the yeast,
mix into a stiff batter, cover, and set in a warm place to rise till
the sponge is very light. In the meantime stir butter, lard, and
sugar to a cream, add the mace, then alternately milk and flour,
then the fruit and rum, and last the 4 whites beaten to a stiff
froth; beat the whole with the hand 10 minutes, then add the sponge;
continue to beat a few minutes longer, cover, and set it in a warm
place to rise till double its size; butter and dust with flour a
large round cake pan, pour in the cake mixture, and bake in a
medium-hot oven till done. When cold, ice the cake with rum icing.

+Small Sponge Cake.+-- Three eggs, ½ cup granulated sugar, ½ cup
flour, the grated rind of ½ lemon, and a little lemon juice. Stir
the 3 yolks with the sugar 15 minutes, then add the lemon; beat the
whites to a stiff froth, add them to the yolks, and beat till the
sugar is all dissolved, which will take about 10 minutes, then sift
in the flour, stir the flour in lightly; butter and dust with flour
a small round pan, pour in the mixture, and bake in a slow oven.

+Apple Ringlets.+-- Peel, core, and cut into thick slices 4 large
tart apples, mix ½ cup of flour with ½ teaspoonful baking powder, ½
teaspoonful butter, and ½ teaspoonful salt. Break 1 egg into ½ cup
of cold water, beat until it foams, add the water and egg to the
flour, and mix into a batter. Melt 1 tablespoonful lard and butter
in a frying pan, dip the apple slices into the batter, put them into
the frying pan, not too many at once, and fry light brown on both
sides, keeping the pan covered while the frying is going on. Serve
dusted with sugar.

+Baking-Powder Rolls.+-- One pint flour, 1 heaping teaspoonful baking
powder, ½ tablespoonful butter, ½ teaspoonful salt, ½ pint milk, 1
egg, 1 teaspoonful sugar. Sift flour, salt, sugar, and powder into a
bowl, add the butter and rub it fine with the flour, mix the egg and
milk together, pour a little of the egg milk into a cup, add the
remaining to the flour, mix all together with a knife into a firm
dough, turn it on to a floured board, and work it together to smooth
the dough, roll it out ¼ inch in thickness, then cut it into rounds,
brush them over with a little melted butter, fold them over and set
them on a buttered tin, brush the rolls over with the egg milk which
was set aside, and bake in a quick oven. A good plan is to keep the
rolls covered with buttered paper the first 10 minutes while baking.

+Waffles.+-- Four ounces butter, 6 eggs, 4 ounces flour, 1
tablespoonful sugar, a pinch of mace, and a little grated lemon
rind, ½ pint whipped cream. Stir the butter to a cream, add
alternately 1 yolk, then a little flour until both are used, add the
sugar, the mace, and lemon, then the whipped cream, and last 5
whites whipped to a stiff froth; rub a waffle iron with fork, pour 1
tablespoonful batter into each compartment, and bake the waffles
light brown on both sides. Serve dusted with sugar.

+Gateau à la Weckesser.+-- Half pound of granulated sugar, 13 yolks,
9 whites, ½ pound flour, and the rind and juice of 1 lemon. Stir
sugar and yolks for 25 minutes by the clock, then beat the whites to
a stiff froth; add the yolks and sugar slowly to the white while
beating constantly, add the lemon, continue the beating 5 minutes,
then add the sifted flour, stir in lightly; butter a large round pan
and dust it with flour, pour in the batter, place the cake on a pan
of salt, and bake in a slow oven. When done, turn it on to a board,
which should be dusted with powdered sugar; let it lie till cold,
then spread a layer of pineapple marmalade over the cake, ice it
with white sugar glaze, and decorate the cake with candied fruit, of
plums, apricots, and cherries. The fruit must be cut into small
slices and the cherries in small dice.

+Lady Cake.+-- Six ounces butter, ½ pound sugar, 1 pound flour, 10
whites of eggs, ½ pint whipped cream, 1 teaspoonful baking powder, 1
teaspoonful vanilla sugar. Stir butter and sugar to a cream until
white and frothy, add the vanilla sugar, sift flour and baking
powder together, beat ½ pint cream until stiff; beat also the 10
whites to a stiff froth, then add alternately the three ingredients
to the creamed butter and sugar; butter and dust with flour a large
round pan, pour in the mixture, and bake in a medium-hot oven. When
done and cold, ice it with clear icing.

+Denmark Cake.+-- Two pounds flour, 2 teaspoonfuls baking powder, 1¾
pound sugar, 1 pound butter, 2 pounds raisins, 8 eggs, 1 pint sweet
milk, ½ pint wine, 3 tablespoonfuls allspice, 3 tablespoonfuls
cinnamon, 4 nutmegs. Sift flour and baking powder together, stir
butter and sugar to a cream, add gradually the yolks and spice, then
alternately milk, flour, and wine, last the fruit. Bake in a large
well-buttered pan in medium-hot oven.

+Stullen with Baking Powder.+-- One pound flour sifted with ½
teaspoonful salt, 2 teaspoonfuls baking powder, ½ cup of butter, ½
cup of sugar, and 2 eggs, the fine-chopped peel of ½ lemon, 1 cupful
seeded raisins, ½ cupful fine-cut citron, ¾ cup of milk. Rub flour
and butter together, add sugar, salt, milk, and eggs, mix all
together; add last the fruit, turn the dough on to a floured board
and work it a little to smooth the dough, then roll it out 1 inch in
thickness, fold it over and lay the cake in a buttered pan, giving
it the shape of a half moon; brush over with beaten egg and bake in
medium-hot oven.

+Wine Baba.+-- One pound flour, 2 teaspoonfuls baking powder, 1
teaspoonful salt, 4 ounces butter, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, the
fine-chopped peel of 1 lemon, 4 eggs, ½ pint milk, ½ cup currants,
½ cup seeded raisins, ½ cup fine-cut citron. Sift flour and baking
powder together, stir butter and sugar to a cream, add by degrees
the yolks and lemon, then alternately flour and milk, next add the
fruit, and last the beaten whites. Fill the mixture into a buttered
form with a tube in the center, place it in a medium-hot oven, and
bake about 40 minutes or till done. In the meantime boil 1 cup sugar
with ½ cup water 5 minutes, remove from fire, add 1 gill sherry wine
and a few tablespoonfuls of raspberry syrup. When the cake is done
turn it on to a sieve, place the sieve on a large plate, and pour
the syrup by spoonfuls over the cake; pour that which runs below in
the plate over the cake again.

+Bunt Kuchen with Baking Powder.+-- One pint flour, 1 heaping
teaspoonful baking powder, ½ teaspoonful salt, 3 tablespoonfuls
sugar, 2 ounces butter, 2 eggs, ½ pint milk, ½ cup currants, ½ cup
stoned raisins, the grated rind of ½ lemon. Sift flour and baking
powder together, add the sugar, salt, and butter, rub the butter
fine in the flour, mix the yolks with the milk and add them to the
flour, mix all into a dough, add the fruit, and last the beaten
whites. Fill the mixture into a round buttered form with a tube in
center and bake about 35 minutes; cover the first 20 minutes with
buttered paper.

+Emelines.+-- _First Part_: The whites of 6 eggs, 1 cup powdered
sugar, 1 cup flour sifted with 1 teaspoonful baking powder, ½
teaspoonful lemon extract, 1 tablespoonful melted butter, measured
after it is melted, 2 tablespoonfuls milk. Beat the whites till
stiff, then add gradually the sugar, butter, lemon extract, and
milk, and last the flour. Butter a long shallow tin pan (13 inches
long, 9 inches wide, and 1 inch deep), dust it with flour, pour in
the mixture, smooth it even with a knife, and bake in a medium-hot
oven.

_Second Part_: The yolks of 6 eggs, 1 cup powdered sugar, 1 cup
flour sifted with 1 teaspoonful baking powder, 2 tablespoonfuls
milk, 1 tablespoonful butter, ½ teaspoonful lemon extract. Stir
butter, sugar, and yolks to a cream, add lemon extract, flour, and
milk; bake the same as the first part. When the cakes are nearly
cold lay them over one another with a layer of jelly between, then
cut it into fancy shapes like half moons, small rounds, and squares;
glaze them with sugar glaze No. 927. In place of jelly, cream or any
other filling may be taken. The two cakes may be spread separately
with jelly, then rolled up like jelly rolls.

+Sand Wafers.+-- Stir 4 ounces butter with 6 tablespoonfuls sugar
till light and creamy, add gradually 3 eggs, the grated rind of ½
lemon, stir 15 minutes, add last 7 ounces sifted flour. Fill the
preparation in a pastry bag, butter and dust with flour some large
shallow tin pans, press small cakes from the bag on to the pans the
size of a 50-cent piece, and bake in medium-hot oven. When done and
cold, glaze them with fruit glaze or leave them plain.

+Cream S.+-- Stir ½ pound butter with 6 ounces sugar to a cream, add
1 teaspoonful vanilla sugar and 4 eggs, stir 10 minutes; add last ½
pound of sifted flour. Put the preparation into a kiss syringe and
press small cakes in the shape of an S into buttered and floured
pans, bake in medium-hot oven, and when cold glaze them with vanilla
glaze.

+Aniseed Wafers.+-- Rub some shallow tin pans with wax, place ½ pound
sugar and 4 whole eggs in a bowl, set the bowl into a pan of hot
water, beat the contents of bowl with an egg beater 15 minutes, then
remove and beat till cold; add 1 teaspoonful well-cleaned aniseed
and ½ pound sifted flour, fill the mixture into a pastry bag and
press small cakes on to the waxed tins, cover and let them stand
till next day, when the little cakes have obtained a crust, then
bake them in slow oven.

+Cinnamon Sticks.+-- Four ounces of almond paste, the white of 1 egg,
4 ounces powdered sugar, 1 teaspoonful cinnamon. Mix all together,
put on to a floured board; roll it out ⅛ inch thick, cut the paste
into 3 long strips 3 fingers wide, spread over an icing made as
follows: Mix the whites of 2 eggs with ½ pound powdered sugar, add ½
teaspoonful cinnamon and a few drops of lemon juice, stir 5 minutes,
then cut the strips into small sticks a finger wide, lay them on to
buttered tins, and bake in a slow oven.

+Meringue Shells.+-- Beat the whites of 4 eggs to a stiff froth, add
½ pound granulated sugar and a little vanilla sugar, stir the sugar
in lightly; fill this into a pastry bag or a paper funnel; press
small portions on to a double-folded paper, dust thickly with sugar,
lay the paper in a pan, and bake in a slow oven. When done and cold,
remove them from the paper, press the soft bottoms into shape to
form a shell, and serve filled with whipped sweetened cream or ice
cream.

+Kisses.+-- Five ounces whites of egg, 1 pound granulated sugar, 1
cup water, 4 ounces powdered sugar. Put the granulated sugar and
water in a saucepan, stir until the sugar is dissolved, then place
the saucepan over the fire, and boil to a crack; have the whites
beaten to a stiff froth, and add slowly the hot sugar while beating
constantly with an egg beater, then beat until cold. This may then
be used as it is, and if wanted very stiff, add the 4 ounces
powdered sugar; stir it through the mixture lightly, then put the
meringue in a kiss syringe, dust some paper with powdered sugar,
press the mixture on to the paper in any shape desired. For shells
it may be put on with a spoon, dust them with sugar, and bake in a
slow oven. The oven may be left open part of the time. In place of
paper, rub some tin pans with butter, then rub off all the butter
with paper, and dust them with powdered sugar, then put the kisses
on them.

+Banana Cake.+-- Three bananas, 1 cup of currant jelly, ½ pint of
whipped cream, 3 ounces butter, ¾ cup sugar, 1½ cups of flour, 1
teaspoonful baking powder, the whites of 3 eggs beaten to a stiff
froth, ½ cup milk, the juice and grated rind of ½ lemon. Sift flour
and baking powder together, stir butter and sugar to a cream, add
the lemon, then alternately flour, milk, and the white of egg;
butter 2 jelly tins of medium size, dust them with flour, divide the
cake mixture evenly in the tins, and bake in a medium-hot oven. When
done and cold, spread half of the jelly over one layer, cover with
banana slices, lay over the second layer, put on the remaining jelly
and bananas; mix the whipped cream with 1 tablespoonful fine sugar
and a little vanilla, cover the whole cake with cream, or take 1
pint of whipped cream and put half of the cream between the layers
and the remaining over the top, and serve.

+Neapolitan Cake.+-- Roll out some puff paste to ⅛ inch in thickness,
cut it into 3 strips 5 inches wide and about 10 inches long; moisten
a large shallow tin pan with cold water, put in the strips, dust
them with powdered sugar, and bake in a medium-hot oven. When done
and cold, cover 1 strip with boiled vanilla cream (see recipe No.
139), put over this the second strip, and spread over some currant
jelly; lay on the third strip. Mix ½ cup powdered sugar with 1
tablespoonful boiling water and a few drops of lemon juice, pour it
over the cake, and set aside till firm.

+One-Egg Cake.+-- One cup sugar, 1 egg, a piece of butter the size of
a walnut, 2 scant cups of flour sifted with 1 heaping teaspoonful
baking powder, ½ teaspoonful extract of lemon or vanilla, 1 cup of
milk; rub butter and flour together, add the sugar, milk, and egg;
mix into a batter, butter a square pan, dust with flour, put in the
mixture, and bake in a medium-hot oven till done. This mixture may
be baked in 3 small jelly tins, and when done lay them over one
another with jelly marmalade or cream between them; or bake it in a
pan 12 inches long and 8 inches wide and 1½ inch deep. When done,
cut the cake in half, lay them over one another with jelly or cream
between, then mix 1 cup sifted powdered sugar with 1 teaspoonful
lemon juice and 2 tablespoonfuls boiling water, stir until smooth,
pour the icing over the cake, and let stand till firm.

For a chocolate cake, bake the cake the same way, then mix 1 cup of
powdered sugar with the white of 1 egg; melt 4 ounces Baker’s
chocolate, add it to the sugar, mix all together, put half of it
between the cake, and spread the remaining over the top of the cake.

For a strawberry shortcake, bake the mixture in 2 small well
buttered and floured jelly tins, wash and mash 1 quart of
strawberries, mix with ½ cup sugar, put half of them between the 2
layers, and the remainder on top; serve with cream or vanilla sauce,
or put some whipped cream over the strawberries.

+Spice Cake.+-- Three fourths cup butter, 1 cup molasses, 1 cup
sugar, 3 eggs, 3 cups flour sifted with 1½ teaspoonful baking
powder, 1½ teaspoonful cinnamon, 1 teaspoonful cloves, ½ grated
nutmeg, 1 cup sour milk or cold coffee. Stir butter and sugar to a
cream, add the eggs one at a time, stir a few minutes between each
addition, add molasses and spice, then alternately flour and milk.
Butter a square cake pan, dust with flour, pour in the cake mixture,
and bake in medium-hot oven; or bake small cakes in gem pans and
when cold ice them with sugar glaze.

+Molasses Cake.+-- One cup molasses, ½ cup butter, 2 eggs, ½ cup
milk, ½ tablespoonful ginger, 2 cups flour sifted with 1 teaspoonful
baking powder. Mix and bake the same as above.

+Gingerbread.+-- One cup brown sugar, 1 cup molasses, ½ cup butter or
lard, 2 eggs, 1 tablespoonful ginger, ½ teaspoonful ground mace, ½
cup cold coffee, ½ teaspoonful salt, 1 heaping teaspoonful baking
powder sifted with 3 cups of flour. Stir butter or lard with the
sugar to a cream, add the eggs one at a time, stirring a few minutes
between each addition; then add the spice and syrup, last the flour
and coffee alternately; pour the mixture into a square or long pan
previously well buttered and dusted with flour; bake in a medium-hot
oven.

+Ginger Snaps.+-- Half pound brown sugar, ½ pound butter, 1 pint
molasses, 1 tablespoonful ginger, 1 teaspoonful cloves, 2
teaspoonfuls cinnamon, 1 teaspoonful baking powder sifted with 2
cups flour. Stir butter and sugar to a cream, add the molasses and
spice; when well mixed add flour and work it into a soft dough; if
necessary, add more flour, roll out very thin, cut into rounds, and
bake on buttered tins.

+Corn Bread.+-- One pint of corn meal, ½ cup of flour, 1 teaspoonful
baking powder, 1 egg, ½ teaspoonful salt, 1½ tablespoonful sugar, 1
cup milk. Mix all together and bake in a well-buttered square tin
pan. This bread should be about 1½ inch thick when done.




FROZEN DESSERTS.


+Mignon Cream.+-- One pint milk, the yolks of 4 eggs, ½ cupful cream,
1 cupful sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla sugar. Place a small pan with
3 tablespoonfuls of the sugar over the fire, stir until it melts and
turns light brown, then add ¼ cup hot water, let it boil to a thin
syrup and add it to the milk; add the yolks, sugar, and vanilla, mix
well and freeze.

+Malborn Cream.+-- Cut ½ pound candied fruit into small pieces, place
it in a bowl with ½ gill of sherry wine, then place a double boiler
with ½ pint of milk, the yolks of 2 eggs, and ¾ cup of sugar over
the fire, stir until just about to boil, remove instantly, and when
cold add ½ pint of cream, 1½ tablespoonful best rum, put the cream
in a freezer, and freeze till nearly stiff, then add the candied
fruit; continue the freezing till firm.

+Banana Ice Cream.+-- Remove the peel from 6 ripe bananas and mash
them fine, mix 1 pint of cream with ½ pint milk, 1 cup of sugar, and
2 teaspoonfuls vanilla; put the cream into the freezer, and freeze
till it begins to thicken, then add the bananas, and freeze till
firm.

+Frozen Caramel Cream.+-- Put in a double boiler 1 cup milk, 1 cup
cream, ¾ cup sugar, and the yolks of 3 eggs; beat well, then place
over the fire, and stir till nearly boiling; when cold, add this
slowly to the 3 beaten whites while stirring constantly; put 3
tablespoonfuls sugar over the fire, stir till it turns yellow, add a
little water, boil to a syrup. When cold, add it to the cream, and
freeze. In place of caramel, 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract may be
added.

+Ice Cream without Milk or Cream.+-- One pint water, 1 ounce butter,
the yolks of 3 eggs, 1 cup of sugar, the peel of ½ lemon, and ½
tablespoonful lemon juice; beat 3 whites to a stiff froth; wash the
butter several times, stir sugar and yolks to a cream, add the water
and butter, place it in a double boiler, stir till nearly boiling;
remove, and when cold add the whites, then freeze.

+Lemon Sherbet.+-- The juice of 4 lemons and 1 orange, 2½ cups sugar,
1 quart water; boil sugar and water to a syrup; when cold add the
lemon and orange juice and freeze; add last 1 or 2 beaten white of
eggs, mix, and serve.

+Strawberry Sherbet.+-- Put the juice of 1 lemon over 1 quart of
mashed strawberries; boil 1 quart water with 2 cups sugar, pour it
over the strawberries, and when cold rub them through a sieve, then
freeze; add last the white of 1 beaten egg, mix, and serve.

+Coffee Frappe.+-- Boil 1 quart water with ½ cup sugar, add 4 ounces
fine-ground coffee, cover and set on side of the stove 10 minutes;
then strain, and when cold add the white of 1 egg; then freeze, and
serve in glasses with whipped cream on top.

+Coffee Sorbet.+-- Pour 3 pints of boiling water over 1 cup of
fine-ground coffee, cover, and let it stand 15 minutes, then strain
through a napkin; add 1 cup sugar, stir till dissolved, and when
cold freeze it till nearly stiff; add 1 gill of the best brandy,
continue the freezing for a few minutes, and serve.




CUSTARD.


+Caramel Custard.+-- Boil 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water till the sugar
begins to turn light brown, then pour it into a pudding-dish. Mix at
the same time 1 quart of milk with 6 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1
teaspoonful vanilla extract; pour this into the dish, set the dish
in a pan of water, and bake till the custard has set. Remove and
place it for several hours on ice. In serving, turn the custard out
on to a dish, and serve. This custard may be put into small molds or
cups and baked the same way.

+Cocoanut Caramel.+-- Mix the whites of 8 eggs with 1½ pint of milk,
½ cup sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract, and 1½ cup fresh
cocoanut; let it stand 1 hour. Place 1 cup of sugar with ½ cup water
over the fire, boil until it begins to turn yellow, then pour it
into 6 small bowls; spread the caramel even with a spoon so that the
bowls are completely lined inside, then pour in the custard, set the
bowl in a pan of water so that the water reaches halfway up the
bowls, and bake till the custard is firm to the touch. When done,
remove the bowls and set them in a cool place. In serving, turn the
custard on to small plates, and serve.

+Caramel Charlotte.+-- Put ½ ounce gelatin in a small bowl with ½
gill of cold water; at the same time place a small saucepan with 3
tablespoonfuls sugar over the fire, stir until the sugar is melted
and has assumed a rich brown color, then add ½ pint milk; cook and
stir till the sugar is dissolved, mix the yolks of 5 eggs with 3
tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla, and 2 tablespoonfuls
cold milk; add a little of the hot caramel milk to the yolks, then
add the yolks to the caramel milk, stir over the fire till nearly
boiling; instantly remove, add the gelatin, stir until dissolved,
then strain into a bowl, and set aside to cool. Beat 1 pint of cream
till stiff, when the caramel mixture begins to thicken add it slowly
to the cream while beating constantly; in the meantime fit a piece
of white paper in the bottom of a charlotte mold, line the sides and
bottom with thin slices of sponge cake, pour in the cream, cover the
top with sponge cake the same way. Place the charlotte on ice for
several hours. When ready to serve turn the charlotte on to a dish
and garnish with a wreath of spun sugar or serve plain.

+Strawberry Charlotte.+-- Prepare a strawberry fromage, No. 189, line
a mold with sponge cake or lady fingers the same as in the foregoing
recipe, pour in the strawberry fromage, cover with the same cake or
fingers, and set on ice. When ready to serve, turn the charlotte on
to a dish, remove the paper, and serve with cream, which should be
sweetened with sugar and flavored with vanilla, or serve plain
without the cream. In place of strawberry fromage any other kind of
fromage may be used.




SAUCES.


+Bismarck Sauce.+-- Stir the yolk of 2 eggs with 1 cup of powdered
sugar to a cream, add slowly ½ cup of Rhine wine, beat the white to
a stiff froth, add the sauce slowly to the white while beating
constantly, add last ½ cupful whipped cream. In place of Rhine wine
sherry wine may be taken.

+Transparent Sauce.+-- Mix 1 heaping teaspoonful cornstarch in a
small saucepan with ¼ cup cold water, add 1 cupful boiling water and
the thin peel of ½ lemon; set the saucepan over the fire, stir and
boil a few minutes, then remove, add 2 tablespoonfuls lemon juice
and 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, or sweeten to taste. To this sauce
a few spoonfuls of strawberry or raspberry syrup or juice may be
added.

+Orange Sauce.+-- Stir the yolks of 3 eggs with 1 cupful powdered
sugar to a cream, add slowly 1 cupful orange juice and 3
tablespoonfuls lemon juice; beat the whites to a stiff froth, add
slowly while beating constantly the orange mixture to the whites;
serve either with hot or cold puddings.

+Cream Sauce.+-- Stir the yolks of 2 eggs with ½ cupful powdered
sugar to a cream, add ½ cupful orange juice and 1 tablespoonful
lemon juice; beat the whites to a stiff froth, add the orange
mixture slowly to the whites while beating constantly; add last 1
cupful whipped cream. In place of orange juice any kind of fruit
juice may be taken, or jelly may be dissolved in hot water and used
the same way.

+Fruit Sauce.+-- Mix 1 teaspoonful cornstarch in a small saucepan
with ½ gill of cold water, add while stirring constantly 1 cupful
boiling water, the thin peel of ½ lemon; place the saucepan over the
fire and boil a few minutes; remove from fire, add ¾ cupful fruit
syrup, either of raspberry, strawberry, apricot, or cherries, and 1
tablespoonful lemon juice; if handy, add 2 or 3 tablespoonfuls white
wine, and serve with soufflé and light delicate puddings. It may
also be served cold with puddings. In place of fruit syrup,
strawberry or cherry marmalade may be taken, or apple or currant
jelly.

+Raspberry Sauce.+-- Mix 1 heaping teaspoonful cornstarch in a small
saucepan with a little cold water; add slowly while stirring
constantly 1 cupful boiling water, a small piece of cinnamon, and
the thin peel of ½ lemon; place the saucepan over the fire, cook a
few minutes, then remove, add 1 cupful fresh raspberry juice, ½
cupful sugar, and 1 tablespoonful lemon juice; if liked and handy,
a little Rhine wine or white wine may be added; serve either hot or
cold. If raspberry syrup is used, omit the sugar.

+Cream Cakes Glassé.+-- Boil ½ pint milk with 2 ounces butter, add 4
ounces flour, stir until it forms into a smooth paste and loosens
itself from the bottom and sides of the saucepan, transfer the paste
to a dish, and when nearly cold add the yolks of 4 eggs, and last
the beaten whites; drop this mixture (by tablespoonfuls) on to
buttered tins, not too close together, brush them over with the
beaten egg, and bake to a fine golden color and well done. When done
and cold, cut the cakes open on the side and fill them with vanilla
cream, No. 129; half the quantity of cream will be sufficient. Place
the cakes on a sieve, boil 1 cup of sugar with ½ cup water till the
sugar begins to turn light brown (caramel), instantly remove, and
pour it over the cakes.




WAR RECIPES


+Economical Jelly Roll.+-- Separate three eggs; to the yolks add half
a pound of powdered sugar; beat fifteen minutes; then add grated
lemon rind; half a pound of sifted flour with a quarter teaspoonful
of baking powder; add it to the mixture with the whites beaten stiff
and half a cup of milk.

Spread, dust with sugar, and bake till done.

+Millionaire Cake.+-- Cream the yolks of three eggs with one-half cup
powdered sugar for ten minutes, add one-half teaspoonful vanilla and
three quarters of a cup of flour sifted with one-fourth of a
teaspoonful of baking powder and the beaten whites of the three
eggs, butter six small layer cake tins and put in the mixture. Bake
in a quick oven ten minutes.

+Filling.+-- Put two tablespoonfuls of chocolate and three
tablespoonfuls sugar with one-half cup strong coffee and boil for
ten minutes, when almost cold add one-half cup well-washed butter,
teaspoon vanilla in small portions; when thick and creamy spread
between layers and on top and decorate with candied cherries.

+Probasco Cream.+-- Mix 4 ounces flour with 2 ounces butter, 2 ounces
ground almonds, 1 yolk and a little water, 1 tablespoonful sugar to
a firm paste; let rest 1 hour, roll out ¼ inch thick, lay a small
jelly tin over, cut around it, lay the round piece of paste on a
buttered tin, brush over with egg and bake a fine golden color. Add
to ½ pint whipped cream, 1 teaspoonful granulated gelatine dissolved
in 2 tablespoonfuls milk, flavor with ½ teaspoonful vanilla and
sweeten with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, fill into a round form and set
on ice.

Boil 1 pound of chestnuts 20 minutes, remove the outside shells and
the brown skin, place the nuts in a saucepan, cover with boiling
water, cook till very tender, drain and press through a sieve, add 2
tablespoonfuls cream, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, a pinch of salt, and ½
tablespoonful melted butter. Set on ice. Shortly before serving turn
the cream on the almond cake, put the chestnut puree in a pastry bag
with a small tube in the end, press the puree in the form of
spaghetti around the cream and cover the cream with a thick layer of
pulverized macaroons with sponge sugar, sprinkle over 1
tablespoonful satin sugar, ornament with whipped cream and sprinkle
with fine pistachio nuts.

+Prune Soufflé.+-- Wash and soak 1 cup of prunes over night, next day
drain, remove pits, and add them to 3 whites of eggs beaten stiff;
add 1 teaspoonful vanilla, put in buttered and sugared soufflé dish,
set in shallow pan with a little water, set in a medium oven to
poach till done, which will take about 40 minutes.

+Apricot Whip.+-- Rub half a cup of apricots after they have been
cooked through a sieve, add half a bottle of cream beaten stiff to
it and two tablespoons powdered sugar and half a teaspoon vanilla,
put in six sherbet glasses and decorate with lady fingers around the
edge.

+Coffee Parfait.+-- Put ¼ cup granulated sugar with one tablespoon
cornstarch and one pint of milk over the fire and boil five minutes,
then add two tablespoons coffee extract and ½ teaspoon vanilla; when
cool freeze, put into four parfait glasses and decorate with whipped
cream.

+Dorothy Royal.+-- Bake a cup cake mixture in a sheet pan, when done
and cool, cut into square pieces and pour over a sauce made as
follows: put one cup of sugar with half a cup of milk, a tablespoon
of butter and one square of chocolate over the fire and cook until
thick and creamy, about ten minutes; pour hot over the cake, add a
spoonful of whipped cream on every piece and sprinkle chopped
walnuts over all.

+Peach à la Melba.+-- Put one tablespoon of vanilla ice cream on a
round of sunshine cake, on it lay half a preserved peach and pour
over two tablespoons melba syrup made as follows: melt ½ cup
raspberry syrup to which has been added one tablespoon fine cut
candied cherries and decorate with whipped cream.

+Praline Cream.+-- Put ¼ cup granulated sugar with one tablespoon
cornstarch and one pint milk over the fire and boil five minutes,
stirring all the time, then add the yolks of two eggs and one
teaspoon vanilla and set aside to cool, in another saucepan put ½
cup granulated sugar with ¼ cup water over the fire and boil until
it turns a golden brown; pour on a buttered marble and when cold
roll with a rolling pin until fine, sprinkle into the cooked
mixture, add ½ pint cream and freeze in a well-packed freezer.

+Prune Whip.+-- Rub ½ cup prunes after they have been cooked through
a sieve; add ½ bottle whipped cream to it and two tablespoonfuls
powdered sugar, ½ teaspoon vanilla, serve in six sherbet glasses
with lady fingers around the edge.

+War Bread.+-- Two cups of rye flour, one cup bran, one cup Indian
meal, one teaspoonful salt, one yeast cake and 2 cups of luke warm
water, two tablespoonfuls molasses, one teaspoonful fat; put flour,
bran and meal into a bowl, add the salt and rub the fat through the
flour, then add the yeast and crumble it fine, then add the warm
water and mix well about 15 minutes, cover and let raise to double
its height, then add some wheat flour slowly while kneading the
dough to a soft firm dough; shape it into loaves, put into buttered
pan, let rise again till double its size, and bake in a medium hot
oven till done about ¾ of an hour.

+Bran Muffins.+-- Put one cup of bran and one cup of whole wheat in a
bowl, add one teaspoon salt and one teaspoon fat and rub it through
until fine and then add one egg, two tablespoons molasses and one
cup milk and a heaping teaspoon baking powder, mix well and put in
buttered and floured muffin tins and bake about fifteen minutes.

+Oatmeal Cookies.+-- Cream two tablespoons butter with ½ cup sugar
until white and creamy, add one egg and stir again a few minutes,
then add ½ cup oatmeal and ½ cup flour, two tablespoons raisins, one
tablespoon molasses and ¼ cup milk; drop by teaspoons on
well-buttered tins and bake in a hot oven about ten minutes.

+Vienna Pancakes.+-- Put two ounces flour with three eggs in a bowl,
add ½ teaspoon salt, one cup milk, one teaspoon sugar and beat
fifteen minutes, heat a large well-cleaned frying pan, melt ½
tablespoon fat or butter, pour in the mixture, turn the pan from
side to side, let the batter run up the sides of the pan, continue
until the batter has formed a coating on bottom and sides of the
pan, then set in a hot oven and bake until light brown on top; serve
dusted with powdered sugar and the juice of ½ lemon.

+Checkerboard Sandwiches.+-- Take an 8-cent white loaf of bread, and
an 8-cent loaf of brown bread, cut off crusts on all sides of both
loaves; now cut into lengths of 2 inches thick, butter thickly on
all sides, lay a white strip next a brown strip of bread alternately
to form checkers; then roll in a wet napkin and set aside to chill;
when required cut in slices and serve. When finished they should
look like checkerboards.

+Domino Sandwiches.+-- Stir one cream cheese with ½ cup cream and two
dashes of paprika until smooth; spread on brown bread and cover with
brown bread; cut the sandwiches 1½ inches by three inches and
decorate top with the cheese mixture put through a pastry bag to
represent dominoes.

+Minced Ham Sandwiches.+-- Put cooked ham through meat machine and to
one cup of ham add ¼ cup mayonnaise spread between thin pieces of
wheat bread cut in diagonal shapes and put a little of the mixture
in the center of each sandwich.

+Fruit Sandwich.+-- Cook ½ cup dates and ½ cup figs in water five
minutes; drain, chop fine, mix with ½ cup apple or currant jelly and
½ cup of chopped walnuts or pecans. Cut graham bread into round and
heart shapes and put mixture between and decorate top with a little
of the mixture.

+Toasted Cheese Roll.+-- Sprinkle grated cheese on thin slices of
wheat bread that has been buttered, sprinkle a little paprika over
it and toast until cheese is melted, holding cheese side to the
flame. Then roll quickly, hold together with a toothpick and toast
the outside.

+Cheese Balls.+-- Grate one-third of a cup of American cheese, add
the beaten whites of one egg to it and a little paprika, drop by
teaspoonfuls into bread crumbs and then fry in hot fat a minute till
brown; nice served with fish or salad.

+Horn of Plenty Salad.+-- Cut pineapple from top lengthwise cutting
across the bottom, remove the fruit of pineapple, cutting it in
small pieces, careful not to break the skin; add one pint of fine
cut peeled apples, one pint of fine cut celery, ½ cup of walnut
meats broken, mix with 1 cup of fine mayonnaise, arrange the
pineapple on a platter the green top up and fix it to look like a
horn of plenty; fill in the salad, pour over one cup of fine
mayonnaise, spread it smooth with a knife, decorate with celery
tops, candied cherries and chopped pistachio nuts.

+Grape Fruit Salad.+-- Cut three grape fruit and three oranges in
half and take out the pieces, add one pint fine cut celery, four
tablespoons fine mayonnaise and put back in the grape fruit shells
that have been cleaned out and scalloped. Mask with mayonnaise and
garnish with pieces of grape fruit and orange and celery leaves,
sprinkle finely chopped pistachio nuts over all.

+Waldorf Salad.+-- Peel, core and cut fine, four apples, add one pint
finely cut celery to it and mix two tablespoonfuls broken English
walnuts previously boiled in salted water, add four tablespoonfuls
fine mayonnaise and mix well, pile on a platter and mask with
mayonnaise, garnish with pieces of red apple, celery leaves and
walnuts.

+Pear farcis fromage à la Rocquefort.+-- Peel a nice mellow ripe
pear, remove core after cutting it carefully in half, cream, put
Rocquefort cheese through a potato ricer, add little cream and a few
dashes of paprika, mix few minutes, fill in center of pears, lay the
pear on a crisp lettuce leaf, decorate with chopped pistachio nuts,
and a candied cherry at top, pour over a nice Russian dressing, and
serve.

+Russian Dressing.+-- Put 2 yolks of eggs in a bowl, set the bowl in
cracked ice or cold water, add to the yolks ¼ teaspoonful dry
mustard, add ¼ cup of salad oil, in small portions till absorbed by
the yolks, add 1 teaspoonful lemon juice or vinegar, 1 even
teaspoonful salt, dash of paprika, 1 tablespoonful Chili sauce, and
1 tablespoonful whipped cream.

+Green Pepper farcis fromage à la Cream.+-- Have a washed green
pepper scooped out so the seeds are all removed. Mix a fresh cream
cheese with fine chopped walnuts and pieces of pimento cut into
small squares, fill into the pepper, so it is well packed, set on
ice till chilled an hour or so.

When ready to serve, cut into slices with a sharp knife, arrange
onto fresh lettuce leaves, pour over French dressing and serve.




CONTENTS.

[Recipe numbers were added by the transcriber, as were any items in
[brackets]. All headers were printed as shown; they do not always
correspond to headers in the body text.]


SAUCES.

                                                                  PAGE

  1. Wine Chaudeau                                                   5
  2. White Wine Sauce                                                5
  3. Wine Cream Sauce                                                5
  4. Claret Sauce                                                    5
  5. Bishop Sauce                                                    6
  6. Madeira Sauce, No. 1                                            6
  7. Madeira Sauce, No. 2                                            6
  8. Butter Sauce                                                    6
  9. Sherry Wine Sauce, No. 1                                        6
  10. Sherry Wine Sauce, No. 2                                       6
  11. Sherry Wine Sauce, No. 3                                       6
  12. Wine or Brandy Sauce                                           7
  13. Arrack Sauce (Allemande)                                       7
  14. Arrack Sauce (English)                                         7
  15. Brandy Sauce with Milk (“English Style”)                       7
  16. Brandy Sauce (American), No. 1                                 7
  17. Brandy Sauce, No. 2                                            7
  18. Punch Sauce                                                    7
  19. Rum Sauce                                                      8
  20. Sauce à la Diaz                                                8
  21. Wine Chaudeau with Rum                                         8
  22. Wine Sauce with Almonds and Raisins                            8
  23. Hard Sauce                                                     8
  24. Hard Sauce with Cherries                                       9
  25. Strawberry Sauce                                               9
  26. Sauce of Apricots                                              9
  27. Sauce of Cherries, No. 1                                       9
  28. Sauce of Cherries, No. 2                                       9
  29. Strawberry Hard Sauce                                          9
  30. Raspberry Sauce, No. 1                                        10
  31. Raspberry Sauce, No. 2                                        10
  32. Huckleberry Sauce                                             10
  33. Sauce of Dried Cherries                                       10
  34. Nut Sauce                                                     10
  35. Hard Sauce with Nuts                                          10
  36. Strawberry Custard Sauce                                      11
  37. Fruit Sauce (not boiled)                                      11
  38. Peach Sauce, No. 1                                            11
  39. Peach Sauce, No. 2                                            11
  40. Sauce of Currants and Raspberries                             12
  41. Cream Sauce with Jelly, No. 1                                 12
  42. Cream Sauce with Jelly, No. 2                                 12
  43. Lemon Sauce, No. 1                                            12
  44. Lemon Custard Sauce                                           12
  45. Lemon Sauce with Liquor                                       12
  46. Sauce à l’Orange                                              12
  47. Sauce au Kirsch                                               13
  48. Lemon Sauce, No. 2                                            13
  49. Lemon Cream Sauce                                             13
  50. Almond Sauce                                                  13
  51. Chocolate Sauce                                               13
  52. Chocolate Cream Sauce                                         13
  53. Vanilla Cream Sauce                                           14
  54. Vanilla Sauce                                                 14
  55. Sauce à la Cream (sweet)                                      14
  56. White Sauce                                                   14
  57. Cream Sauce (plain)                                           14
  58. Vanilla Sauce (plain)                                         14
  59. Vanilla Sauce with Cognac                                     14
  60. Caramel Sauce                                                 15
  61. Coffee Cream Sauce                                            15
  62. Nutmeg Sauce                                                  15
  63. Orange Cream Sauce                                            15
  64. Sabayon Sauce                                                 15
  65. Strawberry Chaudeau Sauce                                     16
  66. Pineapple Chaudeau Sauce                                      16
  67. Raspberry Chaudeau Sauce                                      16
  68. Cocoanut Snow Sauce                                           16
  69. Cocoanut Sauce (another way)                                  16
  70. Snow Sauce with Orange Flavor                                 16
  71. Pistachio Sauce                                               17
  72. Cold Pineapple Sauce                                          17


FRUIT AND SUGAR SYRUPS.

  73. Plain or Sugar Syrup                                          17
  74. Pineapple Syrup                                               17
  75. Strawberry Syrup                                              17
  75a. Raspberry Syrup                                              18
  76. Raspberry and Currant Syrup                                   18
  77. Raspberry Syrup without Fruit                                 18
  78. Raspberry Syrup without Boiling                               18
  79. Blackberry Syrup                                              18
  80. Peach Syrup                                                   19
  81. Apricot Syrup                                                 19
  82. Cherry Syrup                                                  19
  83. Wild Cherry Syrup                                             19
  84. Wild Cherry Bark Syrup                                        19
  85. Vanilla Syrup                                                 19
  86. Vanilla Cream Syrup                                           19
  87. Cream Syrup                                                   20
  88. Lemon Syrup                                                   20
  89. Lemon Syrup with Oil of Lemon                                 20
  90. Lemon Syrup (another way)                                     20
  91. Lemon Syrup (plain)                                           20
  92. Orange Syrup                                                  20
  93. Orange Flower Syrup                                           20


ESSENCES AND EXTRACTS.

  94. Essence of Lemon                                              21
  95. Essence of Vanilla                                            21
  96. Bishop Essence                                                21
  97. Essence of Oranges                                            21
  98. Peach Essence                                                 21
  99. Bitter Almond Essence                                         21
  100. Coffee Essence                                               21
  101. Celery Essence                                               21
  102. Strawberry Essence                                           22
  103. Raspberry Essence                                            22
  104. Rose Essence                                                 22
  105. Orange Blossom Extract                                       22
  106. Orange Peel Extract                                          22


MERINGUES.

  107. Italian Meringue                                             22
  108. Plain Meringue                                               22
  109. Spinach Green for Coloring                                   23
  110. Sugar Color                                                  23


COLORED AND FLAVORED SUGARS.

  111. Lemon Sugar                                                  23
  112. Vanilla Sugar                                                23
  113. Red Sugar                                                    23
  114. Green Sugar                                                  23


FRENCH CREAMS.

  115. Crême française à la vanille                                 23
  116. Crême française au chocolat                                  24
  117. Crême française aux amandes                                  24
  118. Crême française au Café                                      24
  119. Crême française au Thé                                       24
  120. Crême française au Marasquin                                 25
  121. Crême française au rhum                                      25
  122. Petits pots crême à la vanille                               25
  123. Crême au bain-Marie au caramel                               25
  124. Crême au bain-Marie au chocolat                              25
  125. Vienna Orange Cream                                          26
  126. Vienna Lemon Cream                                           26
  127. Milk Cream                                                   26
  128. Russian Cream                                                28
  129. Sabayon of Oranges                                           27
  130. Sabayon of Lemon                                             27
  131. Whipped Cream                                                27
  132. Whipped Cream with Strawberries                              27
  133. Cream with Pineapple                                         27
  134. Whipped Cream with Chocolate                                 28
  135. Whipped Cream with Oranges                                   28
  136. Crême fouettée à la Cobby                                    28
  137. Whipped Cream with Peaches                                   28
  138. Whipped Cream with Cherries                                  28


BOILED CREAMS.

  139. Vanilla Cream                                                29
  140. Chocolate Cream                                              29
  141. Orange Cream                                                 29
  142. Almond Cream                                                 29
  143. Coffee Cream                                                 29
  144. Crême Frangipane à la vanille                                29


JELLIES.

 [145. Jellies                                                      30]
  146. To Clarify Gelatine                                          30
  147. To Clarify Sugar                                             30
  148. To Clarify Fruit Juice                                       30
  149. Jelly Bag                                                    31
  150. Orange Jelly                                                 31
  151. Plain Orange Jelly                                           31
  152. Lemon Jelly                                                  32
  153. Strawberry Jelly                                             32
  154. Pineapple Jelly                                              32
  155. Jelly of Peaches                                             33
  156. Raspberry Jelly                                              33
  157. Wine Jelly                                                   33
  158. Rhine Wine Jelly                                             34
  159. Champagne Jelly                                              34
  160. Apple Jelly                                                  34
  161. Cider Jelly                                                  34
  162. Rose Jelly                                                   35
  163. Gelée russe                                                  35
  164. Macédoine de fruit à la russe                                35
  165. Calvesfoot Jelly                                             35
  166. Macédoine de fruits au vin du Rhine                          36
  167. Gelée à la moscovite                                         36
  168. Orange Baskets with Jelly                                    37
  169. Orange Quarters Used for Garnishing Jellies
         and Other Dishes                                           37
  170. Almond Blanc-Mange                                           37
  171. Chocolate Blanc-Mange                                        38
  172. Blanc-mange marbre au chocolat                               38
  173. Cream Blanc-Mange                                            38
  174. Plain Blanc-Mange                                            39
  175. Cocoanut Blanc-Mange                                         39
  176. Neapolitan Blanc-Mange                                       39
  177. Nest with Eggs                                               39
  178. Fromage bavarois à la vanille, No. 1                         40
  179. Fromage bavarois à la vanille, No. 2                         40
  180. Fromage bavarois aux pistache                                40
  181. Fromage bavarois aux amandes                                 40
  182. Fromage bavarois au Café                                     41
  183. Fromage bavarois au Thé                                      41
  184. Fromage bavarois au chocolat                                 41
  185. Lemon Fromage                                                41
  186. Orange Fromage                                               41
  187. Pineapple Fromage                                            42
  188. Peach Fromage                                                42
  189. Strawberry Fromage                                           42
  190. Rum Bavarois                                                 43
  191. Fromage Bavarois Cardinal                                    43
 [192. Bavarois                                                     43]
  193. Fromage bavarois au pain noir                                43
  194. Snow Pudding                                                 44
  195. Wine Pudding                                                 44
  196. Apple Jelly Pudding                                          44
  197. Maraschino Pudding                                           44
  198. Manilla Pudding                                              45
  199. Rum Pudding                                                  45
  200. Fine Chocolate Pudding                                       45
  201. Fine Claret Pudding                                          46
  202. White Wine Pudding                                           46
  203. Cold Apple Pudding                                           46


FINE COLD PUDDINGS.

  204. Pudding à la polonaise                                       47
  205. Peach Pudding with Champagne                                 47
  206. Pineapple Pudding à la royale                                48
  207. Orange Pudding à la maltaise                                 48
  208. Pudding de Savoie à L’orange                                 49
  209. Chestnut Pudding à la dauphine                               49
  210. Pudding à la Girot                                           50
  211. Chocolate Pudding à la Hollandaise                           50
  212. Pudding à la reine                                           51
  213. Pudding à L’allemande                                        51
  214. Strawberry Pudding                                           52
  215. Imperial Pudding                                             52
  216. Suédoise of Apples                                           53
  217. Suédoise of Pears                                            54
  218. Timbale de pêche à la condé                                  54
  219. Timbale de riz à la napolitaine                              55
  220. Pear Timbale                                                 55
  221. Timbale à la sicilienne                                      55
  222. Timbale of Mixed Fruit                                       56
  223. Chocolate Plombière                                          56
  224. Orange Plombière                                             56
  225. Rum Plombière                                                56
  226. Plombière of Maraschino Curaçoa                              57
  227. Pistache Plombière                                           57
  228. Plombière aux Café                                           57
  229. Tea Plombière                                                57
  230. Peach Plombière                                              57
  231. Vanilla Plombière                                            57
  232. Strawberry Plombière                                         58
  233. Pineapple Plombière                                          58


FROZEN PUDDINGS.

  234. Frozen Strawberry Pudding                                    58
  235. Rich Ice Cream Pudding                                       59
  236. Pudding à la Pückler-Muskau                                  59
  237. Ice Pudding à la Prince Pückler                              59
  238. Chocolate Ice Cream Pudding                                  59
  239. Bombe à la Altenberg                                         60
  240. Bombe à la parisienne                                        60
  241. Pineapple Cream for Bombe à la parisienne                    60
  242. Ice Pudding with Pumpernickel                                61
  243. Ice Pudding with Almonds                                     61
  244. Frozen Puddings à la Montmorency                             61
  245. Pudding Glacé à la Metternich                                62
  246. Pudding à la Duchesse de Berry                               62
  247. Pudding Glacé à la allemande                                 63
  248. Frozen Pudding à la Richelieu                                63
  249. Frozen Chestnut Pudding                                      64
  250. Frozen Apple Pudding                                         64
  251. Mousse à L’ananas                                            65
  252. Mousse à la vanille                                          65
  253. Mousse à L’orange                                            65
  254. Mousse au chocolat                                           65
  255. Mousse au maraskino                                          66


PAINS DE FRUITS.

  256. Pain of Strawberries                                         66
  257. Pain d’ananas                                                66
  258. Pain d’ananas à la parisienne                                66
  259. Pain de pêches                                               67
  260. Pain à la Victoria                                           67
  261. Pain de pêches à la Richelieu                                67
  262. Pain de pêches à la condé                                    68
  263. Pain de pommes à la condé                                    68


ICE CREAMS.

  264. Directions for Making Ice Cream                              69
  265. Ice Cream (large quantity)                                   70
  266. Fine Vanilla Ice Cream                                       70
  267. Custard Ice Cream                                            70
  268. Plain Ice Cream                                              70
  269. Plain Ice Cream (another way)                                70
  270. Pistachio Ice Cream                                          71
  271. Maraschino Ice Cream                                         71
  272. Caramel Ice Cream                                            71
  273. Tea Ice Cream                                                71
  274. Coffee Ice Cream, No. 1                                      71
  275. Coffee Ice Cream, No. 2                                      72
  276. Ice Cream, Simple                                            72
  277. Plain Chocolate Ice Cream                                    72
  278. Nut Ice Cream                                                72
  279. Fine Chocolate Ice Cream                                     72
  280. Strawberry Ice Cream                                         73
  281. How to Make Ice Cream without a Freezer                      73
  282. Vanilla Ice Cream, No. 1                                     73
  283. Vanilla Ice Cream, No. 2                                     73
  284. Fruit Ice Cream                                              74
  285. Fruit Ice                                                    74
  286. Cold Sugar Syrup for Fruit Ice                               74
  287. Strawberry Ice                                               74
  288. Pineapple Ice                                                75
  289. Tutti Frutti Ice                                             75
  290. Peach Ice                                                    75
  291. Melon Ice                                                    75
  292. Orange Ice                                                   75
  293. Lemon Ice                                                    75


SORBETS.

 [294. Sorbet                                                       75]
  295. Champagne Sorbet                                             75
  296. Pineapple Sorbet                                             76
  297. Strawberry Sherbet                                           76
  298. Orange Granite                                               76
  299. Spongada aux pêches                                          76
  300. Spongada au chocolat                                         77
  301. Spongada au Café                                             77
  302. Spongada au marasquin                                        77
  303. Orgeat of Almond Milk                                        77
  304. Thé polonaise                                                77
  305. Iced Tea                                                     78
  306. Iced Coffee                                                  78
  307. Bread Crumbs                                                 78
  308. How to Prepare a Pudding Form                                78


BOILED AND BAKED PUDDINGS.

  309. Plum Pudding                                                 79
  310. English Plum Pudding                                         79
  311. Biscuit Pudding                                              80
  312. Cottage Pudding (baked)                                      80
  313. Cottage Pudding (boiled)                                     80
  314. Cottage Apple Pudding                                        81
  315. Batter Fruit Pudding                                         81
  316. Prince Regent Pudding                                        81
  317. Layer Pudding (German style)                                 81
  318. Portugal Pudding                                             82
  319. Ipsilanti Pudding                                            82
  320. Fine Cherry Pudding                                          82
  321. Cherry Pudding of Preserved Cherries                         83
  322. Cherry Batter Pudding                                        83
  323. Plain Suet Pudding                                           84
  324. Suet Pudding with Apples                                     84
  325. Blackberry Pudding                                           84
  326. Cherry Suet Pudding                                          85
  327. Suet Pudding with Nuts                                       85
  328. Suet Pudding with Raisins                                    85
  329. Suet Fruit Pudding                                           85
  330. Marrow Pudding                                               85
  331. Fig Pudding                                                  86
  332. Apple Pudding (baked)                                        86
  333. Pineapple Pudding or Souflée                                 86
  334. Almond Sponge Pudding                                        87
  335. Nut Pudding                                                  87
  336. Uncle Tom’s Pudding                                          88
  337. Plain German Flour Pudding                                   88
  338. The Queen of Puddings with Strawberries                      88
  339. Indian Pudding (boiled)                                      88
  340. Indian Pudding (baked)                                       89
  341. Graham Flour Pudding                                         89
  342. Madeira Pudding                                              89
  343. Almond Pudding                                               90
  344. Boiled Bread Pudding                                         90
  345. Zwieback Pudding, No. 1                                      90
  346. Cabinet Pudding                                              91
  347. Lemon Pudding (baked)                                        91
  348. Zwieback Pudding, No. 2                                      91
  349. Pumpernickel Pudding                                         91
  350. Vienna Pudding                                               92
  351. Chocolate Pudding                                            92
  352. Apple Pudding with Almonds                                   92
  353. Nudel Pudding                                                93
  354. Potato Pudding                                               93


BREAD AND APPLE PUDDINGS.

  355. Plain Bread Pudding, No. 1                                   94
  356. Plain Bread Pudding (baked), No. 2                           94
  357. Bird’s Nest Pudding                                          94
  358. Bread Pudding (boiled)                                       95
  359. Bread Fruit Pudding                                          96
  360. Bread Sponge Pudding                                         96
  361. Hanoverian Pudding                                           96
  362. Huckleberry Pudding (German style)                           97
  363. Rye Bread Pudding                                            97
  364. Apple Pudding (German art)                                   97
  365. English Apple Pudding                                        98
  366. Apple Pudding (boiled)                                       98
  367. Apple Bread Pudding (German art)                             98
  368. Bread Pudding with Apples                                    99
  369. Apple Rice Pudding (German art)                              99
  370. Apple Pudding à l’allemande                                  99
  371. Old-Fashioned Apple Pudding                                 100
  372. Roly-Poly                                                   100
  373. Roly-Poly Tutti Frutti                                      101


SOUFLEES, PANCAKES, OMELETS AND FRITTERS.

  374. Plain Souflée                                               101
  375. Almond Souflée                                              102
  376. Lemon Souflée                                               102
  377. Vanilla Souflée                                             103
  378. Orange Souflée                                              103
  379. Chocolate Souflée                                           103
  380. Macaroon Souflée                                            103
  381. Apple Souflée, No. 1                                        103
  382. Apple Souflée, No. 2                                        104
  383. Apple Souflée, No. 3                                        104
  384. Apple Souflée, No. 4                                        104
  385. Pineapple Souflée                                           105
  386. Rhubarb Souflée                                             105
  387. Cherry Souflée                                              105
  388. Gooseberry Souflée                                          106
  389. Raspberry Souflée                                           106
  390. Cherry Omelets                                              106
  391. Fruit Pancakes                                              106
  392. Huckleberry Pancakes                                        106
  393. Strawberry Pancakes                                         107
  394. Cherry Pancakes                                             107
  395. Pancakes with Currants and Raspberries                      108
  396. Plain German Pancakes                                       108
  397. Lemon Pancakes                                              108
  398. Peach Pancakes                                              108
  399. Apple Pancakes                                              108
  400. Apple Fritters                                              109
  401. Cherry Fritters                                             109
  402. Orange Fritters                                             109
  403. Rice Fritters                                               110
  404. Cocoanut Fritters                                           110
  405. Currant Fritters                                            110
  406. Walnut Fritters                                             110
  407. Omelette Souflée à la vanille                               111
  408. Omelette Souflée Confitures                                 111
  409. Omelette Souflée with Chocolate                             111
  410. Omelette Souflée with Cocoanut                              111
  411. Rum or Maraschino Souflée                                   111
  412. Vienna Souflée                                              112
  413. Peach Souflée                                               112
  414. Apricot Souflée                                             112
  415. Farina Souflée (Vienna art)                                 112
  416. Farina Souflée (Italian art)                                113
  417. Farina Souflée                                              113
  418. Strawberry Souflée                                          113
  419. Chestnut Souflée                                            113
  420. Beignet Souflée                                             114
  421. Potato Souflée                                              114
  422. Vanilla Koch                                                114
  423. Cream Koch (boiled)                                         115
  424. Nudel Souflée                                               115
  425. Macaroon Souflée                                            115
  426. Zwieback Koch                                               115
  427. Almond Koch with Snow Sauce                                 116
  428. Plain Koch with Strawberry Chaudeau                         116
  429. Apple Koch, No. 1                                           117
  430. Apple Koch, No. 2                                           117
  431. Apple Koch with Almonds and Raisins                         117
  432. Jelly Koch                                                  117
  433. Cream Koch                                                  118
  434. Cream Koch with Sponge Cake                                 118
  435. Almond Koch                                                 118
  436. Nudel Koch                                                  118
  437. Nudel Koch (boiled)                                         118
  438. Nut Koch, No. 1                                             119
  439. Nut Koch, No. 2                                             119
  440. Rice Koch                                                   119
  441. Vanilla Almond Koch                                         120
  442. Koch with Orange Chaudeau                                   120
  443. Orange Chaudeau                                             120
  444. Koch with Nut Cream                                         120
  445. Koch with Chocolate Beguss                                  121
  446. Beignets with Fruit                                         121
  447. Beignets with Zwieback                                      122
  448. Poor Knight (Arme Ritter)                                   122
  449. Apple Beignets                                              122
  450. Poveison                                                    122
  451. Poveison of Pineapple                                       123
  452. Beignets à la Marie-Louise                                  123
  453. Beignets de crême à la française                            123
  454. Peach Beignets                                              123
  455. Batter for Beignets                                         124
  456. Pineapple Beignets                                          124
  457. Beignets of Nudels                                          124
  458. Beignets à la polonaise                                     124
  459. Pannequets à la royale                                      125
  460. Pannequets à la vanille                                     125
  461. Pannequets meringués                                        125
  462. Plain Omelet                                                126
  463. Rum Omelet                                                  126
  464. Strawberry Omelet                                           126
  465. Huckleberry Omelet                                          127
  466. Orange Omelet                                               127
  467. Jelly Omelet                                                127
  468. Omelette à la française                                     127


CHARLOTTES.

  469. Charlotte of Apples, No. 1                                  127
  470. Charlotte of Apples, No. 2                                  128
  471. Charlotte of Peaches                                        128
  472. Charlotte of Cherries                                       128
  473. Charlotte of Currants                                       129
  474. Charlotte of Pineapple                                      129
  475. Charlotte à la polonaise                                    129
  476. Charlotte Russe, No. 1                                      130
  477. Charlotte Russe, No. 2                                      130
  478. Charlotte à la russe                                        130
  479. Charlotte à la russe with Preserved or Stewed Pears         131
  480. Snow Eggs                                                   131


RICE PUDDINGS AND DISHES MADE OF RICE FOR DESSERT.

  481. To Prepare Rice Flour                                       131
  482. Rice Beignets                                               132
  483. Rice Pears                                                  132
  484. Rice Beignets with Chocolate                                132
  485. Rice Boiled with Raisins                                    132
  486. Rice Coteletten                                             133
  487. Rice à la Creole                                            133
  488. Lemon Rice                                                  133
  489. Rice à la française                                         134
  490. Rice Cherry                                                 134
  491. Poor Man’s Rice Pudding                                     134
  492. Rice Custard Pudding                                        134
  493. Rice Pudding (minutatim)                                    135
  494. Rice Snowballs                                              135
  495. Cold Rice Flour Pudding                                     135
  496. Rice Souflée                                                136
  497. Rice Flour Pudding (colored)                                136
  498. Rose Rice Pudding                                           137
  499. Cold Rice Pudding with Almonds                              137
  500. Rice Snowballs with Apples                                  137
  501. Rice Kalte Schale with Wine                                 138
  502. Rice Radetzky                                               138
  503. Rice with Strawberries                                      138
  504. Rice with Apples                                            138
  505. Rice with Marmalade                                         139
  506. Rice Dressed with Sugar and Cinnamon                        139
  507. Fine Rice Pudding with Oranges                              139
  508. Fried Rice                                                  140
  509. Rice Pudding (baked)                                        140
  510. Boiled Rice Pudding                                         140
  511. Rice Flour Pudding                                          141
  512. Rice Flour Pudding (baked)                                  141
  513. Rice Pudding (baked)                                        142
  514. Rice Pudding with Peaches                                   142
  515. Rice Pudding à la Palerino                                  142
  516. Rice à la Malte                                             143
  517. Rice Pudding à la Wellington                                143
  518. Rice Pudding with Pineapple                                 144
  519. Rice Pudding with Apples                                    144
  520. Rice Pudding with Cherries                                  145
  521. Rice Pudding with Almonds                                   145
  522. Lemon Rice Pudding                                          145
  523. Rice Scallop                                                146
  524. Cream of Rice Flour                                         146
  525. Rice Kalte Schale with Cream                                146
  526. Rice Jelly                                                  146
  527. Apples with Rice Border                                     147
  528. Rice Cream                                                  147
  529. Rice Cream with Chocolate                                   147
  530. Rice Cream with Fruit                                       148
  531. Rice Croquettes                                             148
  532. Brioche Dough                                               148
  533. Rice Brioche                                                149
  534. Poveison with Prunes                                        149
  535. Croquettes of Nudels                                        150
  536. Apple Croquettes                                            150
  537. Nudels with Jelly                                           150
  538. Apple Scallop                                               150
  539. Nudel Scallop                                               151


COLD PUDDINGS MADE WITH MILK.

  540. Cocoanut Custard Pudding, No. 1                             151
  541. Cocoanut Custard Pudding, No. 2                             152
  542. Pudding à la Princess                                       152
  543. Cold Sponge Pudding                                         152
  544. Chocolate Pudding                                           153
  545. Sago Pudding                                                153
  546. Sago Pudding with Almonds                                   153
  547. Sago Pudding (Allemande)                                    153
  548. Sago Meringue with Apples                                   154
  549. Sago Cream                                                  154
  550. Rothe Grütze                                                154
  551. Milk Pudding                                                155
  552. Fruit Custard Pudding                                       155
  553. Macaroon Meringue                                           155
  554. Lemon Custard Pudding                                       155
  555. Cornstarch Pudding                                          156
  556. Cornstarch Meringue                                         156
  557. Armor Pudding                                               156
  558. Red Cream Pudding                                           157
  559. Floating Island                                             157
  560. Banana Float                                                157
  561. Peach Float                                                 157
  562. Lemon Custard                                               157
  563. Lemon Cream Pudding                                         158
  564. Custard Bread Pudding                                       158
  565. Custard                                                     158
  566. Apple Custard                                               159
  567. Pineapple Custard                                           159
  568. Strawberry Custard                                          159
  569. Peach Custard                                               159
  570. Chocolate Fruit Custard                                     159
  571. Fruit Custard with Cake                                     160
  572. Tutti Frutti Custard                                        160
  573. Apple Custard Pudding                                       160
  574. Peach Meringue                                              160
  575. Tipsy Parson                                                161
  576. Russian Cream Pudding                                       161
  577. Tapioca Pudding                                             161
  578. Tapioca Meringue                                            161
  579. Tapioca Pudding (economical)                                162
  580. Tapioca Pudding with Lemon Sauce                            163
  581. Tapioca Pudding with Apples                                 162
  582. Apple Tapioca Pudding                                       163
  583. Farina Custard Pudding                                      163
  584. Rose Pudding                                                163
  585. Sultana Pudding                                             163
  586. Farina Melusine with Apples                                 164
  587. Farina Beignets                                             164
  588. Farina Pudding without Eggs                                 164
  589. Farina Koch with Chocolate                                  165
  590. Farina Souflée with Almonds and Raisins                     165
  591. Farina Pudding with Almonds                                 165
  592. Fine Farina Pudding (boiled)                                165
  593. Farina Souflée                                              166
  594. Farina Mush                                                 166
  595. Farina Pudding (cold)                                       166
  596. Fine Farina Pudding with Vanilla Sauce                      167
  597. Figaro Pudding                                              167


[APPLES AND STEWED FRUITS.]

  598. Apples au beurre                                            167
  599. Apple Meringue                                              168
  600. Apples with Whipped Cream                                   168
  601. Pêches à la condé                                           168
  602. Apricots à la parisienne                                    169
  603. Pineapple Croûtes                                           169
  604. Cherry Croûtes                                              170
  605. Apples in Jelly, No. 1                                      170
  606. Apples in Jelly, No. 2                                      170
  607. Apples with Custard                                         170
  608. Apples with Currant Jelly                                   171
  609. Steamed Apples                                              171
  610. Baked Apples, No. 1                                         172
  611. Baked Apples, No. 2                                         172
  612. Baked Apples and Cocoanut                                   172
  613. Pound Sweets (baked)                                        173
  614. Pound Sweets in Syrup                                       173
  615. Apples Baked with Jelly                                     173
  616. Apple à la Neige                                            173
  617. Apple Sauce                                                 174
  618. Apple Sauce (economical)                                    174
  619. Apples Stewed with Lemons                                   174
  620. Apples Stewed Whole with Currants                           174
  621. Stewed Dried Apples                                         175
  622. Stewed Evaporated Apples                                    175
  623. Peaches Stewed Whole                                        175
  624. Stewed Dried Peaches                                        175
  625. Stewed Cherries                                             175
  626. Stewed Quinces                                              175
  627. Stewed Dried Apricots                                       176
  628. Baked Pears                                                 176
  629. Stewed Pears                                                176
  630. Stewed Dried Pears                                          176
  631. Stewed Dried Prunes                                         176
  632. Prunelles                                                   177
  633. Stewed Cranberries                                          177
  634. Stewed Huckleberries                                        177
  635. Stewed Rhubarb                                              177
  636. Stewed Rhubarb with Eggs                                    178
  637. Compote of Gooseberries                                     178
  638. Compote of Strawberries                                     178
  639. Compote of Cherries                                         178
  640. Compote of Raspberries                                      178
  641. Compote of Greengages (or large Egg Plums)                  179
  642. Compote of Plums                                            179
  643. Compote of Oranges                                          179
  644. Compote of Prunes                                           179
  645. Compote of Raisins                                          179
  646. Compote of Dates                                            180
  647. Compote de Marrons                                          180
  648. Compote Chaude de Marrons                                   180
  649. Compote of Pineapple                                        180
  650. Compote of Quinces                                          180
  651. Compote of Peaches                                          181
  652. Compote of Apricots                                         181
  653. Compote of Pears                                            181
  654. Compote de Melons                                           181
  655. Compote of Watermelon                                       182
  656. Compote of Apples                                           182
  657. Compote de Strélity                                         182


PIES.

  658. Directions for Making Pies                                  183
  659. Pie Crust, Quick and Good                                   184
  660. Rich Pie Crust                                              185
  661. Fine Pie Crust                                              185
  662. Family Pie Crust                                            186
  663. Fine Paste for Meat Pies, Patties and Baked Apple Dumplings 186
  664. Puff Paste                                                  187
  665. Short Paste (Mürber Teig), German art                       188
  666. Neapolitan Paste                                            188
  667. Florentinian Paste                                          189
  668. Almond Paste                                                189
  669. Boiled Paste (Pâté a choux)                                 189
  670. Nudels                                                      189
  671. Mince Pie                                                   190
  672. Mock Mince Pie                                              191
  673. Apple Pie, No. 1                                            191
  674. Apple Pie, No. 2                                            191
  675. Apple Pie, No. 3                                            192
  676. Apple Citron Pie                                            192
  677. Apple Meringue Pie                                          192
  678. Dried Apple Pie                                             192
  679. Tutti Frutti Pie                                            193
  680. Cherry Pie                                                  193
  681. Banana Pie                                                  194
  682. Pineapple Pie                                               194
  683. Pineapple Pie with Meringue                                 194
  684. Prune Pie                                                   195
  685. Peach Pie                                                   195
  686. Peach Meringue Pie                                          195
  687. Peach Mountain Pie                                          195
  688. Plum Pie                                                    196
  689. Cranberry Pie                                               196
  690. Gooseberry Pie                                              196
  691. Blackberry Pie                                              196
  692. Huckleberry Pie                                             196
  693. Currant Pie                                                 196
  694. Rhubarb Custard Pie                                         197
  695. Rhubarb Pie                                                 197
  696. Rhubarb Meringue Pie                                        197
  697. Sweet Potato Pie                                            197
  698. Pumpkin Pie                                                 197
  699. Custard Pie                                                 198
  700. Cocoanut Pie                                                198
  701. Lemon Cocoanut Pie                                          199
  702. Chocolate Cream Pie                                         199
  703. Vanilla Cream Pie                                           199
  704. Orange Cream Pie                                            200
  705. Lemon Cream Pie                                             200
  706. Fine Lemon Pie with an Upper Crust                          201
  707. Lemon Pie (plain)                                           201
  708. Lemon Meringue Pie                                          201
  709. D’Artois (or Pie of Marmalade)                              202
  710. Allnumettes                                                 202
  711. Jelly Tarts                                                 202
  712. Tarts                                                       203
  713. Peach Tarts                                                 203
  714. Apple Tarts                                                 203
  715. Rice Tarts                                                  203
  716. Tartelettes of Cherries                                     204
  717. Tartelettes of Peaches, etc                                 204
  718. Tartelettes d’apricots                                      204
  719. Tartelettes of Peaches, etc                                 205
  720. Tartelettes of Strawberries                                 205
  721. Fleurons of Puff Paste                                      205
  722. Fanchonnettes de crême                                      205
  723. D’Artois Meringués                                          206
  724. Condés                                                      206
  725. Small Royal Cakes                                           206
  726. Pâté à choux                                                206
  727. Chocolate Eclairs                                           207
  728. Canapes                                                     207
  729. Cannelous                                                   207
  730. Vol-au-veut (an entrée)                                     207
  731. Vol-au-veut with Strawberries and Whipped Cream             208
  732. Vol-au-veut with Currants and Raspberries                   208
  733. Vol-au-veut with Peaches and Cream                          208
  734. Neapolitan Breads                                           209
  735. Viennoises                                                  209
  736. Almond Tartelettes                                          209
  737. Puites d’amour                                              209
  738. Neapolitans                                                 210
  739. D’Artois Grilles                                            210
  740. Cream Tarts                                                 210
  741. Fine Pineapple Tarts                                        211
  742. Gooseberry Tarts                                            211
  743. Grape Tarts                                                 211
  744. Cranberry Tarts                                             211
  745. Fanchonnettes de pommes                                     211
  746. Darioles à la vanille                                       212
  747. Flau de fruits printaniers                                  212
  748. Flau de Cerises à la crême                                  213
  749. Flau de frangipane                                          213
  750. Flau de pommes à l’anglaise                                 213
  751. Flau de pommes                                              213
  752. Flau d’apricots à la crême meringue                         214
  753. Flau de pêches, No. 1                                       214
  754. Flau de pêches, No. 2                                       214


STRUDEL, STRAWBERRY SHORTCAKES, BABA, SOLEIL, BRIOCHE,
SAVARIN AND DAMPFNUDELN.

 [754a. Strudel Paste                                              215]
  755. Rice Strudel                                                216
  756. Small Rice Strudels                                         216
  757. Rice Strudel with Jelly                                     216
  758. Farina Strudel                                              217
  759. Farina Strudel with Cocoanut                                217
  760. Citron Strudel                                              217
  761. Lemon Strudel                                               217
  762. Almond Strudel                                              218
  763. Chocolate Almond Strudel                                    218
  764. Chocolate Cream Strudel                                     218
  765. Apple Strudel                                               218
  766. Cherry Strudel                                              219
  767. Plum Strudel                                                219
  768. Plain Strawberry Shortcake                                  219
  769. Strawberry Shortcake, No. 1                                 220
  770. Strawberry Shortcake, No. 2                                 220
  771. Peach Shortcake                                             220
  772. Vienna Bröselcake                                           220
  773. Brioche Cake                                                221
  774. Small Brioche                                               221
  775. Baba                                                        221
  776. Savarin Cake                                                222
  777. Soleil                                                      223
  778. Compiègne                                                   224
  779. Damp Nudels                                                 224


FRUIT DUMPLINGS.

  780. Baked Apple Dumplings, No. 1                                225
  781. Baked Apple Dumplings, No. 2                                225
  782. Baked Apple Dumplings, No. 3                                226
  783. Baked Apple Dumplings with Baking Powder                    226
  784. Apple Dumplings (bain-Marie)                                227
  785. Steamed Apple Dumplings                                     227
  786. Boiled Apple Dumplings, No. 1                               227
  787. Boiled Apple Dumplings, No. 2                               228
  788. Lemon Dumplings                                             228
  789. Orange Dumplings                                            228
  790. Fruit Dumplings                                             229
  791. Strawberry Dumplings                                        229
  792. Strawberry Dumplings (another way)                          230
  793. Fine Fruit Dumplings                                        230
  794. Plain Suet Dumplings                                        230
  795. Plain Dumplings with Stewed Apples                          231
  796. Apple Dumplings with Rice                                   231


CAKES.

  797. Plain Cake                                                  231
  798. Marble Cake                                                 232
  799. Nut Cake                                                    232
  800. Citron Cake                                                 232
  801. Lady Cake                                                   233
  802. Dutchess Cake                                               233
  803. Fruit Cake                                                  233
  804. Rich Fruit Cake                                             233
  805. Orange Layer Cake                                           234
  806. Lemon Layer Cake                                            235
  807. Chocolate Layer Cake                                        235
  808. Chocolate Cream Cake                                        236
  809. Cocoanut Layer Cake                                         236
  810. Lemon Cream Cake                                            236
  811. Vanilla Cream Cake                                          237
  812. Jelly Cake, No. 1                                           237
  813. Jelly Cake, No. 2                                           237
  814. Jelly Cake, No. 3                                           238
  815. Wine Glazed Cake                                            238
  816. Wine Glazed Cream Cake                                      238
  817. Pineapple Cake                                              239
  818. Wild Rose Cake                                              239
  819. Biscuit au beurre                                           240
  820. Fine Sponge Cake                                            241
  821. Delicate Sponge Cake                                        241
  822. Marguerites                                                 242
  823. Macaroons                                                   242
  824. Cookies                                                     242
  825. Butter Cakes                                                243
  826. Butter Cakes with Baking Powder                             243
  827. Apple Cake                                                  244
  828. Cheese Cake                                                 244
  829. Chrysanthemum Cake                                          244
  830. Snowflake Cake                                              245


ROLLS AND BREAD.

  831. Parkerhouse Rolls                                           245
  832. How to Make Bread                                           246


COFFEE.

  833. How to Make Coffee                                          246


FRUIT SALADS.

  834. Watermelon Salad                                            247
  835. How to Serve Watermelon                                     248
  836. Plum and Peach Salad                                        248
  837. Orange and Cocoanut Salad                                   248
  838. Peach and Pear Salad                                        248
  839. Peach Salad                                                 248
  840. Banana Salad                                                248
  841. Raspberry and Currant Salad                                 248
  842. How to Serve Blackberries                                   249
  843. Banana and Orange Salad                                     249
  844. Pineapple Salad                                             249
  845. Cherry Salad                                                249


SALADS.

  846. Fine Mayonaise, No. 1                                       249
  847. Mayonaise, No. 2                                            250
  848. Plain Mayonaise                                             250
  849. Sauce Tartare                                               251
  850. Mayonaise without Eggs (economical)                         251
  851. Salad Dressing without Oil, No. 1                           251
  852. Salad Dressing without Oil, No. 2                           251
  853. How to Prepare Lettuce for Salad and for Garnishing         252
  854. Lettuce Salad (plain)                                       252
  855. Lettuce Salad with Mayonaise                                252
  856. Lettuce Salad with Sweet Egg Sauce                          252
  857. Lettuce Salad with Syrup Sauce (North German art)           252
  858. Lettuce Salad with Cream Sauce (North German art)           253
  859. Lettuce Salad with Cream                                    253
  860. Beet Salad                                                  253
  861. Salad Macédoine                                             253
  862. Salad à la russe                                            254
  863. Cucumber Salad                                              254
  864. Salad de laitue romaine                                     254
  865. Salad of Oyster Plant                                       254
  866. Asparagus Salad                                             255
  867. Carrot Salad                                                255
  868. Carrot Salad with Asparagus                                 255
  869. Carrot Salad with Onions                                    255
  870. Carrot Salad with Peas                                      256
  871. Celery Root Salad                                           256
  872. White Celery Salad                                          256
  873. Cabbage Salad                                               256
  874. Salad of Red Cabbage                                        256
  875. Hot Slaw                                                    256
  876. Radish Salad                                                257
  877. White Bean Salad                                            257
  878. String Bean Salad                                           257
  879. Crab Salad                                                  258
  880. Pike Salad                                                  258
  881. Tomato and Potato Salad                                     258
  882. Tomato Salad with Lettuce                                   258
  883. Tomato Salad                                                259
  884. Tomato Salad with Mayonaise                                 259
  885. Tomato and Cucumber Salad                                   259
  886. Tomato Pepper Salad                                         259
  887. Tomato Farce (à la Mayonaise)                               260
  888. Potato Salad                                                260
  889. Potato Salad (another way)                                  260
  890. Potato Salad without Oil                                    261
  891. Potato Salad without Onions                                 261
  892. Fine Potato Salad                                           261
  893. Salad Endive                                                261
  894. Beet and Cabbage Salad                                      261
  895. Vegetable Salad                                             262
  896. Beet and Potato Salad                                       262
  897. Green Pepper Salad                                          262
  898. Tripe Salad                                                 262
  899. Herring Salad                                               263
  900. Salad à L’italienne                                         263
  901. Chicken Salad                                               263
  902. How to Boil Lobster                                         264
  903. Lobster Salad                                               264
  904. Salmon Salad                                                264
  905. Shrimp Salad                                                265
  906. How to Boil Shrimp                                          265
  907. Halibut Salad                                               265
  908. Oyster Salad                                                265
  909. Oyster and Chicken Salad                                    266
  910. Tomato Jelly                                                266
  911. Tomato Jelly Salad                                          266
  912. Egg Salad                                                   267
  913. Eggs with Mayonaise                                         267
  914. Onion Salad                                                 267
  915. Alligator Pear Salad                                        267
  916. Jerusalem Artichoke Salad                                   267
  917. Sour Jelly (Aspic)                                          268
  918. Garnishing                                                  269
  919. Horseradish for Garnishing                                  269
  920. Cocoanut for Garnishing Salads                              269


ICES AND GLAZES.

  921. How to Use Icing                                            269
  922. White Icing                                                 270
  923. Clear Icing                                                 270
  924. White Icing with Wine or Liquor                             270
  925. Almond Icing                                                271
  926. Fruit Icing                                                 271
  927. Sugar Glaze                                                 271
  928. Maraschino Glaze                                            271
  929. Orange Glaze                                                272
  930. Lemon Glaze                                                 272
  931. Coffee Glaze                                                272
  932. Wine Glaze                                                  272
  933. Boiled Cinnamon Glaze                                       272
  934. Chocolate Glaze                                             272
  935. Cinnamon Glaze                                              272
  936. Cold Sugar Glaze                                            272
  937. Boiled Chocolate Glaze                                      272
  938. Transparent Glaze                                           273
  939. Rose Glaze                                                  273
  940. Spinning Sugar                                              273
  941. Boiling Sugar                                               274


APPENDIX.

CAKES.

  Cheese Torte                                                     277
  Pistachio Torte                                                  277
  Kugelhupf or Bunt Kuchen                                         278
  Jelly Roll                                                       278
  Election Cake                                                    279
  Sponge Cake                                                      279
  Apple Ringlets                                                   279
  Baking-Powder Rolls                                              280
  Waffles                                                          280
  Gateau à la Weckesser                                            280
  Lady Cake                                                        281
  Denmark Cake                                                     281
  Stullen with Baking Powder                                       281
  Wine Baba                                                        281
  Bunt Kuchen with Baking Powder                                   282
  Emelines                                                         282
  Sand Wafers                                                      282
  Cream S.                                                         283
  Aniseed Wafers                                                   283
  Cinnamon Sticks                                                  283
  Meringue Shells                                                  283
  Kisses                                                           283
  Banana Cake                                                      284
  Neapolitan Cake                                                  284
  One-Egg Cake                                                     285
  Spice Cake                                                       285
  Molasses Cake                                                    285
  Gingerbread                                                      286
  Ginger Snaps                                                     286
  Corn Bread                                                       286


FROZEN DESSERTS.

  Mignon Cream                                                     286
  Malborn Cream                                                    286
  Banana Ice Cream                                                 287
  Frozen Caramel Cream                                             287
  Ice Cream without Milk or Cream                                  287
  Lemon Sherbet                                                    287
  Strawberry Sherbet                                               287
  Coffee Frappe                                                    287
  Coffee Sorbet                                                    287


CUSTARD.

  Caramel Custard                                                  288
  Cocoanut Caramel                                                 288
  Caramel Charlotte                                                288
  Strawberry Charlotte                                             289


SAUCES.

  Bismarck Sauce                                                   289
  Transparent Sauce                                                289
  Orange Sauce                                                     289
  Cream Sauce                                                      289
  Fruit Sauce                                                      290
  Raspberry Sauce                                                  290
  Cream Cakes Glassé                                               290


WAR RECIPES

  Apricot Whip                                                     292
  Bran Muffins                                                     293
  Checkerboard Sandwiches                                          294
  Cheese Balls                                                     294
  Coffee Parfait                                                   292
  Domino Sandwiches                                                294
  Dorothy Royal                                                    292
  Economical Jelly Roll                                            291
  Filling                                                          291
  Fruit Sandwich                                                   294
  Grape Fruit Salad                                                295
  Green Pepper farcis fromage a la Cream                           295
  Horn of Plenty Salad                                             294
  Millionaire Cake                                                 291
  Minced Ham Sandwiches                                            294
  Oatmeal Cookies                                                  293
  Peach a la Melba                                                 292
  Pear farcis fromage a la Rocquefort                              295
  Praline Cream                                                    292
  Probasco Cream                                                   291
  Prune Soufflé                                                    292
  Prune Whip                                                       293
  Russian Dressing                                                 295
  Toasted Cheese Roll                                              294
  Vienna Pancakes                                                  293
  Waldorf Salad                                                    295
  War Bread                                                        293




ALPHABETICAL INDEX (added by transcriber)

Numbers are recipe numbers. Recipes in the Appendix are unnumbered.


  Alligator Pear Salad                                             915
  Allnumettes                                                      710
  Almond Blanc-Mange                                               170
  Almond Cream                                                     142
  Almond Icing                                                     925
  Almond Koch                                                      435
  Almond Koch with Snow Sauce                                      427
  Almond Paste                                                     668
  Almond Pudding                                                   343
  Almond Sauce                                                      50
  Almond Souflée                                                   375
  Almond Sponge Pudding                                            334
  Almond Strudel                                                   762
  Almond Tartelettes                                               736
  Aniseed Wafers                                                 _App._
  Apple à la Neige                                                 616
  Apple Beignets                                                   449
  Apple Bread Pudding (German art)                                 367
  Apple Cake                                                       827
  Apple Citron Pie                                                 676
  Apple Croquettes                                                 536
  Apple Custard                                                    566
  Apple Custard Pudding                                            573
  Apple Dumplings (bain-Marie)                                     784
  Apple Dumplings with Rice                                        796
  Apple Fritters                                                   400
  Apple Jelly                                                      160
  Apple Jelly Pudding                                              196
  Apple Koch with Almonds and Raisins                              431
  Apple Koch, No. 1                                                429
  Apple Koch, No. 2                                                430
  Apple Meringue                                                   599
  Apple Meringue Pie                                               677
  Apple Pancakes                                                   399
  Apple Pie, No. 1                                                 673
  Apple Pie, No. 2                                                 674
  Apple Pie, No. 3                                                 675
  Apple Pudding (German art)                                       364
  Apple Pudding (baked)                                            332
  Apple Pudding (boiled)                                           366
  Apple Pudding à l’allemande                                      370
  Apple Pudding with Almonds                                       352
  Apple Rice Pudding (German art)                                  369
  Apple Ringlets                                                 _App._
  Apple Sauce                                                      617
  Apple Sauce (economical)                                         618
  Apple Scallop                                                    538
  Apple Souflée, No. 1                                             381
  Apple Souflée, No. 2                                             382
  Apple Souflée, No. 3                                             383
  Apple Souflée, No. 4                                             384
  Apple Strudel                                                    765
  Apple Tapioca Pudding                                            582
  Apple Tarts                                                      714
  Apples Baked with Jelly                                          615
  Apples Stewed Whole with Currants                                620
  Apples Stewed with Lemons                                        619
  Apples au beurre                                                 598
  Apples in Jelly, No. 1                                           605
  Apples in Jelly, No. 2                                           606
  Apples with Currant Jelly                                        608
  Apples with Custard                                              607
  Apples with Rice Border                                          527
  Apples with Whipped Cream                                        600
  Apricot Souflée                                                  414
  Apricot Syrup                                                     81
  Apricot Whip                                                   _App._
  Apricots à la parisienne                                         602
  Armor Pudding                                                    557
  Arrack Sauce (Allemande)                                          13
  Arrack Sauce (English)                                            14
  Asparagus Salad                                                  866
  Baba                                                             775
  Baked Apple Dumplings with Baking Powder                         783
  Baked Apple Dumplings, No. 1                                     780
  Baked Apple Dumplings, No. 2                                     781
  Baked Apple Dumplings, No. 3                                     782
  Baked Apples and Cocoanut                                        612
  Baked Apples, No. 1                                              610
  Baked Apples, No. 2                                              611
  Baked Pears                                                      628
  Baking-Powder Rolls                                            _App._
  Banana Cake                                                    _App._
  Banana Float                                                     560
  Banana Ice Cream                                               _App._
  Banana Pie                                                       681
  Banana Salad                                                     840
  Banana and Orange Salad                                          843
  Batter Fruit Pudding                                             315
  Batter for Beignets                                              455
  Bavarois                                                         192
  Beet Salad                                                       860
  Beet and Cabbage Salad                                           894
  Beet and Potato Salad                                            896
  Beignet Souflée                                                  420
  Beignets de crême à la française                                 453
  Beignets of Nudels                                               457
  Beignets with Fruit                                              446
  Beignets with Zwieback                                           447
  Beignets à la Marie-Louise                                       452
  Beignets à la polonaise                                          458
  Bird’s Nest Pudding                                              357
  Biscuit Pudding                                                  311
  Biscuit au beurre                                                819
  Bishop Essence                                                    96
  Bishop Sauce                                                       5
  Bismarck Sauce                                                 _App._
  Bitter Almond Essence                                             99
  Blackberries, How to Serve                                       842
  Blackberry Pie                                                   691
  Blackberry Pudding                                               325
  Blackberry Syrup                                                  79
  Blanc-mange marbre au chocolat                                   172
  Boiled Apple Dumplings, No. 1                                    786
  Boiled Apple Dumplings, No. 2                                    787
  Boiled Bread Pudding                                             344
  Boiled Chocolate Glaze                                           937
  Boiled Cinnamon Glaze                                            933
  Boiled Paste (Pâté a choux)                                      669
  Boiled Rice Pudding                                              510
  Boiling Sugar                                                    941
  Bombe à la Altenberg                                             239
  Bombe à la parisienne                                            240
  Bran Muffins                                                   _App._
  Brandy Sauce (American), No. 1                                    16
  Brandy Sauce with Milk (“English Style”)                          15
  Brandy Sauce, No. 2                                               17
  Bread Crumbs                                                     307
  Bread Fruit Pudding                                              359
  Bread Pudding (boiled)                                           358
  Bread Pudding with Apples                                        368
  Bread Sponge Pudding                                             360
  Bread, How to Make                                               832
  Brioche Cake                                                     773
  Brioche Dough                                                    532
  Bunt Kuchen with Baking Powder                                 _App._
  Butter Cakes                                                     825
  Butter Cakes with Baking Powder                                  826
  Butter Sauce                                                       8
  Cabbage Salad                                                    873
  Cabinet Pudding                                                  346
  Calvesfoot Jelly                                                 165
  Canapes                                                          728
  Cannelous                                                        729
  Caramel Charlotte                                              _App._
  Caramel Custard                                                _App._
  Caramel Ice Cream                                                272
  Caramel Sauce                                                     60
  Carrot Salad                                                     867
  Carrot Salad with Asparagus                                      868
  Carrot Salad with Onions                                         869
  Carrot Salad with Peas                                           870
  Celery Essence                                                   101
  Celery Root Salad                                                871
  Champagne Jelly                                                  159
  Champagne Sorbet                                                 295
  Charlotte Russe, No. 1                                           476
  Charlotte Russe, No. 2                                           477
  Charlotte of Apples, No. 1                                       469
  Charlotte of Apples, No. 2                                       470
  Charlotte of Cherries                                            472
  Charlotte of Currants                                            473
  Charlotte of Peaches                                             471
  Charlotte of Pineapple                                           474
  Charlotte à la polonaise                                         475
  Charlotte à la russe                                             478
  Charlotte à la russe with Preserved or Stewed Pears              479
  Checkerboard Sandwiches                                        _App._
  Cheese Balls                                                   _App._
  Cheese Cake                                                      828
  Cheese Torte                                                   _App._
  Cherry Batter Pudding                                            322
  Cherry Croûtes                                                   604
  Cherry Fritters                                                  401
  Cherry Omelets                                                   390
  Cherry Pancakes                                                  394
  Cherry Pie                                                       680
  Cherry Pudding of Preserved Cherries                             321
  Cherry Salad                                                     845
  Cherry Souflée                                                   387
  Cherry Strudel                                                   766
  Cherry Suet Pudding                                              326
  Cherry Syrup                                                      82
  Chestnut Pudding à la dauphine                                   209
  Chestnut Souflée                                                 419
  Chicken Salad                                                    901
  Chocolate Almond Strudel                                         763
  Chocolate Blanc-Mange                                            171
  Chocolate Cream                                                  140
  Chocolate Cream Cake                                             808
  Chocolate Cream Pie                                              702
  Chocolate Cream Sauce                                             52
  Chocolate Cream Strudel                                          764
  Chocolate Eclairs                                                727
  Chocolate Fruit Custard                                          570
  Chocolate Glaze                                                  934
  Chocolate Ice Cream Pudding                                      238
  Chocolate Layer Cake                                             807
  Chocolate Plombière                                              223
  Chocolate Pudding                                                351
  Chocolate Pudding                                                544
  Chocolate Pudding à la Hollandaise                               211
  Chocolate Sauce                                                   51
  Chocolate Souflée                                                379
  Chrysanthemum Cake                                               829
  Cider Jelly                                                      161
  Cinnamon Glaze                                                   935
  Cinnamon Sticks                                                _App._
  Citron Cake                                                      800
  Citron Strudel                                                   760
  Claret Sauce                                                       4
  Clear Icing                                                      923
  Cocoanut Blanc-Mange                                             175
  Cocoanut Caramel                                               _App._
  Cocoanut Custard Pudding, No. 1                                  540
  Cocoanut Custard Pudding, No. 2                                  541
  Cocoanut Fritters                                                404
  Cocoanut Layer Cake                                              809
  Cocoanut Pie                                                     700
  Cocoanut Sauce (another way)                                      69
  Cocoanut Snow Sauce                                               68
  Cocoanut for Garnishing Salads                                   920
  Coffee Cream                                                     143
  Coffee Cream Sauce                                                61
  Coffee Essence                                                   100
  Coffee Frappe                                                  _App._
  Coffee Glaze                                                     931
  Coffee Ice Cream, No. 1                                          274
  Coffee Ice Cream, No. 2                                          275
  Coffee Parfait                                                 _App._
  Coffee Sorbet                                                  _App._
  Coffee, How to Make                                              833
  Cold Apple Pudding                                               203
  Cold Pineapple Sauce                                              72
  Cold Rice Flour Pudding                                          495
  Cold Rice Pudding with Almonds                                   499
  Cold Sponge Pudding                                              543
  Cold Sugar Glaze                                                 936
  Cold Sugar Syrup for Fruit Ice                                   286
  Compiègne                                                        778
  Compote Chaude de Marrons                                        648
  Compote de Marrons                                               647
  Compote de Melons                                                654
  Compote de Strélity                                              657
  Compote of Apples                                                656
  Compote of Apricots                                              652
  Compote of Cherries                                              639
  Compote of Dates                                                 646
  Compote of Gooseberries                                          637
  Compote of Greengages (or large Egg Plums)                       641
  Compote of Oranges                                               643
  Compote of Peaches                                               651
  Compote of Pears                                                 653
  Compote of Pineapple                                             649
  Compote of Plums                                                 642
  Compote of Prunes                                                644
  Compote of Quinces                                               650
  Compote of Raisins                                               645
  Compote of Raspberries                                           640
  Compote of Strawberries                                          638
  Compote of Watermelon                                            655
  Condés                                                           724
  Cookies                                                          824
  Corn Bread                                                     _App._
  Cornstarch Meringue                                              556
  Cornstarch Pudding                                               555
  Cottage Apple Pudding                                            314
  Cottage Pudding (baked)                                          312
  Cottage Pudding (boiled)                                         313
  Crab Salad                                                       879
  Cranberry Pie                                                    689
  Cranberry Tarts                                                  744
  Cream Blanc-Mange                                                173
  Cream Cakes Glassé                                             _App._
  Cream Koch                                                       433
  Cream Koch (boiled)                                              423
  Cream Koch with Sponge Cake                                      434
  Cream S.                                                       _App._
  Cream Sauce                                                    _App._
  Cream Sauce (plain)                                               57
  Cream Sauce with Jelly, No. 1                                     41
  Cream Sauce with Jelly, No. 2                                     42
  Cream Syrup                                                       87
  Cream Tarts                                                      740
  Cream of Rice Flour                                              524
  Cream with Pineapple                                             133
  Crême au bain-Marie au caramel                                   123
  Crême au bain-Marie au chocolat                                  124
  Crême fouettée à la Cobby                                        136
  Crême française au Café                                          118
  Crême française au Marasquin                                     120
  Crême française au Thé                                           119
  Crême française au chocolat                                      116
  Crême française au rhum                                          121
  Crême française aux amandes                                      117
  Crême française à la vanille                                     115
  Crême Frangipane à la vanille                                    144
  Croquettes of Nudels                                             535
  Cucumber Salad                                                   863
  Currant Fritters                                                 405
  Currant Pie                                                      693
  Custard                                                          565
  Custard Bread Pudding                                            564
  Custard Ice Cream                                                267
  Custard Pie                                                      699
  Damp Nudels                                                      779
  Darioles à la vanille                                            746
  Delicate Sponge Cake                                             821
  Denmark Cake                                                   _App._
  Domino Sandwiches                                              _App._
  Dorothy Royal                                                  _App._
  Dried Apple Pie                                                  678
  Dutchess Cake                                                    802
  D’Artois (or Pie of Marmalade)                                   709
  D’Artois Grilles                                                 739
  D’Artois Meringués                                               723
  Economical Jelly Roll                                          _App._
  Egg Salad                                                        912
  Eggs with Mayonaise                                              913
  Election Cake                                                  _App._
  Emelines                                                       _App._
  English Apple Pudding                                            365
  English Plum Pudding                                             310
  Essence of Lemon                                                  94
  Essence of Oranges                                                97
  Essence of Vanilla                                                95
  Family Pie Crust                                                 662
  Fanchonnettes de crême                                           722
  Fanchonnettes de pommes                                          745
  Farina Beignets                                                  587
  Farina Custard Pudding                                           583
  Farina Koch with Chocolate                                       589
  Farina Melusine with Apples                                      586
  Farina Mush                                                      594
  Farina Pudding (cold)                                            595
  Farina Pudding with Almonds                                      591
  Farina Pudding without Eggs                                      588
  Farina Souflée                                                   417
  Farina Souflée                                                   593
  Farina Souflée (Italian art)                                     416
  Farina Souflée (Vienna art)                                      415
  Farina Souflée with Almonds and Raisins                          590
  Farina Strudel                                                   758
  Farina Strudel with Cocoanut                                     759
  Fig Pudding                                                      331
  Figaro Pudding                                                   597
  Filling                                                        _App._
  Fine Cherry Pudding                                              320
  Fine Chocolate Ice Cream                                         279
  Fine Chocolate Pudding                                           200
  Fine Claret Pudding                                              201
  Fine Farina Pudding (boiled)                                     592
  Fine Farina Pudding with Vanilla Sauce                           596
  Fine Fruit Dumplings                                             793
  Fine Lemon Pie with an Upper Crust                               706
  Fine Mayonaise, No. 1                                            846
  Fine Paste for Meat Pies, Patties and Baked Apple Dumplings      663
  Fine Pie Crust                                                   661
  Fine Pineapple Tarts                                             741
  Fine Potato Salad                                                892
  Fine Rice Pudding with Oranges                                   507
  Fine Sponge Cake                                                 820
  Fine Vanilla Ice Cream                                           266
  Flau de Cerises à la crême                                       748
  Flau de frangipane                                               749
  Flau de fruits printaniers                                       747
  Flau de pommes                                                   751
  Flau de pommes à l’anglaise                                      750
  Flau de pêches, No. 1                                            753
  Flau de pêches, No. 2                                            754
  Flau d’apricots à la crême meringue                              752
  Fleurons of Puff Paste                                           721
  Floating Island                                                  559
  Florentinian Paste                                               667
  Fried Rice                                                       508
  Fromage Bavarois Cardinal                                        191
  Fromage bavarois au Café                                         182
  Fromage bavarois au Thé                                          183
  Fromage bavarois au chocolat                                     184
  Fromage bavarois au pain noir                                    193
  Fromage bavarois aux amandes                                     181
  Fromage bavarois aux pistache                                    180
  Fromage bavarois à la vanille, No. 1                             178
  Fromage bavarois à la vanille, No. 2                             179
  Frozen Apple Pudding                                             250
  Frozen Caramel Cream                                           _App._
  Frozen Chestnut Pudding                                          249
  Frozen Pudding à la Richelieu                                    248
  Frozen Puddings à la Montmorency                                 244
  Frozen Strawberry Pudding                                        234
  Fruit Cake                                                       803
  Fruit Custard Pudding                                            552
  Fruit Custard with Cake                                          571
  Fruit Dumplings                                                  790
  Fruit Ice                                                        285
  Fruit Ice Cream                                                  284
  Fruit Icing                                                      926
  Fruit Juice, To Clarify                                          148
  Fruit Pancakes                                                   391
  Fruit Sandwich                                                 _App._
  Fruit Sauce                                                    _App._
  Fruit Sauce (not boiled)                                          37
  Garnishing                                                       918
  Gateau à la Weckesser                                          _App._
  Gelatine, To Clarify                                             146
  Gelée russe                                                      163
  Gelée à la moscovite                                             167
  Ginger Snaps                                                   _App._
  Gingerbread                                                    _App._
  Gooseberry Pie                                                   690
  Gooseberry Souflée                                               388
  Gooseberry Tarts                                                 742
  Graham Flour Pudding                                             341
  Grape Fruit Salad                                              _App._
  Grape Tarts                                                      743
  Green Pepper Salad                                               897
  Green Pepper farcis fromage a la Cream                         _App._
  Green Sugar                                                      114
  Halibut Salad                                                    907
  Hanoverian Pudding                                               361
  Hard Sauce                                                        23
  Hard Sauce with Cherries                                          24
  Hard Sauce with Nuts                                              35
  Herring Salad                                                    899
  Horn of Plenty Salad                                           _App._
  Horseradish for Garnishing                                       919
  Hot Slaw                                                         875
  Huckleberry Omelet                                               465
  Huckleberry Pancakes                                             392
  Huckleberry Pie                                                  692
  Huckleberry Pudding (German style)                               362
  Huckleberry Sauce                                                 32
  Ice Cream, Directions for Making                                 264
  Ice Cream (large quantity)                                       265
  Ice Cream without Milk or Cream                                _App._
  Ice Cream without a Freezer, How to Make                         281
  Ice Cream, Simple                                                276
  Ice Pudding with Almonds                                         243
  Ice Pudding with Pumpernickel                                    242
  Ice Pudding à la Prince Pückler                                  237
  Iced Coffee                                                      306
  Iced Tea                                                         305
  Icing, How to Use                                                921
  Imperial Pudding                                                 215
  Indian Pudding (baked)                                           340
  Indian Pudding (boiled)                                          339
  Ipsilanti Pudding                                                319
  Italian Meringue                                                 107
  Jellies                                                          145
  Jelly Bag                                                        149
  Jelly Cake, No. 1                                                812
  Jelly Cake, No. 2                                                813
  Jelly Cake, No. 3                                                814
  Jelly Koch                                                       432
  Jelly Omelet                                                     467
  Jelly Roll                                                     _App._
  Jelly Tarts                                                      711
  Jelly of Peaches                                                 155
  Jerusalem Artichoke Salad                                        916
  Kisses                                                         _App._
  Koch with Chocolate Beguss                                       445
  Koch with Nut Cream                                              444
  Koch with Orange Chaudeau                                        442
  Kugelhupf or Bunt Kuchen                                       _App._
  Lady Cake                                                        801
  Lady Cake                                                      _App._
  Layer Pudding (German style)                                     317
  Lemon Cocoanut Pie                                               701
  Lemon Cream Cake                                                 810
  Lemon Cream Pie                                                  705
  Lemon Cream Pudding                                              563
  Lemon Cream Sauce                                                 49
  Lemon Custard                                                    562
  Lemon Custard Pudding                                            554
  Lemon Custard Sauce                                               44
  Lemon Dumplings                                                  788
  Lemon Fromage                                                    185
  Lemon Glaze                                                      930
  Lemon Ice                                                        293
  Lemon Jelly                                                      152
  Lemon Layer Cake                                                 806
  Lemon Meringue Pie                                               708
  Lemon Pancakes                                                   397
  Lemon Pie (plain)                                                707
  Lemon Pudding (baked)                                            347
  Lemon Rice                                                       488
  Lemon Rice Pudding                                               522
  Lemon Sauce with Liquor                                           45
  Lemon Sauce, No. 1                                                43
  Lemon Sauce, No. 2                                                48
  Lemon Sherbet                                                  _App._
  Lemon Souflée                                                    376
  Lemon Strudel                                                    761
  Lemon Sugar                                                      111
  Lemon Syrup                                                       88
  Lemon Syrup (another way)                                         90
  Lemon Syrup (plain)                                               91
  Lemon Syrup with Oil of Lemon                                     89
  Lettuce Salad (plain)                                            854
  Lettuce Salad with Cream                                         859
  Lettuce Salad with Cream Sauce (North German art)                858
  Lettuce Salad with Mayonaise                                     855
  Lettuce Salad with Sweet Egg Sauce                               856
  Lettuce Salad with Syrup Sauce (North German art)                857
  Lettuce for Salad and for Garnishing, How to Prepare             853
  Lobster Salad                                                    903
  Lobster, How to Boil                                             902
  Macaroon Meringue                                                553
  Macaroon Souflée                                                 380
  Macaroon Souflée                                                 425
  Macaroons                                                        823
  Macédoine de fruit à la russe                                    164
  Macédoine de fruits au vin du Rhine                              166
  Madeira Pudding                                                  342
  Madeira Sauce, No. 1                                               6
  Madeira Sauce, No. 2                                               7
  Malborn Cream                                                  _App._
  Manilla Pudding                                                  198
  Maraschino Glaze                                                 928
  Maraschino Ice Cream                                             271
  Maraschino Pudding                                               197
  Marble Cake                                                      798
  Marguerites                                                      822
  Marrow Pudding                                                   330
  Mayonaise without Eggs (economical)                              850
  Mayonaise, No. 2                                                 847
  Melon Ice                                                        291
  Meringue Shells                                                _App._
  Mignon Cream                                                   _App._
  Milk Cream                                                       127
  Milk Pudding                                                     551
  Millionaire Cake                                               _App._
  Mince Pie                                                        671
  Minced Ham Sandwiches                                          _App._
  Mock Mince Pie                                                   672
  Molasses Cake                                                  _App._
  Mousse à L’ananas                                                251
  Mousse à L’orange                                                253
  Mousse à la vanille                                              252
  Mousse au chocolat                                               254
  Mousse au maraskino                                              255
  Neapolitan Blanc-Mange                                           176
  Neapolitan Breads                                                734
  Neapolitan Cake                                                _App._
  Neapolitan Paste                                                 666
  Neapolitans                                                      738
  Nest with Eggs                                                   177
  Nudel Koch                                                       436
  Nudel Koch (boiled)                                              437
  Nudel Pudding                                                    353
  Nudel Scallop                                                    539
  Nudel Souflée                                                    424
  Nudels                                                           670
  Nudels with Jelly                                                537
  Nut Cake                                                         799
  Nut Ice Cream                                                    278
  Nut Koch, No. 1                                                  438
  Nut Koch, No. 2                                                  439
  Nut Pudding                                                      335
  Nut Sauce                                                         34
  Nutmeg Sauce                                                      62
  Oatmeal Cookies                                                _App._
  Old-Fashioned Apple Pudding                                      371
  Omelette Souflée Confitures                                      408
  Omelette Souflée with Chocolate                                  409
  Omelette Souflée with Cocoanut                                   410
  Omelette Souflée à la vanille                                    407
  Omelette à la française                                          468
  One-Egg Cake                                                   _App._
  Onion Salad                                                      914
  Orange Baskets with Jelly                                        168
  Orange Blossom Extract                                           105
  Orange Chaudeau                                                  443
  Orange Cream                                                     141
  Orange Cream Pie                                                 704
  Orange Cream Sauce                                                63
  Orange Dumplings                                                 789
  Orange Flower Syrup                                               93
  Orange Fritters                                                  402
  Orange Fromage                                                   186
  Orange Glaze                                                     929
  Orange Granite                                                   298
  Orange Ice                                                       292
  Orange Jelly                                                     150
  Orange Layer Cake                                                805
  Orange Omelet                                                    466
  Orange Peel Extract                                              106
  Orange Plombière                                                 224
  Orange Pudding à la maltaise                                     207
  Orange Quarters Used for Garnishing Jellies and Other Dishes     169
  Orange Sauce                                                   _App._
  Orange Souflée                                                   378
  Orange Syrup                                                      92
  Orange and Cocoanut Salad                                        837
  Orgeat of Almond Milk                                            303
  Oyster Salad                                                     908
  Oyster and Chicken Salad                                         909
  Pain à la Victoria                                               260
  Pain de pommes à la condé                                        263
  Pain de pêches                                                   259
  Pain de pêches à la Richelieu                                    261
  Pain de pêches à la condé                                        262
  Pain d’ananas                                                    257
  Pain d’ananas à la parisienne                                    258
  Pain of Strawberries                                             256
  Pancakes with Currants and Raspberries                           395
  Pannequets meringués                                             461
  Pannequets à la royale                                           459
  Pannequets à la vanille                                          460
  Parkerhouse Rolls                                                831
  Pâté à choux                                                     726
  Peach Beignets                                                   454
  Peach Custard                                                    569
  Peach Essence                                                     98
  Peach Float                                                      561
  Peach Fromage                                                    188
  Peach Ice                                                        290
  Peach Meringue                                                   574
  Peach Meringue Pie                                               686
  Peach Mountain Pie                                               687
  Peach Pancakes                                                   398
  Peach Pie                                                        685
  Peach Plombière                                                  230
  Peach Pudding with Champagne                                     205
  Peach Salad                                                      839
  Peach Sauce, No. 1                                                38
  Peach Sauce, No. 2                                                39
  Peach Shortcake                                                  771
  Peach Souflée                                                    413
  Peach Syrup                                                       80
  Peach Tarts                                                      713
  Peach a la Melba                                               _App._
  Peach and Pear Salad                                             838
  Peaches Stewed Whole                                             623
  Pear Timbale                                                     220
  Pear farcis fromage a la Rocquefort                            _App._
  Pêches à la condé                                                601
  Petits pots crême à la vanille                                   122
  Pies, Directions for Making                                      658
  Pie Crust, Quick and Good                                        659
  Pike Salad                                                       880
  Pineapple Beignets                                               456
  Pineapple Cake                                                   817
  Pineapple Chaudeau Sauce                                          66
  Pineapple Cream for Bombe à la parisienne                        241
  Pineapple Croûtes                                                603
  Pineapple Custard                                                567
  Pineapple Fromage                                                187
  Pineapple Ice                                                    288
  Pineapple Jelly                                                  154
  Pineapple Pie                                                    682
  Pineapple Pie with Meringue                                      683
  Pineapple Plombière                                              233
  Pineapple Pudding or Souflée                                     333
  Pineapple Pudding à la royale                                    206
  Pineapple Salad                                                  844
  Pineapple Sorbet                                                 296
  Pineapple Souflée                                                385
  Pineapple Syrup                                                   74
  Pistache Plombière                                               227
  Pistachio Ice Cream                                              270
  Pistachio Sauce                                                   71
  Pistachio Torte                                                _App._
  Plain Blanc-Mange                                                174
  Plain Bread Pudding (baked), No. 2                               356
  Plain Bread Pudding, No. 1                                       355
  Plain Cake                                                       797
  Plain Chocolate Ice Cream                                        277
  Plain Dumplings with Stewed Apples                               795
  Plain German Flour Pudding                                       337
  Plain German Pancakes                                            396
  Plain Ice Cream                                                  268
  Plain Ice Cream (another way)                                    269
  Plain Koch with Strawberry Chaudeau                              428
  Plain Mayonaise                                                  848
  Plain Meringue                                                   108
  Plain Omelet                                                     462
  Plain Orange Jelly                                               151
  Plain Souflée                                                    374
  Plain Strawberry Shortcake                                       768
  Plain Suet Dumplings                                             794
  Plain Suet Pudding                                               323
  Plain or Sugar Syrup                                              73
  Plombière aux Café                                               228
  Plombière of Maraschino Curaçoa                                  226
  Plum Pie                                                         688
  Plum Pudding                                                     309
  Plum Strudel                                                     767
  Plum and Peach Salad                                             836
  Poor Knight (Arme Ritter)                                        448
  Poor Man’s Rice Pudding                                          491
  Portugal Pudding                                                 318
  Potato Pudding                                                   354
  Potato Salad                                                     888
  Potato Salad (another way)                                       889
  Potato Salad without Oil                                         890
  Potato Salad without Onions                                      891
  Potato Souflée                                                   421
  Pound Sweets (baked)                                             613
  Pound Sweets in Syrup                                            614
  Poveison                                                         450
  Poveison of Pineapple                                            451
  Poveison with Prunes                                             534
  Praline Cream                                                  _App._
  Prince Regent Pudding                                            316
  Probasco Cream                                                 _App._
  Prune Pie                                                        684
  Prune Soufflé                                                  _App._
  Prune Whip                                                     _App._
  Prunelles                                                        632
  Pudding à L’allemande                                            213
  Pudding à la Duchesse de Berry                                   246
  Pudding à la Girot                                               210
  Pudding à la Princess                                            542
  Pudding à la polonaise                                           204
  Pudding à la Pückler-Muskau                                      236
  Pudding à la reine                                               212
  Pudding Form, How to Prepare a                                   308
  Pudding Glacé à la Metternich                                    245
  Pudding Glacé à la allemande                                     247
  Pudding de Savoie à L’orange                                     208
  Puff Paste                                                       664
  Puites d’amour                                                   737
  Pumpernickel Pudding                                             349
  Pumpkin Pie                                                      698
  Punch Sauce                                                       18
  Queen of Puddings with Strawberries, The                         338
  Radish Salad                                                     876
  Raspberry Chaudeau Sauce                                          67
  Raspberry Essence                                                103
  Raspberry Jelly                                                  156
  Raspberry Sauce                                                _App._
  Raspberry Sauce, No. 1                                            30
  Raspberry Sauce, No. 2                                            31
  Raspberry Souflée                                                389
  Raspberry Syrup                                                   75a
  Raspberry Syrup without Boiling                                   78
  Raspberry Syrup without Fruit                                     77
  Raspberry and Currant Salad                                      841
  Raspberry and Currant Syrup                                       76
  Red Cream Pudding                                                558
  Red Sugar                                                        113
  Rhine Wine Jelly                                                 158
  Rhubarb Custard Pie                                              694
  Rhubarb Meringue Pie                                             696
  Rhubarb Pie                                                      695
  Rhubarb Souflée                                                  386
  Rice à la Creole                                                 487
  Rice à la française                                              489
  Rice à la Malte                                                  516
  Rice Beignets                                                    482
  Rice Beignets with Chocolate                                     484
  Rice Boiled with Raisins                                         485
  Rice Brioche                                                     533
  Rice Cherry                                                      490
  Rice Coteletten                                                  486
  Rice Cream                                                       528
  Rice Cream with Chocolate                                        529
  Rice Cream with Fruit                                            530
  Rice Croquettes                                                  531
  Rice Custard Pudding                                             492
  Rice Dressed with Sugar and Cinnamon                             506
  Rice Flour, To Prepare                                           481
  Rice Flour Pudding                                               511
  Rice Flour Pudding (baked)                                       512
  Rice Flour Pudding (colored)                                     497
  Rice Fritters                                                    403
  Rice Jelly                                                       526
  Rice Kalte Schale with Cream                                     525
  Rice Kalte Schale with Wine                                      501
  Rice Koch                                                        440
  Rice Pears                                                       483
  Rice Pudding (baked)                                             509
  Rice Pudding (baked)                                             513
  Rice Pudding (minutatim)                                         493
  Rice Pudding with Almonds                                        521
  Rice Pudding with Apples                                         519
  Rice Pudding with Cherries                                       520
  Rice Pudding with Peaches                                        514
  Rice Pudding with Pineapple                                      518
  Rice Pudding à la Palerino                                       515
  Rice Pudding à la Wellington                                     517
  Rice Radetzky                                                    502
  Rice Scallop                                                     523
  Rice Snowballs                                                   494
  Rice Snowballs with Apples                                       500
  Rice Souflée                                                     496
  Rice Strudel                                                     755
  Rice Strudel with Jelly                                          757
  Rice Tarts                                                       715
  Rice with Apples                                                 504
  Rice with Marmalade                                              505
  Rice with Strawberries                                           503
  Rich Fruit Cake                                                  804
  Rich Ice Cream Pudding                                           235
  Rich Pie Crust                                                   660
  Roly-Poly                                                        372
  Roly-Poly Tutti Frutti                                           373
  Rose Essence                                                     104
  Rose Glaze                                                       939
  Rose Jelly                                                       162
  Rose Pudding                                                     584
  Rose Rice Pudding                                                498
  Rothe Grütze                                                     550
  Rum Bavarois                                                     190
  Rum Omelet                                                       463
  Rum Plombière                                                    225
  Rum Pudding                                                      199
  Rum Sauce                                                         19
  Rum or Maraschino Souflée                                        411
  Russian Cream                                                    128
  Russian Cream Pudding                                            576
  Russian Dressing                                               _App._
  Rye Bread Pudding                                                363
  Sabayon Sauce                                                     64
  Sabayon of Lemon                                                 130
  Sabayon of Oranges                                               129
  Sago Cream                                                       549
  Sago Meringue with Apples                                        548
  Sago Pudding                                                     545
  Sago Pudding (Allemande)                                         547
  Sago Pudding with Almonds                                        546
  Salad à L’italienne                                              900
  Salad à la russe                                                 862
  Salad Dressing without Oil, No. 1                                851
  Salad Dressing without Oil, No. 2                                852
  Salad Endive                                                     893
  Salad Macédoine                                                  861
  Salad de laitue romaine                                          864
  Salad of Oyster Plant                                            865
  Salad of Red Cabbage                                             874
  Salmon Salad                                                     904
  Sand Wafers                                                    _App._
  Sauce à la Cream (sweet)                                          55
  Sauce à la Diaz                                                   20
  Sauce à l’Orange                                                  46
  Sauce au Kirsch                                                   47
  Sauce of Apricots                                                 26
  Sauce of Cherries, No. 1                                          27
  Sauce of Cherries, No. 2                                          28
  Sauce of Currants and Raspberries                                 40
  Sauce of Dried Cherries                                           33
  Sauce Tartare                                                    849
  Savarin Cake                                                     776
  Sherry Wine Sauce, No. 1                                           9
  Sherry Wine Sauce, No. 2                                          10
  Sherry Wine Sauce, No. 3                                          11
  Short Paste (Mürber Teig), German art                            665
  Shrimp Salad                                                     905
  Shrimp, How to Boil                                              906
  Small Brioche                                                    774
  Small Rice Strudels                                              756
  Small Royal Cakes                                                725
  Snow Eggs                                                        480
  Snow Pudding                                                     194
  Snow Sauce with Orange Flavor                                     70
  Snowflake Cake                                                   830
  Soleil                                                           777
  Sorbet                                                           294
  Sour Jelly (Aspic)                                               917
  Spice Cake                                                     _App._
  Spinach Green for Coloring                                       109
  Spinning Sugar                                                   940
  Spongada au Café                                                 301
  Spongada au chocolat                                             300
  Spongada au marasquin                                            302
  Spongada aux pêches                                              299
  Sponge Cake                                                    _App._
  Steamed Apple Dumplings                                          785
  Steamed Apples                                                   609
  Stewed Cherries                                                  625
  Stewed Cranberries                                               633
  Stewed Dried Apples                                              621
  Stewed Dried Apricots                                            627
  Stewed Dried Peaches                                             624
  Stewed Dried Pears                                               630
  Stewed Dried Prunes                                              631
  Stewed Evaporated Apples                                         622
  Stewed Huckleberries                                             634
  Stewed Pears                                                     629
  Stewed Quinces                                                   626
  Stewed Rhubarb                                                   635
  Stewed Rhubarb with Eggs                                         636
  Strawberry Charlotte                                           _App._
  Strawberry Chaudeau Sauce                                         65
  Strawberry Custard                                               568
  Strawberry Custard Sauce                                          36
  Strawberry Dumplings                                             791
  Strawberry Dumplings (another way)                               792
  Strawberry Essence                                               102
  Strawberry Fromage                                               189
  Strawberry Hard Sauce                                             29
  Strawberry Ice                                                   287
  Strawberry Ice Cream                                             280
  Strawberry Jelly                                                 153
  Strawberry Omelet                                                464
  Strawberry Pancakes                                              393
  Strawberry Plombière                                             232
  Strawberry Pudding                                               214
  Strawberry Sauce                                                  25
  Strawberry Sherbet                                               297
  Strawberry Sherbet                                             _App._
  Strawberry Shortcake, No. 1                                      769
  Strawberry Shortcake, No. 2                                      770
  Strawberry Souflée                                               418
  Strawberry Syrup                                                  75
  String Bean Salad                                                878
  Strudel Paste                                                    754a
  Stullen with Baking Powder                                     _App._
  Suédoise of Apples                                               216
  Suédoise of Pears                                                217
  Suet Fruit Pudding                                               329
  Suet Pudding with Apples                                         324
  Suet Pudding with Nuts                                           327
  Suet Pudding with Raisins                                        328
  Sugar, To Clarify                                                147
  Sugar Color                                                      110
  Sugar Glaze                                                      927
  Sultana Pudding                                                  585
  Sweet Potato Pie                                                 697
  Tapioca Meringue                                                 578
  Tapioca Pudding                                                  577
  Tapioca Pudding (economical)                                     579
  Tapioca Pudding with Apples                                      581
  Tapioca Pudding with Lemon Sauce                                 580
  Tartelettes d’apricots                                           718
  Tartelettes of Cherries                                          716
  Tartelettes of Peaches, etc                                      717
  Tartelettes of Peaches, etc                                      719
  Tartelettes of Strawberries                                      720
  Tarts                                                            712
  Tea Ice Cream                                                    273
  Tea Plombière                                                    229
  Thé polonaise                                                    304
  Timbale à la sicilienne                                          221
  Timbale de pêche à la condé                                      218
  Timbale de riz à la napolitaine                                  219
  Timbale of Mixed Fruit                                           222
  Tipsy Parson                                                     575
  Toasted Cheese Roll                                            _App._
  Tomato Farce (à la Mayonaise)                                    887
  Tomato Jelly                                                     910
  Tomato Jelly Salad                                               911
  Tomato Pepper Salad                                              886
  Tomato Salad                                                     883
  Tomato Salad with Lettuce                                        882
  Tomato Salad with Mayonaise                                      884
  Tomato and Cucumber Salad                                        885
  Tomato and Potato Salad                                          881
  Transparent Glaze                                                938
  Transparent Sauce                                              _App._
  Tripe Salad                                                      898
  Tutti Frutti Custard                                             572
  Tutti Frutti Ice                                                 289
  Tutti Frutti Pie                                                 679
  Uncle Tom’s Pudding                                              336
  Vanilla Almond Koch                                              441
  Vanilla Cream                                                    139
  Vanilla Cream Cake                                               811
  Vanilla Cream Pie                                                703
  Vanilla Cream Sauce                                               53
  Vanilla Cream Syrup                                               86
  Vanilla Ice Cream, No. 1                                         282
  Vanilla Ice Cream, No. 2                                         283
  Vanilla Koch                                                     422
  Vanilla Plombière                                                231
  Vanilla Sauce                                                     54
  Vanilla Sauce (plain)                                             58
  Vanilla Sauce with Cognac                                         59
  Vanilla Souflée                                                  377
  Vanilla Sugar                                                    112
  Vanilla Syrup                                                     85
  Vegetable Salad                                                  895
  Vienna Bröselcake                                                772
  Vienna Lemon Cream                                               126
  Vienna Orange Cream                                              125
  Vienna Pancakes                                                _App._
  Vienna Pudding                                                   350
  Vienna Souflée                                                   412
  Viennoises                                                       735
  Vol-au-veut (an entrée)                                          730
  Vol-au-veut with Currants and Raspberries                        732
  Vol-au-veut with Peaches and Cream                               733
  Vol-au-veut with Strawberries and Whipped Cream                  731
  Waffles                                                        _App._
  Waldorf Salad                                                  _App._
  Walnut Fritters                                                  406
  War Bread                                                      _App._
  Watermelon Salad                                                 834
  Watermelon, How to Serve                                         835
  Whipped Cream                                                    131
  Whipped Cream with Cherries                                      138
  Whipped Cream with Chocolate                                     134
  Whipped Cream with Oranges                                       135
  Whipped Cream with Peaches                                       137
  Whipped Cream with Strawberries                                  132
  White Bean Salad                                                 877
  White Celery Salad                                               872
  White Icing                                                      922
  White Icing with Wine or Liquor                                  924
  White Sauce                                                       56
  White Wine Pudding                                               202
  White Wine Sauce                                                   2
  Wild Cherry Bark Syrup                                            84
  Wild Cherry Syrup                                                 83
  Wild Rose Cake                                                   818
  Wine Baba                                                      _App._
  Wine Chaudeau                                                      1
  Wine Chaudeau with Rum                                            21
  Wine Cream Sauce                                                   3
  Wine Glaze                                                       932
  Wine Glazed Cake                                                 815
  Wine Glazed Cream Cake                                           816
  Wine Jelly                                                       157
  Wine Pudding                                                     195
  Wine Sauce with Almonds and Raisins                               22
  Wine or Brandy Sauce                                              12
  Zwieback Koch                                                    426
  Zwieback Pudding, No. 1                                          345
  Zwieback Pudding, No. 2                                          348
REMARKS ON SOUPS.


Soups, like salads, present an excellent opportunity for the cook to
display good taste and judgment.

The great difficulty lies in selecting the most appropriate soup for
each particular occasion; it would be well to first select your bill of
fare, after which decide upon the soup.

The season, and force of circumstances, may compel you to decide upon a
heavy fish, such as salmon, trout, or other oleaginous fishes, and heavy
joints and entrées.

Under these circumstances it must necessarily follow that a light soup
should begin the dinner, and _vice versa_; for large parties, one light
and one heavy soup is always in order.

There is as much art in arranging a bill of fare and harmonizing the
peculiarities of the various dishes, as there is in preparing the colors
for a painting; the soup represents the pivot upon which harmony
depends.

Soups may be divided into four classes: clear, thick, purées or bisques,
and chowders. A purée is made by rubbing the cooked ingredients through
a fine sieve; an ordinary thick soup is made by adding various
thickening ingredients to the soup stock; clear soups are, properly
speaking, the juices of meats, served in a convenient and appetizing
form.

Chowders are quite distinct from the foregoing, being compounds of an
infinite variety of fish, flesh, fowl, or vegetables, in proportions to
suit the fluctuating ideas of the cook; the object sought is to prepare
a thick, highly seasoned compound, without reducing the ingredients to
the consistency of a purée.

     *     *     *     *     *

SOUP STOCK.--The word stock when used in cooking means the foundation or
basis upon which soups and sauces depend; it is therefore the most
important part of soup making. Care should be exercised that nothing in
the least tainted or decayed enters the stock pot; it is very desirable
that soup stock be prepared a day or two before it is wanted; the
seasoning should be added in moderation at first, as it is difficult to
restore a soup that has been damaged by over seasoning.

Milk or cream should be boiled and strained and added hot when intended
for soups; when eggs are used beat them thoroughly, and add while the
soup is hot. Should they be added when the soup is boiling, they are
very apt to separate, and give the soup the appearance of having
curdled; the best plan is to beat up the egg with a little of the warm
soup, then add it to the soup gradually.

In summer, soup stock should be boiled from day to day, if kept any
length of time, else it may become sour: should this happen, add a piece
of charcoal to the soup, boil, cool, and strain into freshly scalded
earthen or porcelain-lined ware. On no account allow the soup stock to
become cold in an iron pot or saucepan.

TO MAKE BEEF STOCK.--Take six pounds of soup meat, cut it up into good
sized pieces, break the bones into small pieces, place them in the stock
pot, and add five quarts of cold water and two ounces of salt; boil
slowly for five hours, remove the scum as fast as it rises; cut up three
white turnips and three carrots, add these to the soup with two stalks
of celery, one large onion quartered, six cloves, teaspoonful of whole
peppers, and a small bunch of herbs.

When the vegetables are thoroughly cooked, strain the soup into a large
saucepan, and set it on back of range to keep hot, but not to boil, cut
one pound of lean raw beef into fine pieces, put in into a saucepan, and
add the whites and shells of four eggs; season with salt, pepper, and a
little chopped parsley or celery tops; squeeze these together with your
hand for fifteen minutes, until they are thoroughly incorporated, then
add to the warm soup; allow the soup to simmer slowly one hour; taste
for seasoning; strain into crocks, or serve. This is now called consommé
or bouillon, and is the basis of nearly all soups; such items as
macaroni, sago, Italian paste, Macedoine, and, in fact, nearly all kinds
of cereals and soup ingredients may be added to this stock at different
times to produce variety; they should all be boiled separately before
adding to the soup.

Calf's feet and knuckle of veal may be added to the original or first
pot if a very strong stock is required.

VEAL STOCK.--Chop up three slices of bacon and two pounds of the neck of
veal; place in a stewpan with a pint of water or beef stock, and simmer
for half an hour; then add two quarts of stock, one onion, a carrot, a
bouquet of herbs, four stalks of celery, half a teaspoonful of bruised
whole peppers, and a pinch of nutmeg with a teaspoonful of salt; boil
gently for two hours, removing the scum in the meantime. Strain into an
earthen crock, and when cold remove the fat. A few bones of poultry
added, with an additional quantity of water or stock, will improve it.

CROUTONS, or fried bread crumbs for soups, are prepared in this
way:--Cut slices of stale home-made bread half an inch thick, trim off
all crust and cut each slice into squares; fry these in very hot fat;
drain them on a clean napkin, and add six or eight to each portion of
soup.

MARROW DUMPLINGS FOR SOUPS.--Grate the crust of a breakfast roll, and
break the remainder into crumbs; soak these in cold milk; drain, and add
two ounces of flour; chop up half a pound of beef marrow freed from skin
and sinews; beat up the yolks of five eggs; mix all together thoroughly,
if too moist add some of the grated crumbs; salt and pepper to taste;
form into small round dumplings; boil them in the soup for half an hour
before serving.

GLAZE.--Glaze is made from rich soup stock, boiled down until it forms a
dark, strong jelly. It is used in coloring soups and sauces and for
glazing entrées. It should be kept in a stone crock.

ARTICHOKE SOUP.--Melt a piece of butter the size of an egg in a
saucepan; then fry in it one white turnip sliced, one red onion sliced,
three pounds of Jerusalem artichokes washed, pared, and sliced, and a
rasher of bacon. Stir these in the boiling butter for about ten minutes,
add gradually one pint of stock. Let all boil together until the
vegetables are thoroughly cooked, then add three pints more of stock;
stir it well; add pepper and salt to taste, strain and press the
vegetables through a sieve, and add one pint of boiling milk. Boil for
five minutes more and serve.

ASPARAGUS SOUP.--Take seventy-five heads of asparagus; cut away the
hard, tough part, and boil the rest until tender. Drain them, and throw
half into cold water until the soup is nearly ready, and press the other
half through a hair sieve. Stir the pressed asparagus into two pints of
stock, and let it boil; add salt, pepper, and a small lump of sugar. Cut
the remaining heads of asparagus into peas; put them into the soup, and
in a few minutes serve. If necessary color with a little spinach green.

BARLEY SOUP.--Put into a stock pot a knuckle of veal and two pounds of
shoulder of mutton chopped up; cover with one gallon of cold water;
season with salt, whole peppers, and a blade of mace; boil for three
hours, removing the scum as fast as it rises. Wash half a pint of barley
in cold water, drain and cover it with milk, and let it stand for half
an hour, drain and add to the soup; boil half an hour longer,
moderately; strain, trim the meat from the bone, chop up a little
parsley or celery tops, add a tablespoonful to the soup and serve.

BEEF TEA.--Take half a pound of lean beef; cut it up into small bits;
let it soak in a pint of water for three-quarters of an hour; then put
both into a quart champagne bottle with just a suspicion of salt. Cork
tightly, and wire the cork, so as to prevent its popping out. Set the
bottle in a saucepan full of warm water, boil gently for an hour and a
half, and strain through a napkin. Beef tea, without the fibrine of the
meat, if administered often to a patient, will tend to weaken, instead
of strengthening the invalid; always add about a teaspoonful of finely
chopped raw meat to a goblet of the tea, and let it stand in the tea for
about five minutes before serving.

BISQUE OF CRABS.--Boil twelve hard-shell crabs for thirty minutes, and
drain; when cold break them apart, pick out the meat carefully, scrape
off all fat adhering to the upper shell, and save these for deviled
crabs (an excellent recipe for deviled crabs may be found in "Salads and
Sauces.")

Set the crab meat aside; put the under shell and the claws in a mortar
with half a pound of butter and a cupful of cold boiled rice, and pound
them as smooth as possible; then put this into a saucepan, and add a
heaping teaspoonful of salt, a bouquet of assorted herbs, a dozen whole
peppers, a blade of mace, and three quarts of stock; boil slowly for one
hour, pour it through a sieve, and work as much of the pulp through the
sieve as possible. Place the soup on the range to keep warm, but not to
boil.

Beat up the yolk of one egg, and add it slowly to a quart of warm milk
previously boiled; whisk the milk into the soup; taste for seasoning.
Now take the crab meat and heat it in a little boiling water, drain, put
it into a hot soup tureen, pour the soup over it and serve.

BISQUE OF LOBSTER.--Procure two large live lobsters; chop them up while
raw, shells and all; put them into a mortar with three-fourths of a
pound of butter, three raw eggs, and one quarter of a pound of cold
boiled rice: pound to a paste, moisten with a little water or stock,
then set aside. Fry out two slices of bacon fat, add to it one minced
onion, a tablespoonful of chopped celery tops, one chopped long red
pepper, one sliced carrot, and a quart of stock, boil and pour the whole
into a saucepan. Add the lobster and three pints more of stock; boil
slowly for two hours; strain, and rub the ingredients through a sieve.
Return to the soup; keep it warm, but do not allow it to boil. If too
thick, add a little more stock; add salt to taste. Boil one quart of
cream; whisk it into the soup; taste again for seasoning; pour it into a
hot soup tureen, and send to table.

This soup can be prepared by following receipt for bisque of crab, or it
may be prepared by adding boiled lobster to a strong veal stock, and
colored red by pounding the coral with butter, and adding this to the
soup.

BOUILLE-ABAISSE.--Take six pounds of cod-fish; cut it up into small
pieces; chop two red onions; put them in a stewpan with an ounce of
butter; let them brown without burning. Now add the fish and four
tablespoonfuls of fine olive-oil, a bruised clove of garlic, two bay
leaves, four slices of lemon peeled and quartered, half a pint of
Shrewsbury tomato catsup, and half a salt-spoonful of saffron. Add
sufficient hot soup stock to cover the whole; boil slowly for half to
three-quarters of an hour; skim carefully while boiling; when ready to
serve add a tablespoonful of chopped celery tops.

CAULIFLOWER SOUP.--Fry half an onion in a very little butter; when it is
a light brown add a tablespoonful of minced raw ham and two or three
stalks of celery, then add a quart of soup stock; simmer slowly for half
an hour. Boil for twenty-five or thirty minutes one medium-sized head of
cauliflower in water slightly salted. Strain the contents of the
frying-pan into a saucepan, and add one quart more of stock. Drain the
cauliflower; rub it through a fine sieve into the stock; boil just once;
draw to one side of the fire; taste for seasoning. Now dissolve a
teaspoonful of rice flour in half a cupful of cold milk; whisk the soup
thoroughly; pour into a hot tureen, and serve.

CHESTNUT SOUP.--Remove the outer peel or coating from twenty-five
Italian chestnuts; pour scalding water over them, and rub off the inner
coating. Put them into a saucepan with one quart of soup stock, and boil
for three-quarters of an hours; drain; rub them through a colander, then
through a sieve, with one tablespoonful of cracker dust, or pound to a
paste in a mortar; season with salt and pepper; add gradually the stock
in which they were boiled; add one pint more of stock; boil once, and
draw to one side of the fire.

Beat up the yolks of two raw eggs; add them to one quart of warm milk;
whisk the milk into the soup; taste for seasoning; pour into a hot
tureen, and send to table with croutons.

CHICKEN BROTH FOR THE INVALID.--Procure a dry-picked Philadelphia
roasting chicken; cut it in halves; put one half in the ice box; chop
the other half into neat pieces; put it into a small saucepan; add one
quart of cold water, a little salt and a leaf of celery; simmer gently
for two hours; remove the oily particles thoroughly; strain the broth
into a bowl; when cooled a little, serve to the convalescent. Serve the
meat with the broth.

CHICKEN SOUP.--Take three young male chickens; cut them up; put them in
a saucepan with three quarts of veal stock. (A sliced carrot, one
turnip, and one head of celery may be put with them and removed before
the soup is thickened.) Let them simmer for an hour. Remove all the
white flesh; return the rest of the birds to the soup, and boil gently
for two hours. Pour a little of the liquid over a quarter of a pound of
bread crumbs, and when they are well soaked put it in a mortar with the
white flesh of the birds, and pound the whole to a smooth paste: add a
pinch of ground mace, salt, and a little cayenne pepper; press the
mixture through a sieve, and boil once more, adding a pint of boiling
cream; thicken with a little flour mixed in cold milk; remove the bones,
and serve.

CHICKEN SOUP, NO. 2.--Cut up one chicken, put into a stewpan two quarts
of cold water, a teaspoonful of salt, and one pod of red pepper; when
half done add two desert spoonfuls of well washed rice: when thoroughly
cooked, remove the bird from the soup, tear a part of the breast into
shreds (saving the remainder of the fowl for a salad), and add it to the
soup with a wine-glass full of cream.

CLAM BROTH.--Procure three dozen little-neck clams in the shell; wash
them well in cold water; put them in a saucepan, cover with a quart of
hot water; boil fifteen minutes; drain; remove the shells; chop up the
clams, and add them to the hot broth with a pat of butter; salt if
necessary and add a little cayenne; boil ten minutes, pour into a soup
tureen, add a slice of toast, and send to table. This is the mode
adopted when we do not have a clam opener in the house.

Raw, freshly opened clams should be chopped fine and prepared in the
manner above described. The large clams are better for chowders than for
stews and broth.

CLAM CHOWDER.--Chop up fifty large clams; cut eight medium-sized
potatoes into small square pieces, and keep them in cold water until
wanted.

Chop one large, red onion fine, and cut up half a pound of larding pork
into small pieces.

Procure an iron pot, and see that it is very clean and free from rust;
set it on the range, and when very hot, throw the pieces of pork into
it, fry them brown; next add the onion, and fry it brown; add one fourth
of the chopped clams, then one fourth of the chopped potato, and two
pilot crackers quartered, a teaspoonful of salt, one chopped, long, red
pepper, a teaspoonful of powdered thyme and half a pint of canned tomato
pulp. Repeat this process until the clams and potato are used, omitting
the seasoning; add hot water enough to cover all, simmer slowly three
hours. Should it become too thick, add more hot water; occasionally
remove the pot from the range, take hold of the handle, and twist the
pot round several times; this is done to prevent the chowder from
burning. On no account disturb the chowder with a spoon or ladle until
done; now taste for seasoning, as it is much easier to season properly
after the chowder is cooked than before. A few celery tops may be added
if desired.

CONSOMMÉ.--This is nothing more than beef stock, with a little more
attention given to clarifying it. It is always acceptable if the dinner
to follow is composed of heavy joints and side dishes. If the party
consists of more than twenty, serve one thick soup and one light soup or
consommé.

CONSOMMÉ COLBERT.--Prepare a strong consommé; add to two quarts of it a
tablespoonful each of shredded young turnips and carrots and a
tablespoonful of green peas; simmer until the vegetables are tender;
taste for seasoning.

Poach four eggs in hot water in the usual manner; send these to table
with the soup. In serving add one poached egg to each plate. It is well
always to poach two extra eggs to be used should any of the others be
broken in the service.

CREAM OF CELERY.--Cut up six stalks of celery into half-inch pieces; put
them into a saucepan with one red onion quartered, one blade of mace,
salt, and a few whole peppers; add a quart of veal stock, and boil for
one hour. Rub the ingredients through a sieve; put the pulp into a
saucepan, and add one quart more of veal stock; boil; then draw to one
side of fire to keep hot.

Boil three pints of cream; strain it into the soup; whisk the soup at
the same time (if not thick enough to suit your taste add a little
flour); taste for seasoning; pour it into a hot tureen; serve with small
pieces of toast or croutons.

CREAM OF RICE.--Wash thoroughly a half pound of rice; pick out all
imperfect or colored grains; put it into a saucepan and add two quarts
of stock. Boil slowly for one hour; then rub the rice through a sieve
twice; return it to the stock; season with salt and pepper. Care must be
exercised that the rice does not adhere to the bottom of the saucepan.
Simmer until wanted. Beat up the yolks of two eggs; add them slowly to a
quart of warm, milk previously boiled; whisk the milk into the soup,
which must not be very hot; then pour it into a hot tureen, and serve.

CREAM SOUP.--Prepare two quarts of strong veal stock; set it on the back
part of the range to simmer.

Boil one quart of cream; whisk it into the stock; pour it into a hot
tureen, and serve with croutons. If convenient the breast of a boiled
chicken may be added.

FISH CHOWDER.--Take two fine, fresh cod-fish, weighing six pounds each;
clean them well; cut the fish lengthwise from the bone, and cut it into
pieces two inches square. Chop up the bones and heads; put them into a
saucepan; add three quarts of warm water, one red onion sliced, heaping
teaspoonful of salt, a dozen bruised peppercorns, and a few stalks of
celery. Boil until the fish drops from the bones; then strain into
another saucepan.

Cut into small squares one peck of small potatoes and a pound and a half
of salt pork; arrange the fish, pork, and potatoes into mounds; divide
each equally into four parts; add one quarter of the fish to the stock,
next a quarter of the pork, then a quarter of the potato, and three
pilot crackers, broken into quarters, salt, pepper, and a little thyme.
Repeat this process until the remaining three quarters of pork, fish,
and potato, are used; cover all with warm milk; simmer slowly until the
fish is tender, care being taken that the soup does not boil over; now
taste for seasoning, serve as neatly as possible.

The above is the old-fashioned New England fish chowder. Clams may be
used instead of fish.

GERMAN SOUP.--Melt half an ounce of fresh butter in a saucepan; when
very hot, add half an onion, chopped fine, and a teaspoonful of caraway
seeds. When the onion is slightly browned, add three quarts of strong
veal stock, well seasoned; simmer gently for three quarters of an hour.
Prepare some marrow dumplings; boil them in water, or a portion of the
soup, and serve.

GIBLET SOUP.--An economical, and at the same time excellent, soup, is
made from the legs, neck, heart, wings, and gizzard of all kinds of
poultry. These odds and ends are usually plentiful about the holidays.

To turn them to account, follow general instructions for chicken soup;
add a little rice, and your soup is complete.

GREEN TURTLE SOUP.--Many housewives imagine that green turtle is too
expensive, and too difficult to prepare for household use, and for these
reasons it is seldom met with in private families, except in tin cans.
Even this is not always made from turtle.

This soup is not any more expensive than many other kinds. A small
turtle may be purchased at Fulton market for from ten to twenty cents
per pound, and weighing from fifteen to forty pounds, the price varying
according to the law of supply and demand. The only objection to small
turtles is that they do not contain a very large percentage of the green
fat, so highly prized by epicures.

Procure a live turtle, cut off the head, and allow it to drain and cool
over night; next morning place it on the working table, lay it on its
back, and make an incision round the inner edge of the shell; then
remove it. Now remove the intestines carefully, and be very careful that
you do not break the gall; throw these away; cut off the fins and all
fleshy particles, and set them aside; trim out the fat, which has a
blueish tint when raw; wash it well in several waters. Chop up the upper
and under shells with a cleaver; put them with the fins into a large
saucepan; cover them with boiling water; let stand ten minutes; drain
and rub off the horny, scaly particles, with a kitchen towel.

Scald a large saucepan, and put all the meat and shell into it (except
the fat); cover with hot water; add a little salt, and boil four hours.
Skim carefully, and drain; put the meat into a large crock; remove the
bones, and boil the fat in the stock. This does not take very long if
first scalded. When done, add it also to the crock; pour the stock into
another crock; let it cool, and remove all scum and oily particles; this
is quite work enough for one day. Clean the saucepans used, and dry them
thoroughly.

Next day fry out half a pound of fat ham; then add one chopped onion,
one bay leaf, six cloves, one blade of mace, two tablespoonfuls of
chopped celery tops, a tablespoonful of salt, a teaspoonful of white
pepper, and one quart of ordinary soup stock. Simmer for half an hour.
Now put the turtle stock on the fire; when hot strain the seasoning into
it; remove the turtle from the other crock, cut it up, and add to the
stock; now add a pint of dry sherry.

Do not let the soup come to a boil; taste for seasoning, and if herbs
are needed tie a string to a bunch of mixed herbs, throw them into the
soup, and tie the other end to the saucepan handle; taste often, and
when palatable, remove the herbs. If the soup is not dark enough, brown
a very little flour and add to it. Keep the soup quite hot until served;
add quartered slices of lemon and the yolk of a hard boiled egg,
quartered just before serving; send to table with a decanter of sherry.

The yolks of the eggs may be worked to a paste, and made into round
balls to imitate turtle eggs if this is desired.

I have placed before my readers this complicated receipt in as simple a
form as it is possible to do, having carefully avoided all the technical
formulas used in the profession.

GUMBO SOUP.--Cut up two chickens, two slices of ham, and two onions into
dice; flour them, and fry the whole to a light brown; then fill the
frying pan with boiling water; stir it a few minutes, and turn the whole
into a saucepan containing three quarts of boiling water. Let it boil
for forty minutes, removing the scum.

In the meantime soak three pints of ochra in cold water for twenty
minutes; cut them into thin slices, and add to the other ingredients;
let it boil for one hour and a half. Add a quart of canned tomatoes and
a cupful of boiled rice half an hour before serving.

JULIENNE SOUP.--Cut into fine shreds, an inch long, two carrots, two
turnips, two heads of celery, and the white ends of two spring leeks.
Put them into a frying pan, with one ounce of butter, a teaspoonful of
salt, and one lump of cut sugar; simmer until tender, then add a cupful
of stock. Put two quarts of veal stock in a saucepan; add the
vegetables, and a teaspoonful of chopped parsley, a little fresh sorrel
if convenient (wild wood sorrel is the best for julienne) shredded.
Taste for seasoning; boil once, and serve.

LENTIL SOUP.--Lentils are very nutritious, and form the basis of a most
excellent soup; but they are little used in American cookery. Soak a
pint of dry lentils for two hours; put them in a saucepan; add two
quarts of cold water, half an onion, two or three celery tops, salt,
whole peppers, and two or three ounces of the small end of a ham. Boil
gently for three hours; add a little more hot water, if the quantity has
been reduced by boiling, pour through a sieve, remove the ham, onion and
celery; rub the lentils through a sieve, return to the soup; whisk it
thoroughly; taste for seasoning, and serve with croutons.

LIEBIG'S SOUP.--An excellent soup may be prepared at short notice, as
follows:--Take half an onion, three or four outer stocks of celery, one
carrot sliced, salt, pepper, and a very little mace. Boil these in two
quarts of water for half an hour; strain, and add to the water two
tablespoonfuls of Liebig's Extract of meat; whisk thoroughly, taste for
seasoning, and serve.

MACARONI SOUP.--Boil half a pound of Macaroni for half an hour, in
three pints of water slightly salted; add a blade of mace. When done,
drain, and cut it into two inch pieces. Put three pints of soup stock
into a saucepan; add the macaroni; taste for seasoning, boil a moment
and serve.

MOCK TURTLE SOUP.--Take half a calf's head, with the skin on; remove the
brains. Wash the head in several waters, and let it soak in cold water
for an hour. Put it in a saucepan with five quarts of beef stock; let it
simmer gently for an hour; remove the scum carefully. Take up the head
and let it get cold; cut the meat from the bones into pieces an inch
square, and set them in the ice-box.

Dissolve two ounces of butter in a frying pan; mince a large onion, and
fry it in the butter until nicely browned, and add to the stock in which
the head was cooked. Return the bones to the stock; simmer the soup,
removing the scum until no more rises. Put in a carrot, a turnip, a
bunch of parsley, a bouquet of herbs, a dozen outer stalks of celery,
two blades of mace and the rind of one lemon, grated; salt and pepper to
taste. Boil gently for two hours, and strain the soup through a cloth.
Mix three ounces of browned flour with a pint of the soup; let simmer
until it thickens, then add it to the soup. Take the pieces of head out
of the ice-box, and add to the soup; let them simmer until quite tender.
"Before serving add a little Worcestershire sauce, a tablespoonful of
anchovy paste, a gobletful of port or sherry, and two lemons sliced,
each slice quartered, with the rind trimmed off." Warm the wine a very
little before adding it to the soup. Keep in ice-box three or four days
before using. Serve the brains as a side dish.

MULLIGATAWNY SOUP.--Divide a large chicken into neat pieces; take a
knuckle of veal, and chop it up; put all into a large saucepan, and add
one gallon of water; salt; boil for three hours or until reduced
one-third. Put an ounce of butter in a hot frying pan, cut up two red
onions, and fry them in the butter. Into a half pint of the stock put
two heaping tablespoonfuls of curry powder; add this to the onion, then
add the whole to the soup, now taste for seasoning. Some like a little
wine, but these are the exception and not the rule. Before serving add
half a slice of lemon to each portion. Many prefer a quantity of rice to
be added to the soup before it is finished; the rice should be first
well washed and parboiled.

MUTTON BROTH.--Take four pounds of lean mutton trimmings; cut them into
neat pieces; put them into a saucepan; add three quarts of cold water,
one heaping teaspoonful of salt. Bruise, and add six peppercorns, three
or four celery tops, and one young leek. Boil slowly for two hours;
remove the scum as it rises. Boil a cupful of rice for twenty minutes;
add it to the soup, and taste for seasoning; remove the celery, leek,
and mutton bones; pour the soup into a hot tureen, and serve.

Substitute a knuckle of veal for mutton, and you will have an excellent
veal broth.

ONION SOUP.--Peel and cut into small pieces three medium-sized onions;
fry them in a little butter until tender, but not brown; pour over them
a pint of stock; add a little salt and cayenne. Simmer for fifteen
minutes; press the soup through a sieve; put it in a saucepan, and add
three tablespoonfuls of grated bread crumbs, and half a gobletful of hot
cream. Taste for seasoning, and serve with small slices of toast.

OXTAIL SOUP.--Take two oxtails; cut them into joints, and cut each joint
into four pieces; put them into a pan with two ounces of butter, and fry
them for ten minutes. Slice two onions, one turnip, two carrots, and a
dozen outer stalks of celery, and fry in the same butter, with three
slices of bacon cut up fine; fry to a light brown. Turn the ingredients
into a saucepan with a quart of stock or ham water, and boil quickly for
half an hour, then add two more quarts of stock, a bouquet of herbs, two
bay-leaves, a dozen whole peppers crushed, a few cloves, and salt to
taste. Simmer until the meat is quite tender; then take it out; strain
the soup; skim off the fat, and thicken with two ounces of flour. Return
the meat to the soup; add a tablespoonful of Worcestershire, and a
cupful of sherry, and serve with grated rusks.

OYSTER SOUP.--Wet a saucepan with cold water; pour into it two quarts of
milk. When at boiling point, add two dozen oysters and a pint of oyster
liquor well seasoned with salt and pepper. Dissolve a tablespoonful of
rice flour in a little cold milk; finally add a large tablespoonful of
table butter; do not let the soup boil again as it will contract the
oysters. Pour into a tureen, taste for salting, and serve, a few broken
crackers may be added. The object in wetting the pan is to prevent the
milk from burning.

PEA SOUP.--Cut two large slices of ham into dice, with a sliced onion,
and fry them in a little bacon fat until they are lightly browned. Cut
up one turnip, one large carrot, four outer stalks of celery, and one
leek into small pieces; add these last ingredients to the ham and onion,
and let them simmer for fifteen minutes; then pour over them three
quarts of corned-beef water or hot water, and add a pint of split peas
which have been soaked in cold water over night.

Boil gently until the peas are quite tender stirring constantly to
prevent burning; then add salt and pepper to taste, and a teaspoonful of
brown sugar. Remove the soup from the fire, and rub through a sieve; if
it is not thick enough to suit your taste, add a few ounces of flour
mixed smoothly in a little cold milk; return the soup to the fire, and
simmer for half an hour. Cut up four slices of American bread into small
dice, and fry the pieces in very hot fat until nicely browned; place
them on a napkin or towel, and add a few to each plate or tureen of soup
just before it goes to table.

PEA SOUP, ECONOMICAL.--Boil for four hours two quarts of green pea hulls
in four quarts of water, in which beef, mutton, or fowl has been boiled,
then add a bunch or bouquet of herbs, salt and pepper, a teaspoonful of
butter, and a quart of milk. Rub through a hair sieve, thicken with a
little flour, and serve with croutons, as in the foregoing receipt.

POTATO SOUP.--Wash and peel two dozen small sized potatoes; put them
into a saucepan with two onions; add three quarts of corned-beef water;
boil for one hour and a half until the potatoes fall to pieces. Pour the
soup through a sieve, and rub the potato through it to a fine pulp; put
the whole into the saucepan again; when very hot add a pint of hot rich
cream, salt and pepper, if necessary; whisk thoroughly; pour into a
tureen, add croutons, and serve.

PURÉE OF BEANS.--Soak two quarts of small, white beans over night;
change the water twice; drain, put them into a pot or saucepan, and
cover them with cold water. Boil slowly for six hours; as the water
evaporates, add hot water. One hour before the beans are cooked add one
pound of salt pork, a bunch of fresh herbs, half a dozen whole cloves,
salt if necessary; when done pour the soup through a sieve, remove the
pork and seasoning, and rub the soup through a sieve; add the pulp to
the stock; taste for seasoning; pour the soup into a tureen, add
croutons and serve. Many prefer a ham bone to pork.

PURÉE OF CLAMS.--Chop twenty-five large hard-shell clams, very fine, and
put them aside; fry half a chopped red onion in an ounce of hot butter;
add a teaspoonful of chopped celery tops, a blade of mace, one salted
anchovy, six whole peppers, and a pint of soup stock. Let it boil; then
strain into a saucepan; add the chopped clams and one quart of stock or
hot water. Boil slowly one hour; strain all the clams through a sieve
twice, and return to the stock; season with salt and cayenne. Keep the
soup warm, but do not let it boil again; taste for seasoning. Boil one
pint of cream in a saucepan previously wet with cold water; strain it,
and add to the soup slowly. Mix a teaspoonful of rice flour in a little
cold milk; add to the soup; whisk the soup; taste again for seasoning;
pour it into a hot tureen, and serve.

RABBIT SOUP.--Cut up two jack rabbits into neat pieces; put them into a
stewpan containing one quarter of a pound of melted butter; add a slice
of fat bacon cut into small pieces. Fry for five minutes in the butter;
slice two small carrots, and two red onions, and add to the saucepan
with one bay leaf, one blade of mace, four cloves, a few green celery
stalks, one ounce of salt, and one long red pepper.

Pour over all, one gallon of stock; simmer gently for nearly three
hours; skim carefully; strain into a saucepan, and set on back of range
to keep hot, but not to boil. Add half a pint of dry sherry, and serve
with croutons. If not dark enough add a little glaze.

SCOTCH BROTH.--Take two pounds of mutton trimmings; cut into neat
pieces; put into a saucepan with three quarts of water, one large red
onion, salt, and a dozen whole peppers. Boil gently, and remove the scum
as it rises; wash half a pint of barley; soak it while the soup is
boiling, and add it at the end of the first hour. Let the soup boil for
two hours longer; taste for seasoning; pour slowly into a soup tureen,
leaving the meat in the saucepan. Some prefer to take the meat out of
the soup, and after removing the bones they return the meat to the soup.

SORREL SOUP.--Sorrel is an excellent ingredient for soup. Its acid
leaves are much appreciated by the French; the wild sorrel may be used,
but now that truck gardeners are cultivating it extensively, it will be
found less troublesome to use the latter.

The Germans make the best sorrel soup; their recipe is as follows:--Wash
and pick over two quarts of sorrel; remove the stems; then cut the
sorrel into pieces. Heat two ounces of butter in a small saucepan; add
the sorrel and a few blades of chives; cover without water and allow it
to steam for half an hour. Stir to prevent burning; sprinkle over this a
tablespoonful of flour free from lumps. Now add three quarts of
well-seasoned veal stock; taste for seasoning; boil once, and send to
table with croutons or small bits of toast. This an excellent spring and
summer soup.

SPRING SOUP.--Take two quarts of nicely seasoned veal stock; place it on
the range to keep hot, but not to boil. Cut into neat strips four young
carrots, four young spring turnips, and two spring leeks; add them to
the stock. Now add half a pint of fresh green peas; boil gently for
fifteen minutes; taste for seasoning, and serve.

TOMATO SOUP.--Cut four ounces of ham into dice; slice two onions, and
fry with ham in two ounces of butter; when browned turn them into a
saucepan containing three quarts of stock or corned-beef water, and add
three carrots, two turnips, and one long red pepper, and a dozen outer
stalks of celery. Simmer gently for one hour; then add a quart of canned
tomatoes; boil gently for another hour; rub the whole through a sieve,
and simmer again with the liquor a few minutes; add salt, and serve with
fried bread crumbs.

TURKEY SOUP.--Take the remains of a cold roast turkey, trim off all the
meat, break up the bones, and put them into a saucepan; cover them with
two quarts of veal stock; salt and cayenne to taste. Boil gently for one
hour; strain and skim. Now add the flesh of the turkey; simmer gently;
dissolve a tablespoonful of rice flour in a little cold milk, and add it
to the soup. Let it come to a boil; taste for seasoning, and serve with
croutons.

VEGETABLE SOUP.--Wash and clean two carrots and two turnips; cut them
into slices, and cut each slice into small narrow strips; put them into
a saucepan with four stalks of celery cut into inch pieces, a dozen
button onions, one long red pepper, and a teaspoonful of salt; add three
quarts of soup stock; boil until the vegetables are tender, add a lump
of sugar, and serve. The carrots and turnips may be cut into fancy
shapes with a vegetable cutter.

VERMICELLI SOUP.--Take one quarter of a pound of vermicelli; break it
into pieces, and boil it for five minutes; drain and add it to three
pints of strong soup stock. Boil once; draw to one side, and simmer
gently for twenty minutes. Should any scum arise, remove it; taste for
seasoning, and send to table with a little Parmesan cheese.




COOKERY BOOKS.

By THOMAS J. MURREY
LYDIA E. PINKHAM'S MEDICINES

Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound
The original Pinkham medicine and best known of all.
It has been on the market for nearly fifty years and is put up in the
following forms:

Liquid.
Dose--One tablespoonful every four hours through the day.
Dry (Tablets).
Dose--One tablet every four hours through the day.

Lydia E. Pinkham's Sanative Wash. FOR LEUCORRHOEA AND INFLAMMATION
Liquid, a concentrated extract, ready to dilute and use at once, the
most convenient form. Use daily as a vaginal injection. Add one
teaspoonful (in severe cases two teaspoonfuls) of the Sanative Wash to
one pint of warm water, mix thoroughly and it is ready for use. (Can be
had, if preferred, in dry form, to steep.)

Lydia E. Pinkham's Blood Medicine. FOR POOR BLOOD
We recommend this as a good blood medicine for either men or women.
Dose--One tablespoonful three times a day, half an hour before eating.

Lydia E. Pinkham's Liver Pills. FOR CONSTIPATION
Dose--Take three the first night, two the second, and one the third; and
unless there is a regular and healthy movement of the bowels continue
taking one every night.

FOR SALE BY DRUGGISTS GENERALLY

Send for LYDIA E. PINKHAM'S PRIVATE TEXT BOOK UPON AILMENTS PECULIAR TO
WOMEN, mailed free on application to THE LYDIA E. PINKHAM MEDICINE CO.
Lynn, Mass.,
Public Inspection of our Laboratories Cordially Invited.


HINTS FOR MEALTIME
How often do we hear women exclaim, "Oh dear, what shall I have for the
next meal?"

This little book will aid you in answering that troublesome question.
The recipes are carefully selected and we hope you will find them
helpful.

More important to you than the question of food is that of health.
Therefore, in this book we show you many letters from women who have
received great benefit by taking Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound.
You have heard of this splendid medicine, for it has been used by women
for nearly fifty years. It is a Woman's Medicine for Women's Ailments.
It is prepared from medicinal plants that are especially adapted for the
treatment of the troubles women so often have.

As you read these letters remember these women are stating for the
benefit of other women who are sick just how they felt and just how the
Vegetable Compound restored them to health.

You know it is bad enough to worry over the various duties of life when
you are well and strong. It is a serious matter when you are half sick
and all tired out most of the time.

So in the following pages you will find suggestions for the next meal
that may help you, but more important by far are the letters
recommending Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound as the splendid
medicine for the ailments of women.

You will read letters from many classes of women, young and old, mother
and daughter. They are genuine expressions of gratitude from one woman
to another.

Thousands of women by word of mouth and by letter highly praise Lydia E.
Pinkham's Vegetable Compound.

"Of all the world's wealth
The best treasure is health,
For without it there's nothing worth while."


BAKING OF BREAD AND ROLLS
[Illustration]

The pans should be well oiled and the loaves should never more than half
fill them.

Bread should be put into a hot oven and loaves should rise during the
first fifteen minutes. It should continue browning for the next twenty
minutes then reduce the heat somewhat. Small loaves require 45 minutes,
large ones 1 hour.

Biscuits and rolls require a hotter oven than bread. They should rise
for the first five minutes and then should begin to brown. After 15
minutes reduce the heat and at 30 minutes the biscuits should be golden
brown and thoroughly baked inside. Remove bread from the pans as soon as
it comes from the oven. Keep covered with a clean cloth until cool then
place in a stone jar or tin box.

WHAT DOES YOUR DRUGGIST SAY
when you ask him if he can recommend any good medicine to you because
you are nervous and run-down and not able to get your work done? He
suggests that Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound is a well-known and
well-made medicine and that he knows many women who take it and
recommend it.

"COULD NOT WORK HALF THE TIME"
"For many years I have had troubles with my nerves and have been in a
general run down condition for some time. I could not do my work half
the time because of troubles every month. I was told of Lydia E.
Pinkham's Vegetable Compound by friends and advised to try it. It has
done me good and I strongly recommend it. Since I have taken it I have
been able to do all my own work, and I also know friends who have found
it good. You can use these facts as a testimonial."
MRS. ELLEN FLATTERS,
Box 761, Cobourg, Ontario.


WHITE BREAD
[Illustration]

Ingredients
1 tablespoon lard
1 tablespoon butter
1-1/2 teaspoons salt
1 tablespoon sugar
1 cup scalded milk
1 cup boiling water
1 yeast cake in 1/4 cup lukewarm water
6 cups sifted flour

Method--Put lard, butter, salt and sugar into large bowl. Pour over them
the scalded milk and boiling water. When this is lukewarm add the yeast
cake dissolved in luke-warm water. Sift in flour gradually, beating with
a spoon. Toss on a floured board and knead until smooth. Allow it to
rise over night in a moderately warm place or until it doubles its
original size. Cut down or knead and allow it to rise until light, then
form into loaves or biscuits. Allow these to rise until light, then
bake. The amount of yeast used will depend on the length of time the
bread is allowed to rise.

WHAT DO GIRLS DO
who don't have mothers to advise them about their health?

"SHE WAS UNABLE TO ATTEND SCHOOL"
"Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound was recommended to me for my
daughter. She had trouble every month which left her in a weak and
nervous condition, with weak back and pain in her right side. She had
these troubles for three years and frequently was unable to attend
school. She has become regular and feels much better since she began
taking the Vegetable Compound and attends school regularly. She is
gaining steadily and I have no hesitancy in recommending Lydia E.
Pinkham's Vegetable Compound and Lydia E. Pinkham's Blood Medicine."
MRS. JOHN TOMS,
Ball St., Cobourg, Ontario.


CORN CAKE
[Illustration]

Ingredients
2 cups Indian Meal
1 cup flour
1/2 cup sugar
1 teaspoon salt
1 egg
1 teaspoon soda
2 cups sour milk

Method--Sift the dry ingredients together except the soda. Add egg
slightly beaten. Dissolve the soda in sour milk, stir into the dry
ingredients quickly and pour into a greased pan. Bake for half an hour
in a moderate oven.

EVERY TRUE MOTHER
realizes the fact that her baby's health depends upon her own, that the
very vitality of her child is influenced by her own physical condition.
Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound has brought health and strength to
thousands of others.

"I COULD NOT DO A SINGLE BIT OF WORK"
"I was troubled with weak feelings, headache all the time, a cough,
fainting spells and pains in my back and side. I could not do a single
bit of work and had to be helped out to the hammock where I lay in the
fresh air from morning until night and I had to be carried up and down
stairs. After other medicines had failed a friend advised me to take
Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound as she said it was excellent for
any one in the family way. Before the first bottle was taken I could
walk alone and as I kept on with it I got stronger until I was able to
do all of my work. My baby is now six weeks old and is a big fat healthy
fellow. I am sure Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound has done wonders
for me and I recommend it to any woman in that condition."
MRS. MURRAY J. BARTON, R.R. No. 1,
Cumberland Bay, New Brunswick.


TEA BISCUIT
[Illustration]

Ingredients
2 cups bread flour
4 teaspoons baking powder
1/2 teaspoon salt
1 to 2 tablespoons shortening
3/4 cup milk

Method--Sift the dry ingredients together, mix in fat with the tips of
fingers, then add the milk a little at a time or cut it in with a knife.
The dough should be as soft as can be easily handled. Roll lightly until
one inch thick, cut in rounds and bake in a hot oven for 15 or 20
minutes.

AN EVIDENCE OF CONFIDENCE
in a friend is to follow her advice, especially if it is not hearsay
evidence but something which she has tried out on herself and proved.
Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound merits such confidence. Women all
over Canada as well as in the United States take our medicine and tell
its worth.

"SAVED ME FROM AN OPERATION"
"I took Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound at the change of life for
troubles women often have. I had not been well for a year and was not
really able to do my work. A friend who had taken the Vegetable Compound
herself recommended it to me and I think its use saved me from an
operation. I highly recommend to all women with troubles like mine."
MRS. DANIEL J. TRACEY,
Knightington, Ontario.

"A FRIEND RECOMMENDED IT"
"A friend in Rose Valley recommended Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable
Compound to me, and it has been a great help to me. I recommend it, and
you can use this letter as a testimonial if you wish."
MRS. PETER NORDIN,
Wadena, Saskatchewan.


OMELET
[Illustration]

Ingredients
1 egg
1 tablespoon hot water
1 salt spoon salt
Few grains of pepper

Method--Separate the white from the yoke of the egg and beat it until
stiff. Beat the yolk until thick and add the hot water and salt. Fold
the beaten white of the egg in and put into a buttered pan. Cook slowly
until puffed and brown.

SCRAMBLED EGGS

Ingredients
1 egg
1 tablespoon milk or water
1/2 salt spoon salt
Few grains of pepper

Method--Beat the eggs slightly and add liquid and seasonings. Pour into
a warm buttered pan and cook slowly over water. As the egg coagulates on
the bottom and sides of the pan lift it with a spoon. Continue until
thickened and creamy but not dry. Serve immediately.

ONLY A FEW BOTTLES
of Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound are needed to give surprising
results, as so many women tell us.

"HAD NO AMBITION"
"I suffered greatly from weakness, seemed to be tired all the time, and
had no ambition to do anything or go any place. My nerves were in bad
shape, I could not sleep at night and then came a breakdown. I read of
Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound in the newspapers and several of
my friends advised me to use it. It surely put new life into me and now
I am quite able to do all my own work."
MRS. CHAS. WAKELIN,
272 Christie St., Toronto, Ontario.


SWEET MILK GRIDDLE CAKES
[Illustration]

Ingredients
3 cups flour
2 tablespoons sugar
1/2 teaspoon salt
4 tablespoons baking powder
1 egg
2 cups milk
2 tablespoons melted fat

Method--Mix and sift dry ingredients. Add beaten egg, milk and fat to
make a thin batter. Drop on a hot oiled griddle and brown on both sides.

SAVINGS
Save all the waxed paper that crackers and bread come wrapped in. It is
very handy to roll out pie-crust or biscuits on, also doughnuts and
cookies, and saves washing the pastry board.

IF YOU HAVE TO WORK
you must have good health in order to do your work well. Besides this,
you want to be able to play afterwards and both work and play require
good health. It is a great handicap to be lacking in energy when you are
young and should be strong. Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound will
help that tired feeling which many girls have.

"I HAD TO STAY IN BED"
"I suffered for three years with troubles women often have. About every
three weeks I had to stay in bed four or five days. I nearly went crazy
with pains in my back, and for about a week at a time I could not do my
work. I saw Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound advertised in the
'Hamilton Spectator' and I took it. Now I have no pain and am quite
regular unless I overwork or stay on my feet from early morning until
late at night. I keep house and do all my own work without any trouble.
I have recommended the Vegetable Compound to several friends."
MRS. EMILY BEECROFT,
16 Douglas St., Hamilton, Ontario.


VINEGAR
[Illustration]

A spoonful of vinegar added to the water when cooking corned beef will
make it more tender.

To make pie-crust flaky try adding one-half a spoonful of vinegar to the
cold water before mixing.

Add vinegar to the water in which you soak wilted vegetables and they
will revive quickly and any little bugs in them will come out.

Add vinegar to the water when washing windows or paint or cleaning
floors.

If paint or varnish is on a window, wet it with hot vinegar and rub it
off with a cent.

To take the shine from clothing, sponge the shiny places with boiling
hot vinegar, rubbing vigorously, then press as usual.

IT IS PERFECTLY SAFE
for any one to take Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound whenever such
a medicine is needed. It contains no narcotics nor harmful drugs and is
made in the most accurate and sanitary manner. Can a medicine be a fraud
that is compounded from nature's own remedies, the roots and herbs of
the fields, that has stood the test of time by restoring health and
happiness to thousands of suffering women?

"FOR WOMEN'S TROUBLES"
"I saw Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound advertised for women's
troubles, and when a friend recommended it to me I tried it, and it has
done me so much good in the two years in which I have been taking it
that I find I am a different woman since then. I recommend your
Vegetable Compound as much as I can and you may use my letter as a
testimonial."
MRS. WM. J. THOMAS,
Melaval, Saskatchewan.


CASSEROLE OF RICE AND MEAT
[Illustration]

Ingredients
2 cups steamed rice
2 cups chopped seasoned meat
1 cup gravy or tomato sauce
1/2 cup buttered crumbs

Method--Place in a baking dish a layer of rice, over this sprinkle a
layer of chopped meat and repeat until the dish is nearly filled; then
pour gravy or tomato sauce over the meat. Cover with the buttered crumbs
and bake until brown.

HELPFUL HINTS
To keep the daily paper from blowing away when it is left on the porch,
get the carrier to snap it into a spring clothes-pin which is tied to
the railing.

WHEN A WOMAN KNOWS
that a certain medicine is good she wants no substitute or makeshift.
The women who take Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound are of this
class. They know what they want and they will take nothing else.

"COULD NOT SLEEP"
"I took Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound for weakness of the female
organs. I had pains in the back and bearing-down pains in the abdomen
and was in a general run-down condition. I could not sleep, rest or
work, and was quite unfit to do even light household tasks. A friend
told me about your Vegetable Compound and I in my turn truly recommend
it, as my severe symptoms vanished and I am better in every way. I do my
own work, look after my children and see to chickens, a cow, and my
garden. I also recommend it for young girls who are weak and rundown, as
my 16-year-old daughter has taken it and is quite her own gay self
again."
MRS. FRED. WILEY,
Viscount, Saskatchewan.


FILIPINO ROLL
[Illustration]

Ingredients
1 sweet green pepper
2 onions
1 lb. Hamburg steak
1 cup bread crumbs
1 egg
2 teaspoons salt
1 tablespoon Worcestershire Sauce
5 or 6 slices of bacon

Sauce
1 cup tomato soup
1 tablespoon flour
1 teaspoon sugar
1/2 cup water

Method--Wash the pepper and remove the seeds, add onions and chop
together. Mix with meat, breadcrumbs and well beaten egg. Add seasonings
and form into a roll. Cover with bacon and bake 45 minutes in a
moderately hot oven. Remove to platter, add water to make gravy and
strain into it the thickened tomato soup. Let it boil a few minutes then
pour around the roll.

A FEW MINUTES
of any woman's time is well spent if she will read what Lydia E.
Pinkham's Vegetable Compound does for sick and ailing women.

"ONE OF YOUR LITTLE BOOKS"
"I took Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound for weakness and female
disorders. I was so weak at times that I could not stand up. I had been
this way for nearly three years, and the different medicines I had taken
had not done me any good. I found one of your little books at my door
one day and thought I would give your medicine a trial. I am now on my
fifth bottle and it is wonderful the way it has helped me. I am feeling
much better, have no weak spells, and can do all my work now. I am
recommending your Vegetable Compound to all I know."
MRS. CASEY LEMERY,
176 Abbott St., Brockville, Ontario.


MOCK MEAT CAKES
[Illustration]

Ingredients
1/2 cup dried peas or beans
5 medium potatoes
1/2 cup grated cheese
1/2 cup fine breadcrumbs
1 egg (beaten)
1 tablespoon melted bacon fat
salt and pepper

Method--Soak peas or beans over night, then boil until very tender. Boil
and mash potatoes. Add mashed beans, grated cheese, bread-crumbs, beaten
egg, bacon fat and seasonings. When cool shape into cakes, dip into
cornmeal and fry.

WHY ARE SOME WOMEN
happy, beloved, and successful, while others drag out a negative
existence, of no use to themselves or anyone else? Except in a few cases
the answer is to be found in a state of freedom from the troubles known
as "female." The well woman radiates cheerfulness and serenity, while
the ailing one repels you with her despondency. It is not necessary,
however, to harbor aches and pains, and the "blues," which make one a
detriment to society. The use of Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound
has brought relief to such women, and given them a new lease of life.

"A GENERAL RUN-DOWN CONDITION"
"I was in a general run-down condition, with a weak back and tired
feeling, so that I did not feel like working. My mother was taking Lydia
E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound and recommended it to me, so I have
taken it, and my back is better and I am now able to do my work. I
recommend the Vegetable Compound to my neighbors and you may publish
this letter."
MRS. JOSEPHAT A. GRENIER,
Hesketh, Alberta.


DRY BEAN CHOWDER
[Illustration]

Ingredients
1 cup dried beans
2 slices bacon (diced)
1 can corn
1 can tomatoes
salt and pepper
cracker crumbs

Method--Soak the beans over night and boil until tender. Drain into a
fire-proof casserole. Try out the fat from the bacon until it is
perfectly crisp, care being taken that it is not burned. Then add corn,
seasoning and tomatoes. Mix all and add to beans. Sprinkle cracker
crumbs over the top and bake twenty-five minutes. Serve from the
casserole.

IN THIS GENERATION
it is 'the style' to be healthy. Our heroines no longer languish and
faint. They are all healthy girls and women who do a day's work or play
just as a man does. If some of us are not so healthy as this, we try to
be and take Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound when we feel the need.

"I WAS A TOTAL WRECK"
"Before using Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound I was a total wreck.
I had terrible pains in my sides and was not regular. Finally I got so
weak I could not go upstairs without stopping to rest halfway up. I saw
your medicine advertised in the newspapers and gave it a trial. I took
four bottles of the Vegetable Compound and was restored to health. I am
married, am the mother of two children, and do all my own housework,
milk eight cows and do a hired man's work and enjoy the best of health.
I also found the Vegetable Compound a great help for my weak back before
my babies were born. I recommend it to all my friends."
MRS. HENRY JANKE,
Marmion, Ontario.


COOKING HINTS
[Illustration]

Never throw away the feet of a fowl as they are excellent for making
soups, broths and jellies. You can buy extra feet from the butcher. Dip
them in boiling water for a few seconds and they may be readily skinned.
Boil with the chicken until they fall to pieces, then strain the broth.

Before baking potatoes let them stand in hot water for fifteen minutes.
They will require only half the time to bake.

Pour boiling water on oranges and let them stand for five minutes. This
will make the white lining come away from the skin and they will be
easier to prepare for a pudding.

ANY HOSPITAL EXPERIENCE
is painful as well as costly and frequently dangerous. Many women have
avoided this experience by taking Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound
in time, thereby relieving the present distress and preventing the
development of conditions that might require an operation.

"THEY SAID I NEEDED AN OPERATION"
"I suffered from the time I was a schoolgirl until I had taken your
medicine with pain in my left side and with cramps, growing worse each
year until I was all rundown. I was so bad at times that I was unfit for
work. I tried several doctors and patent medicines but was only relieved
for a short time. Some of the doctors wanted to have an operation, but
my father objected. Finally I learned through my mother of Lydia E.
Pinkham's Vegetable Compound, and how thankful I am that I tried it. I
am relieved from pains and cramps and feel as if it has saved my life.
You may use my letter to help other women, as I am glad to recommend the
medicine."
MRS. H.A. GOODMAN,
14 Rockvale Ave., Toronto, Ontario.


HINTS AND HELPS
[Illustration]

The common nut-cracker makes a splendid little household wrench for cans
and bottles with screw tops. Even glass stoppers will yield to it.

A pair of scissors in the pantry to cut up raisins, suet, citron, etc.,
is easier to use then the chopper. A metal shoe-horn that has a hole in
the top to hang it up by, makes a good kettle scraper.

Use a bicycle pump to clean such parts of the sewing machine as you
cannot reach with a cloth or with an old tooth brush.

Save the sand-paper which comes on the match-boxes and use it for
scraping, cleaning, etc.

Ammonia water will remove the cloudy appearance from the preserve jars
in which vegetables have been canned.

THE BEST ADVERTISED MEDICINE
in the world is the medicine which has the most friends.

"It HAS DONE SO MUCH FOR WOMEN"
"I took Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound for years, and it is the
only patent medicine I ever recommend. I am a nurse, and if I find a
woman is in poor health I always tell her to take it. Although you know
doctors and nurses do not use patent medicines I must say that I think
there is nothing better than your Vegetable Compound. When I first took
it many years ago, I was that tired when I got up in the morning that I
was weak and I could not eat nor sleep. My mother-in-law told me that
Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound was just what I wanted, so I tried
it, and only took two bottles when I felt better. Since then I have
found that there is nothing that makes me feel so well, for it seems to
build my system right up. I don't know any other medicine that has done
so much for women."
MRS. W.H. PARKER,
19 Wellesley Ave., Toronto, Ontario.


DUTCH CHEESE
[Illustration]

Ingredients
1 quart sour milk
1/3 to 1 teaspoon salt
1/4 cup sour or sweet cream
(or 1 large tablespoon butter)

Method--The milk should be freshly sour to get the best flavor. This is
best obtained by adding a little sour milk to five or six times the
amount of sweet milk. It should be kept in a warm place (the back of the
stove) until the curd of the milk is thick and smooth and the whey is
watery and has risen to the top. Drain in a cheese cloth bag until dry.
Add cream (or butter) and salt. If the process needs to be hurried stir
into the milk a cup full of nearly boiling water. Leave to settle before
draining. As the cheese is very rich in protein it easily becomes tough
by overheating. For the same reason it is very nourishing.

THE CONTINUED SUCCESS
of a medicine depends entirely upon its merit. For nearly fifty years
Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound has been demonstrating its worth
among women as a valuable medicine for the treatment of female ills, and
the tremendous volume of letters on file in the Pinkham laboratory at
Lynn, Massachusetts, from grateful women in all parts of the United
States and Canada is ample proof of its merit.

"A LOT OF GOOD"
"I had female troubles for two years. I always had a headache and a pain
in my side, and sometimes I felt so weak that I could not do my work. A
friend advised me to take Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound and I
have taken six bottles of it. It has done me a lot of good and I am
still taking it. I will tell my friends of your medicine and hope they
will try it."
MRS. CAMILLE DesROCHE,
Miscouche, Prince Edward's Island.


CAKE-MAKING
Success in cake-making depends on careful combining of ingredients,
accurate measurements and careful baking. To make cake light and close
in texture, thorough beating is necessary.

Baking--Small and layer cakes require a hot oven for 10 to 20 minutes.

Loaf cakes need a moderate oven from 40 to 60 minutes. In the beginning
the oven should be hot enough to cause the cake to rise and then to form
a crust which holds the gases. When the cake has risen to its full
height decrease the heat so that the cake may finish baking without
becoming too brown. If the oven is too hot at first a crust will be
formed before the cake is risen. If not hot enough, gas will not be
retained in the cake. Either of these conditions will make the cake
heavy.

Testing--The cake is baked if, when pressed lightly upon the top in the
middle, it springs back again. It usually shrinks from the sides of the
pan. A deep cake may be tested with a clean straw.

Methods of work--First grease and flour the pans. Collect all materials
and utensils needed and make sure that the oven will be ready. Do this
before combining any materials.

WE READ
a good deal about "Pre-Natal Care"--the care of the mother before her
child is born--and we all agree that a healthy and happy mother is the
one to have the best babies.

"SO SMART AND HEALTHY"
"When I would get out of bed in the morning I could hardly stand on my
feet for weakness and a bearing-down pain. I heard of Lydia E. Pinkham's
Vegetable Compound and tried it with Lydia E. Pinkham's Liver Pills and
used Lydia E. Pinkham's Sanative Wash for the white flow, and was doing
fine. This was before my little girl was born. She is so smart and
healthy and good-natured that I think the Compound must have made her
that way."
MRS. RICHARD WILLIAMS,
Milltown, New Brunswick.


PLAIN CAKE
for Loaf or Layer Cake
[Illustration]

Ingredients
2 eggs
1 cup sugar
3 teaspoons Oleo or butter
1/2 cup milk
1/2 teaspoon salt
1-1/2 cups flour
1-1/2 teaspoons baking powder
1/2 teaspoon vanilla

Method--Beat eggs light, add sugar, butter, milk, salt and all but 2
tablespoons of the flour. Beat well, add vanilla, then add the remainder
of the flour with the baking powder, sifted together. Bake in loaf or
layer cake pans.

BROWNSTONE CAKE FILLING
Ingredients--1/2 cup sugar, 1 square of chocolate, 1 tablespoon
cornstarch, a few grains of salt, 1/2 cup of milk.

Method--Mix dry ingredients. Add liquid gradually. Cook in double boiler
until thick and creamy.

WEAKNESS MAY SHOW
in early girlhood and if attended to at that time and not allowed to
develop into serious troubles by carelessness or overwork, girls will
grow stronger as they grow older. Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound
is what many mothers give their girls in these early years.

"MY MOTHER-IN-LAW TOLD ME"
"I took Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound for female troubles. I
would have headaches, backache, pains between my shoulders and under my
shoulder-blades, and bad feelings in the lower parts on each side, in
the groins. I was sometimes unable to do my work and felt very badly. My
mother-in-law told me about the Vegetable Compound and I got some right
away. It has done me more good than any other medicine I ever took, and
I recommend it to my neighbors."
MRS. EDGAR SIMMONS,
R.R. No. 2, Pine Grove, Ontario.


SPONGE CAKE
[Illustration]

Ingredients
2 eggs
1/2 cup sugar
1 teaspoon cold water
1/2 tablespoon lemon juice
1 salt spoon salt
1/2 cup flour

Method--Beat yolks until thick and add sugar gradually. Add water and
lemon juice. Sift flour and salt into yolk mixture and beat thoroughly.
Fold in the stiffly beaten whites of eggs and bake in a moderate oven.

CRISPETTES
Ingredients--2 eggs, 1/2 cup white sugar, 1/2 cup brown sugar, 1/2 cup
chopped walnuts or cocoanut, 1/2 cup flour, 1/2 teaspoon vanilla, 1/2
teaspoon salt.

Method--Beat eggs very light, add sugar and remaining ingredients. Beat
well and drop by tablespoonfuls on a buttered pan 2 inches apart. Bake
in a moderately hot oven. Always use a tin pan.

A LITTLE CARE
when one is young is not much to pay for good health afterwards. Take
Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound for any weakness you may have.
This well-known medicine is recommended by mothers to their daughters,
by sisters to one another, and by friends and neighbors to the woman
whose loved ones are far from her when she needs them most.

"AM PERFECTLY SATISFIED"
"When my husband was called back to England in 1914, I took Lydia E.
Pinkham's Vegetable Compound to strengthen me so that I could work. My
periods were twice a month and used to make me so weak, but I am able to
do my work now and am perfectly satisfied with your medicine. I still
get it at the chemist's, and strongly recommend it to any one I hear of
suffering as I did."
MRS. E. HORNBLOWER,
899 Yonge St., Toronto, Ontario.


WAR CAKE
[Illustration]

Ingredients
1 cup brown sugar
1 cup water
2 cups raisins
1/3 cup fat
1/4 teaspoon grated nutmeg
1 teaspoon ground cloves
few grains salt.

Method--Boil the above ingredients together for three minutes. Let cool.
When cold add 1 teaspoon soda dissolved in 2 tablespoons hot water. Add
2 cups flour in which 1 teaspoon baking powder has been sifted. Bake in
a moderate oven.

PANTRY HELPS
If butter is too hard to serve, heat a bowl with boiling water and turn
the empty bowl over the butter. This will not waste or impair the taste
of the butter.

ARE YOU INTERESTED
in a letter from a woman in South Africa who takes Lydia E. Pinkham's
Vegetable Compound?

"ONE OF YOUR LITTLE BOOKS"
"I took Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound for weakness and because I
felt run down. I tried a lot of medicine before I tried yours. One day I
was standing on my stoop when a boy came up to me and handed me one of
your little books. I read the book, and the next day my husband went to
a chemist and bought me a bottle of Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable
Compound. I have taken the medicine ever since and I feel quite strong
and well now as I am on the sixth bottle. I have written to my sister
and told her all about the wonders it has done for me, and I am quite
willing for you to use my name, as I cannot thank you enough for what it
has done for me."
MRS. W.F. RUSH,
128 6th Avenue, Mayfair, Fordesburg,
Johannesburg, South Africa.


CHOCOLATE CAKE
[Illustration]

Ingredients
5 tablespoons butter
1 cup sugar
2 eggs
1/2 cup milk
1-1/2 cups flour
2 squares chocolate
1/2 teaspoon vanilla
1/2 teaspoon salt
2-1/2 teaspoons baking powder.

Method--Cream butter and sugar. Add yolks of eggs beaten until thick,
then milk, and all but 2 tablespoons of the flour. Beat thoroughly, add
melted chocolate and vanilla. Add remaining flour, salt and baking
powder sifted together. Fold in stiffly beaten whites of eggs. Bake in
moderate oven.

A PROPRIETARY MEDICINE
like everything else that comes before the public, has to prove its
merits. The law of the survival of the fittest applies in this field as
in others. Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound has been used by women
for nearly fifty years.

"I KNOW WOMEN WHO HAVE BEEN HELPED"
"My mother had taken Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound, and when I
needed something for my periods I took it and got good results. I
recommend it to women with any female troubles, and I know other women
who have been helped by it."
MRS. MAX RETZER,
Lumsden, Saskatchewan.

"I used to have very bad pains in my back and sides and often was not
fit for work. I tried many medicines before I took yours. I saw Lydia E.
Pinkham's Vegetable Compound advertised in the 'Toronto Globe,' and now
that it has helped me I recommend it to all my neighbors."
ELIZABETH CAMPBELL,
13 St. Paul St., Lindsay, Ontario.


CHOCOLATE FROSTING
[Illustration]

Ingredients
1-1/2 squares chocolate
1 cup sugar
1 cup boiling water

Method--Cut chocolate into small pieces, add sugar and water and stir
until blended. Boil until a soft ball forms when dropped into ice-water.
Cool. Beat until creamy and spread on cake.

WHITE FROSTING

Ingredients
1 egg white
1 cup confectioner's sugar
1/2 teaspoon flavoring

Method--Beat the white of egg until stiff. Stir in the sugar and
flavoring and beat until creamy.

WHEN A MAN
comes home from work at night, he wants to find his home clean and
comfortable, his supper ready, his children happy and his wife smiling a
welcome to him. These are only natural feelings and when things are the
reverse and he has to help do the work, he looks for the cause of the
trouble and its remedy. Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound will help
women keep strong and well.

"WITH MY HUSBAND'S HELP"
"I used Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound for pains across the small
of my back. They bothered me so badly that I could do my work only with
my husband's help. One day we saw the 'ad' in our paper telling what
Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound is doing for women so I began to
take it. It has helped me wonderfully. I am feeling fine, do all my
housework and washing for seven in the family. I had been irregular too,
and now I am all right. I am telling my friends what it has done for me
and am sure it will do good for others. I will stand up for Lydia E.
Pinkham's Vegetable Compound any time."
MRS. WM. JUHNKE, Foster, Oregon


MOCHA FROSTING
[Illustration]

Ingredients
3 tablespoons butter
1 cup confectioner's sugar
2 tablespoons cold boiled coffee
2 tablespoons cocoa
1/2 teaspoon vanilla

Method--Cream the butter and sugar, add the remaining ingredients and
enough more sugar to make it creamy.

Plain icing may be made by moistening confectioner's sugar with milk or
water (either hot or cold) and adding flavoring. Either this or white
frosting may be used as a foundation for nuts or chopped fruit. Orange
frosting may be made by moistening the sugar with orange juice.

HOWEVER BUSY
a woman is she always finds time to read the daily papers. And she may
read the Bargains first and the Weather Report last, but she always
reads the testimonial letters advertising Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable
Compound. She wants to know what experience other women have had with
this great medicine.

"WHEN MY DAUGHTER WAS THIRTEEN"
"When my daughter was thirteen and until she was fifteen she suffered
every month so that she could hardly move around the house and when she
would have the pains in school she would have to be carried home. She
also had headache, dizzy and faint spells, and soreness in her back. I
saw your advertisement in the 'Hamilton Spectator' and got Lydia E.
Pinkham's Vegetable Compound for her. She does not have the least bit of
trouble now, and we both recommend your medicine. She works in a
candy-shop now and seems well and strong. I give you permission to
publish this letter as a testimonial."
MRS. I.P. CLAUSE,
83 Oxford St., Hamilton, Ontario.


LEMON PIE WITH MERINGUE
[Illustration]

Ingredients
3/4 cup sugar
3 tablespoons cornstarch
1 cup boiling water
3 tablespoons lemon juice
and grated rind
1 tablespoon butter
2 egg yolks

Method--Mix sugar and corn starch thoroughly, pour boiling water over
them, stirring constantly. Cook until thick and until starch is well
done. Add lemon juice and butter. Cool slightly and add egg yolks. Pour
into plate lined with pastry and bake until paste is cooked. Or pour
into crust already baked.

MERINGUE
Ingredients--2 egg whites beaten stiff, 2 to 4 tablespoons of powdered
sugar, a few drops of vanilla. Add sugar gradually to stiffly beaten
whites of eggs. Add flavoring. Spread over top of pie and cook until
golden brown in a slow oven.

"MAN MAY WORK
from sun to sun, but woman's work is never done." Women continually
overdo and drift along from bad to worse. Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable
Compound is a standard medicine for women's troubles.

"WE HAVE TO DO OUR OWN WORK"
"I saw in the newspapers where Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound was
doing so much good to women, and as I needed something I began to take
it. I used to be very sick, but I am not now. I live on a farm in the
homestead district and we have to do all our own work. I tell all the
women I see what Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound does for me. I
think it saves me from going to a doctor and is the best medicine women
can take."
MRS. WILLIAM COULTAS,
Fork River, Manitoba.


PIE CRUST
[Illustration]

Ingredients
1-1/2 cups flour
3 tablespoons lard
1/2 teaspoon salt
cold water
3 tablespoons butter

Method--Wash butter and squeeze until water and salt has been removed.
Chill the lard then chop it into the flour, with two knives. Add salt
and moisten it to a dough with cold water. (Ice water is not essential
but is desirable in summer.) Toss on a floured board and roll out. Fold
to make three layers and put the butter between the layers. Turn half
way round, pat, and roll out. Cut off the sides of it and roll into
shape for the plate. Roll the center for the upper crust, cutting slits
in it to let out steam. Fold the upper crust under the edge of the lower
crust. Bake in a moderately hot oven 40-50 minutes. Pastry may be used
immediately or chilled before using. It must not come in contact with
the ice.

IF THERE IS ONE THING
more than another that a woman should care about it is her health. She
may be cheated in her happiest hopes because she does not know that
Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound can be safely taken by all women.

"MY BACK SEEMED THE WORST"
"I was so weak that I could hardly do anything and my back seemed the
worst. I read so much about Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound for
women that I thought I would try it. I feel that it did help me. I am
looking after my own home now and seem quite strong again. I have
recommended your Vegetable Compound to quite a few friends and you can
use my name if you wish to do so."
MRS. H. PORTER,
Box 440, Meaford, Ontario.


APPLE PIE
[Illustration]

Ingredients
4 or 5 sour apples
1/3 cup sugar
1/4 tablespoon grated nutmeg
1/8 teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon lemon juice
few gratings lemon rind
1 tablespoon butter

Method--Line pie-plate with pastry. Pare, core, and cut apples into
eighths. Put row of slices around the plate 1/2 inch from the edge
working towards the center until the plate is covered. Then pile on the
remainder. Mix sugar, nutmeg, salt, lemon juice and grated rind and
sprinkle over the apple. Dot all with butter. Wet the edges of the under
crust, cover with the upper crust and press together. Bake for 40-45
minutes in a moderate oven.

DO YOU FEEL
broken-down, nervous and weak sometimes? Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable
Compound is excellent to take at such a time. It always helps and if
taken regularly and persistently will relieve this condition.

"AS IF I MUST SCREAM"
"I cannot speak too highly of what Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound
has done for me. I was a nervous wreck and I just had to force myself to
do my work. Even the sound of my own children playing made be feel as if
I must scream if they did not get away from me. I could not even speak
right to my husband. The doctor said that he could do nothing for me
owing to my condition. My husband's grandmother advised me to take Lydia
E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound. I started it right away and everyone
noticed what a different woman I was in a short time. I was able to do
my work once more, and it was a pleasure, not a burden."
MRS. EMILY DAVIS,
721 McGee St., Winnipeg, Manitoba.


BAKED FRUIT PUDDING
[Illustration]

Prepare fruit--apples, peaches,--and sprinkle with sugar, also with
cinnamon or nutmeg if apples are used. Place fruit in baking-dish to
within one inch of the top.

CRUST

Ingredients
1 cup flour
1 salt spoon salt
1 teaspoon baking powder
2 tablespoons butter
1/3 cup milk

Method--Mix and sift the dry ingredients, cut in butter with knife and
add milk. Roll the crust to fit the baking-dish, keeping it 1/2 inch
thick and place over the fruit. Press edges of the crust to the rim of
the dish and make a small opening in the crust near the center. Bake in
a moderate oven 30 minutes. Serve with vanilla sauce.

THE RIGHT ROAD
to Health is what every ailing woman is looking for and when one woman
gets on that road she is always ready to direct some other woman to it.

"IT HAD HELPED MY SISTER"
"I was a sufferer for three years, not able to do my housework. My
husband was discouraged for I was no better and had the doctor all this
time and nothing had helped me. I was always sleepy, had no appetite and
suffered with my left side. My mother, in England, recommended Lydia E.
Pinkham's Vegetable Compound because it had helped my sister, so I have
been taking it. I am now able to do my housework and I cannot praise
your Vegetable Compound too highly, as I have great hopes for the
future. I will tell anyone who writes to me what good it has done me."
MRS. HENRY MASSON,
St. Henry P.O., Montreal.


VANILLA SAUCE
[Illustration]

Ingredients
1 cup boiling water
2 teaspoons corn-starch
1 tablespoon butter
1/2 cup sugar
1/2 teaspoon vanilla
little salt

Method--Mix the corn-starch with a little cold water and stir into the
hot water, boiling five minutes. Put butter, sugar, flavoring and salt
into a bowl and pour the thoroughly cooked cornstarch over it, stirring
until the sugar and the butter are dissolved.

LEMON JELLY
Ingredients--2 oranges, 1 lemon, the rind of one orange grated fine, 1
cup sugar, 1 tablespoon gelatine, 2 cups boiling water.

Method--Mix the juices and the fruit gratings with the sugar. Soak 1
tablespoon gelatine in 1 cup of cold water until soft. Stir in 2 cups of
boiling water and add the sugar and fruit juices. Stir until the
gelatine is dissolved, then pour into a mold to harden.

"WOMEN'S TROUBLES AND WOMEN'S WORK"
"I was weak and had some troubles women often have and usually I was
unfit to do my work. I saw your advertisement and decided to try Lydia
E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound. I am very much pleased with the result
and recommend your Vegetable Compound whenever I have a chance."
MRS. WANDLESS,
360 Church St., Fredericton, New Brunswick.

"I have taken Lydia E. Pinkham's medicines and they have done me a lot
of good. Since then I have been able to do my housework, and I have a
lot to do as we live on a farm. Seeing your advertisement in the papers
was what made me think of writing to you."
MRS. WM. B. KEIVER,
Upper New Horton, New Brunswick.


CHOCOLATE BREAD PUDDING
[Illustration]

Ingredients
2 cups bread crumbs
4 cups of milk (or 2 of water
and 2 of evaporated milk)
2 squares chocolate
2/3 cup sugar
1 salt spoon salt
1 teaspoon vanilla

Method--Soak bread crumbs in milk until soft. Melt the chocolate over
hot water and add the sugar to it. Beat eggs well and add with the
remaining ingredients to the crumbs and milk. Mix well and bake in a
buttered pudding-dish in a moderate oven, until thick and firm. A
Meringue (see page 23) of egg white and sugar may be spread over the top
about 15 minutes before it is done, or it can be served with cream,
hard, or foamy sauce.

Hard Sauce--1/3 cup butter, 1 cup powdered sugar, 1/3 teaspoon lemon
extract, 2/3 teaspoon vanilla. Cream the butter, add sugar gradually,
and flavoring.

LACK OF ENERGY
or 'pep' makes a woman feel old while she is yet young in years and
general appearance.

"NO SERIOUS TROUBLE"
"I had no disease only I felt tired and had headache very often and
thought I needed a tonic, so I got Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound
and the Liver Pills. I am now on the third bottle and have not had
headache for over two weeks. Of course I have not had any serious
trouble at all."
MRS. M.A. WATSON,
Victoria St., Cobourg, Ontario.

"I was weak and run down, had no appetite and was nervous. The nurse who
took care of me told me to try Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound,
and now I am getting strong. I recommend your medicine to my friends."
MRS. D. MAXWELL,
R.R. No. 2, Bothwell, Ontario.


CUP CUSTARDS
[Illustration]

Ingredients
1 quart milk
4 eggs
4 tablespoons sugar
1/2 teaspoon salt
few grains nutmeg

Method--Scald one quart of rich creamy milk. Beat four egg yolks, add
sugar and salt and beat until thick like cream. Beat the four egg whites
until foamy, not stiff, mix well with the yolks and sugar and add
scalded milk. Stand the cups in a shallow pan, stir the foam down, and
fill the cups to overflowing or nearly so. Put hot water in the pan and
bake in a hot oven, watching them carefully that they do not scorch. Lay
buttered paper over if needed. Test with a knife as soon as they begin
to puff up and if the blade comes out clean, not milky, they are done.

DO WOMEN READ
our little books which come so regularly to their homes? We feel sure
that they are read from cover to cover.

"I SEEMED TO BE SMOTHERING"
"I suffered with irregular periods, was weak and run-down, could not eat
and had headaches. The worst symptoms were dragging down pains, so bad I
sometimes thought I would go crazy and I seemed to be smothering. I was
in this condition for two or three years and could not seem to work. I
tried all kinds of remedies but received no benefit. I found one of your
booklets and felt inclined to try Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound.
I received the best results from it and now I keep house and go out to
work and am like a new woman."
MRS. J.F. PEASEY,
387 King St. West, Toronto, Ontario.


SUBSTITUTES
[Illustration]

Use jelly tumblers to bake custards in.

Use soldier's long wristers to make gaiters for a baby; just sew an
elastic band at the bottom.

Use cold cream jars to keep pepper, allspice, and other spices in, and
label with a sticker or a piece of surgeon's plaster.

Instead of the usual dust cap, cut a three-cornered piece of
cheese-cloth, hemming the two sides without selvedge and tie around the
head with the point at the back of your neck.

To avoid giving out fresh napkins at every meal, write each name on a
spring clothes-pin and pin to the napkin. You can name your face towel
in this way when camping out.

When cleaning fish use scissors in place of a knife and if it is to be
scaled dip it first into boiling water.

DO YOU KEEP ON TAKING
your medicine when you begin to improve, or do you stop taking it,
trusting that you are on the road to recovery and no more medicine is
needed, even if you have been sick for months and are having your first
hours of relief from pains and nervousness?

"HAVE TAKEN IT FAITHFULLY"
"For five years I suffered with pains in my back and from other troubles
women often have. All of this time I was unfit for work and was taking
different medicines that I thought were good. I saw the advertisement in
the papers of Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound and have taken it
faithfully. I am now in good health and do all my own work. I recommend
it to others and give you permission to publish this letter in your
little books and in the newspapers as a testimonial."
MRS. D. CASSADY,
Box 461, Paris, Ontario.


HOUSE-CLEANING HINTS
[Illustration]

To clean a painted wall wash it with saleratus water; about one
tablespoonful of saleratus to a quart of warm water.

A piece of zinc placed on the glowing coals will clean the chimney of
soot.

A little lye put in paste will make wall-paper stick.

To drive a nail into plaster, heat it very hot and the plaster will not
break.

To drive nails or screws into hard wood always rub them over with soap
and they will go in easily and will not split the wood.

Shellac the inside of all drawers and they will be easy to clean.

When you remove the waste from your carpet-sweeper, carefully cut the
lint and hair from the revolving rolls and brushes. Then with a cloth
dipped in kerosene rub the bristles and the inside of the box clean, and
the oil will prevent the dust from rising when you sweep.

HAVE YOU EVER THOUGHT
of writing to us about what Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound has
done for you?

"I AM STRONGER AND FEEL FINE."
"I took Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound because I was tired and
run down. I had headaches and no appetite and was troubled for two years
with sleeplessness. I tried many medicines but nothing did me any real
good. While I was living in Washington I was recommended by a friend to
take the Vegetable Compound. I am stronger and feel fine since then and
am able to do my housework. I am willing for you to use these facts as a
testimonial."
MRS. J.C. GREAVES,
771 Hornby St., Vancouver, British Columbia.


FIRST AIDS
[Illustration]

For a rusty nail accident pour turpentine at once on the afflicted
parts.

For burns put on scraped raw potato instantly and change as often as it
gets warm, until the pain is relieved.

Olive oil will remove gum from a child's hair as if by magic.

When a child puts a bean in his nose, don't try to dig it out. Put a
little cayenne pepper upon his upper lip and he will sneeze it out.

To extract splinters, fill a wide-mouthed bottle almost to the top with
very hot water and place the injured part over the mouth of the bottle
and press lightly. Suction will draw the flesh down and steam will
extract the splinter.

TABLE OF MEASURES
(dry and liquid)

4 salt spoons         1 teaspoonful
3 teaspoonfuls        1 tablespoonful
16 tablespoonfuls     1 cup
2 cups                1 pint

All measures are level. To measure dry materials, take up all a spoon or
cup will hold and level it with a knife.

To measure liquids, take up all the spoon or cup will hold.

"AFTER BEING MARRIED SIXTEEN YEARS"
"Seven years ago I took Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound and after
being married sixteen years became the mother of a sweet little girl. I
had longed for children all the while and wept many a day and envied
every woman with a child. I was thirty-six years old when my baby was
born. I recommend Lydia E. Pinkham's Vegetable Compound to any woman who
is ailing with female weakness."
MRS. J. NAUMANN
Pork making on the farm nearly a lost art--General merit of homemade
pork--Acknowledgments.


CHAPTER I.--PORK MAKING ON THE FARM.

Best time for killing--A home market for farm pork--Opportunities for
profit--Farm census of live stock for a series of years.


CHAPTER II.--FINISHING OFF HOGS FOR BACON.

Flesh forming rations--Corn as a fat producer--Just the quality of bacon
wanted--Normandy Hogs.


CHAPTER III.--SLAUGHTERING.

Methods employed--Necessary apparatus--Heating water for scalding.


CHAPTER IV.--SCALDING AND SCRAPING.

Saving the bristles--Scalding tubs and vats--Temperature for
scalding--"Singeing pigs"--Methods of Singeing.


CHAPTER V.--DRESSING AND CUTTING.

Best time for dressing--Opening the carcass--Various useful
appliances--Hints on dressing--How to cut up a hog.


CHAPTER VI.--WHAT TO DO WITH THE OFFAL.

Portions classed as offal--Recipes and complete directions for utilizing
the wholesome parts, aside from the principal pieces--Sausage, scrapple,
jowls and head, brawn, head-cheese.


CHAPTER VII.--THE FINE POINTS IN MAKING LARD.

Kettle and steam rendered--Time required in making--Storing.


CHAPTER VIII.--PICKLING AND BARRELING.

A clean barrel one of the first considerations--The use of salt on pork
strips--Pickling by covering with brine--Renewing pork brine.


CHAPTER IX.--CARE OF HAMS AND SHOULDERS.

A first-class ham--A general cure for ham and shoulders--Pickling
preparatory to smoking--Westphalian hams.


CHAPTER X.--DRY SALTING BACON AND SIDES.

Proper proportion of salt to meat--Other preservatives--Applying the
salt--Best distribution of the salt--Time required in curing--Pork for the
south.


CHAPTER XI.--SMOKING AND SMOKEHOUSES.

Treatment previous to smoking--Simple but effective
smokehouses--Controlling the fire in smoke formation--Materials to produce
best flavor--The choice of weather--Variety in smokehouses.


CHAPTER XII.--KEEPING HAMS AND BACON.

The ideal meat house--Best temperature and surroundings--Precautions
against skippers--To exclude the bugs entirely.


CHAPTER XIII.--SIDE LIGHTS ON PORK MAKING.

Growth of the big packing houses--Average weight of live hogs--"Net to
gross"--Relative weights of various portions of the carcass.


CHAPTER XIV.--PACKING HOUSE CUTS OF PORK.

Descriptions of the leading cuts of meat known as the speculative
commodities in the pork product--Mess pork, short ribs, shoulders and
hams, English bacon, varieties of lard.


CHAPTER XV.--MAGNITUDE OF THE SWINE INDUSTRY.

Importance of the foreign demand--Statistics of the trade--Receipts at
leading points--Prices for a series of years--Co-operative curing houses
in Denmark.


CHAPTER XVI.--DISCOVERING THE MERITS OF ROAST PIG.

The immortal Charles Lamb on the art of roasting--An oriental luxury of
luxuries.


CHAPTER XVII.--RECIPES FOR COOKING AND SERVING PORK.

Success in the kitchen--Prize methods of best cooks--Unapproachable list
of especially prepared recipes--Roasts, pork pie, cooking bacon, pork and
beans, serving chops and cutlets, use of spare ribs, the New England
boiled dinner, ham and sausage, etc.




INTRODUCTION.


Hog killing and pork making on the farm have become almost lost arts in
these days of mammoth packing establishments which handle such enormous
numbers of swine at all seasons of the year. Yet the progressive farmer of
to-day should not only provide his own fresh and cured pork for family
use, but also should be able to supply at remunerative prices such persons
in his neighborhood as appreciate the excellence and general merit of
country or "homemade" pork product. This is true, also, though naturally
in a less degree, of the townsman who fattens one or two pigs on the
family kitchen slops, adding sufficient grain ration to finish off the
pork for autumn slaughter.

The only popular book of the kind ever published, "Home Pork Making"
furnishes in a plain manner just such detailed information as is needed to
enable the farmer, feeder, or country butcher to successfully and
economically slaughter his own hogs and cure his own pork. All stages of
the work are fully presented, so that even without experience or special
equipment any intelligent person can readily follow the instructions.
Hints are given about finishing off hogs for bacon, hams, etc. Then,
beginning with proper methods of slaughtering, the various processes are
clearly presented, including every needful detail from the scalding vat to
the kitchen baking dish and dining-room table.

The various chapters treat successively of the following, among other
branches of the art of pork making: Possibilities of profit in home
curing and marketing pork; finishing off hogs for bacon; class of rations
best adapted, flesh and fat forming foods; best methods of slaughtering
hogs, with necessary adjuncts for this preliminary work; scalding and
scraping; the construction of vats; dressing the carcass; cooling and
cutting up the meat; best disposition of the offal; the making of sausage
and scrapple; success in producing a fine quality of lard and the proper
care of it.

Several chapters are devoted to putting down and curing the different cuts
of meat in a variety of ways for many purposes. Here will be found the
prized recipes and secret processes employed in making the popular pork
specialties for which England, Virginia, Kentucky, New England and other
sections are noted. Many of these points involve the old and well-guarded
methods upon which more than one fortune has been made, as well as the
newest and latest ideas for curing pork and utilizing its products. Among
these the subject of pickling and barreling is thoroughly treated,
renewing pork brine; care of barrels, etc. The proper curing of hams and
shoulders receives minute attention, and so with the work of dry salting
bacon and sides. A chapter devoted to smoking and smokehouses affords all
necessary light on this important subject, including a number of helpful
illustrations; success in keeping bacon and hams is fully described,
together with many other features of the work of home curing. The
concluding portion of the book affords many interesting details relating
to the various cuts of meat in the big packing houses, magnitude of the
swine industry and figures covering the importance of our home and foreign
trade in pork and pork product.

In completing this preface, descriptive of the various features of the
book, the editor wishes to give credit to our friends who have added to
its value through various contributions and courtesies. A considerable
part of the chapters giving practical directions for cutting and curing
pork are the results of the actual experience of B. W. Jones of Virginia;
we desire also to give due credit to contributions by P. H. Hartwell,
Rufus B. Martin, Henry Stewart and many other practical farmers; to Hately
Brothers, leading packers at Chicago; North Packing and Provision Co. of
Boston, and to a host of intelligent women on American farms, who, through
their practical experience in the art of cooking, have furnished us with
many admirable recipes for preparing and serving pork.




CHAPTER I.

PORK MAKING ON THE FARM.


During the marvelous growth of the packing industry the past generation,
methods of slaughtering and handling pork have undergone an entire
revolution. In the days of our fathers, annual hog-killing time was as
much an event in the family as the harvesting of grain. With the coming of
good vigorous frosts and cold weather, reached in the Northern states
usually in November, every farmer would kill one, two or more hogs for
home consumption, and frequently a considerable number for distribution
through regular market channels. Nowadays, however, the big pork packing
establishments have brought things down to such a fine point, utilizing
every part of the animal (or, as has been said, "working up everything but
the pig's squeal"), that comparatively few hogs out of all the great
number fattened are slaughtered and cut up on the farm.

Unquestionably there is room for considerable business of this character,
and if properly conducted, with a thorough understanding, farmers can
profitably convert some of their hogs into cured meats, lard, hams, bacon,
sausage, etc., finding a good market at home and in villages and towns.
Methods now in use are not greatly different from those followed years
ago, although of course improvement is the order of the day, and some
important changes have taken place, as will be seen in a study of our
pages. A few fixtures and implements are necessary to properly cure and
pack pork, but these may be simple, inexpensive and at the same time
efficient. Such important portions of the work as the proper cutting of
the throat, scalding, scraping, opening and cleaning the hog should be
undertaken by someone not altogether a novice. And there is no reason why
every farmer should not advantageously slaughter one or more hogs each
year, supplying the family with the winter's requirements and have
something left over to sell.


THE POSSIBILITIES OF PROFIT

in the intelligent curing and selling of homemade pork are suggested by
the far too general custom of farmers buying their pork supplies at the
stores. This custom is increasing, to say nothing of the very large number
of townspeople who would be willing to buy home cured pork were it
properly offered them. Probably it is not practicable that every farmer
should butcher his own swine, but in nearly every neighborhood one or two
farmers could do this and make good profits. The first to do so, the first
to be known as having home cured pork to sell, and the first to make a
reputation on it, will be the one to secure the most profit.

In the farm census of live stock, hogs are given a very important place.
According to the United States census of 1890 there were on farms in this
country 57,409,583 hogs. Returns covering later years place the farm
census of hogs, according to compilations of _American Agriculturist_ and
_Orange Judd Farmer_, recognized authorities, at 47,061,000 in 1895,
46,302,000 in 1896, and 48,934,000 in 1899. According to these authorities
the average farm value of all hogs in 1899 was $4.19 per head. The
government report placed the average farm price in 1894 at $5.98, in '93,
$6.41, and in 1892, $4.60.


A TRAVELING PIGPEN.

It is often desirable to change the location of a pigpen, especially where
a single pig is kept. It may be placed in the garden at the time when
there are waste vegetables to be disposed of, or it may be penned in a
grass lot. A portable pen, with an open yard attached, is seen in the
accompanying illustrations. Figure 1 presents the pen, the engraving
showing it so clearly that no description is needed. The yard, seen in
Fig. 2, is placed with the open space next to the door of the pen, so that
the pig can go in and out freely. The yard is attached to the pen by hooks
and staples, and both of them are provided with handles, by which they can
be lifted and carried from place to place. Both the yard and pen should
be floored, to prevent the pig from tearing up the ground. The floors
should be raised a few inches from the ground, that they may be kept dry
and made durable.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. PORTABLE PEN.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2. YARD ATTACHMENT.]




CHAPTER II.

FINISHING OFF HOGS FOR BACON.


The general subject of feeding and fattening hogs it is not necessary here
to discuss. It will suffice to point out the advisability of using such
rations as will finish off the swine in a manner best fitted to produce a
good bacon hog. An important point is to feed a proper proportion of
flesh-forming ration rather than one which will serve to develop fat at
the expense of lean. The proper proportion of these will best subserve the
interest of the farmer, whether he is finishing off swine for family use
or for supplying the market with home cured bacon. A diet composed largely
of protein (albuminoids) results in an increased proportion of lean meat
in the carcass. On the other hand, a ration made up chiefly of feeds which
are high in starchy elements, known as carbohydrates, yields very largely
in fat (lard). A most comprehensive chart showing the relative values of
various fodders and feeding stuffs has been prepared by Herbert Myrick,
editor of _American Agriculturist_, and will afford a good many valuable
hints to the farmer who wishes to feed his swine intelligently. This
points out the fact that such feeds as oats, barley, cowpea hay, shorts,
red clover hay and whole cottonseed are especially rich in flesh-forming
properties.

Corn, which is rich in starch, is a great fat producer and should not be
fed too freely in finishing off hogs for the best class of bacon. In
addition to the important muscle-producing feeds noted above, there are
others rich in protein, such as bran, skim milk, buttermilk, etc. While
corn is naturally the standby of all swine growers, the rations for bacon
purposes should include these muscle-producing feeds in order to bring the
best results. If lean, juicy meat is desired, these muscle forming foods
should be continued to the close. In order to get


JUST THE QUALITY OF BACON THAT IS WANTED,

feeders must so arrange the ration that it will contain a maximum of
muscle and a minimum of fat. This gives the sweet flavor and streaked meat
which is the secret of the popularity of the Irish and Danish bacon. Our
American meats are as a rule heavy, rich in fat and in marked contrast
with the light, mild, sweet flavored pork well streaked with lean, found
so generally in the English market and cured primarily in Ireland and
Denmark. What is wanted is a long, lean, smooth, bacon hog something after
the Irish hog. Here is a hint for our American farmers.

England can justly boast of her hams and bacon, but for sweet, tender,
lean pork the Normandy hogs probably have no superior in the world. They
are fed largely on meat-producing food, as milk, peas, barley, rye and
wheat bran. They are not fed on corn meal alone. They are slaughtered at
about six months. The bristles are burned off by laying the carcass on
straw and setting it on fire. Though the carcasses come out black, they
are scraped white and clean, and dressed perfectly while warm. It is
believed that hogs thus dressed keep better and that the meat is sweeter.


SELF-CLOSING DOOR FOR PIGPEN.

Neither winter snows nor the spring and summer rains should be allowed to
beat into a pigpen. But the difficulty is to have a door that will shut
itself and can be opened by the animals whenever they desire. The
engraving, Fig. 3, shows a door of this kind that can be applied to any
pen, at least any to which a door can be affixed at all. It is hung on
hooks and staples to the lintel of the doorway, and swinging either way
allows the inmates of the pen to go out or in, as they please,--closing
automatically. If the door is intended to fit closely, leather strips two
inches wide should be nailed around the frame of the doorway, then as the
door closes it presses tightly against these strips.

[Illustration: FIG. 3. AUTOMATIC DOOR.]


A HOG-FEEDING CONVENIENCE.

The usual hog's trough and the usual method of getting food into it are
conducive to a perturbed state of mind on the part of the feeder, because
the hog is accustomed to get bodily into the trough, where he is likely to
receive a goodly portion of his breakfast or dinner upon the top of his
head. The ordinary trough too, is difficult to clean out for a similar
reason--the pig usually standing in it. The diagram shown herewith, Fig.
4 gives a suggestion for a trough that overcomes some of the difficulties
mentioned, as it is easily accessible from the outside, both for pouring
in food and for removing any dirt or litter that may be in it. The
accompanying sketch so plainly shows the construction that detailed
description does not appear to be necessary.

[Illustration: FIG. 4. PROTECTED TROUGH.]




CHAPTER III.

SLAUGHTERING.


Whatever may be said as to the most humane modes of putting to death
domestic animals intended for food, butchering with the knife, all things
considered, is the best method to pursue with the hog. The hog should be
bled thoroughly when it is killed. Butchering by which the heart is
pierced or the main artery leading from it severed, does this in the most
effectual way, ridding the matter of the largest percentage of blood, and
leaving it in the best condition for curing and keeping well. The very
best bacon cannot be made of meat that has not been thoroughly freed from
blood, and this is a fact that should be well remembered. Expert butchers,
who know how to seize and hold the hog and insert the knife at the proper
place, are quickly through with the job, and often before the knife can be
withdrawn from the incision, the blood will spurt out in a stream and
insensibility and death will speedily ensue. It is easy, however, for a
novice to make a botch of it; hence the importance that none but an expert
be given a knife for this delicate operation.

There are some readily made devices by which one man at killing time may
do as much as three or four, and with one helper a dozen hogs may be made
into finished pork between breakfast and dinner, and without any
excitement or worry or hard work. It is supposed that the hogs are in a
pen or pens, where they may be easily roped by a noose around one hind
leg. This being done, the animal is led to the door and guided into a
box, having a slide door to shut it in. The bottom of the box is a hinged
lid. As soon as the hog is safely in the box and shut in by sliding down
the back door, and fastening it by a hook, the box is turned over,
bringing the hog on his back. The bottom of the box is opened immediately
and one man seizes a hind foot, to hold the animal, while the other sticks
the hog in the usual manner. The box is turned and lifted from the hog,
which, still held by the rope is moved to the dressing bench. All this may
be done while the previous hog is being scalded and dressed, or the work
may be so managed that as soon as one hog is hung and cleaned the next one
is ready for the scalding.

[Illustration: FIG. 5. HEATING WATER IN KETTLES.]


NECESSARY AIDS.

Before the day for slaughter arrives, have everything ready for performing
the work in the best manner. There may be a large boiler for scalding set
in masonry with a fireplace underneath and a flue to carry off the smoke.
If this is not available, a large hogshead may be utilized at the proper
time. A long table, strong and immovable, should be fixed close to the
boiler, on which the hogs are to be drawn after having been scalded, for
scraping. On each side of this table scantlings should be laid in the form
of an open flooring, and upon this the farmer and helpers may stand while
at work, thus keeping their feet off the ground, out of the water and mud
that would otherwise be disagreeable. An appreciated addition on a rainy
day would be a substantial roof over this boiler and bench. This should be
strong and large enough so that the hog after it is cleaned may be
properly hung up. Hooks and gambrels are provided, knives are sharpened, a
pile of dry wood is placed there, and everything that will be needed on
the day of butchering is at hand.


HEATING WATER FOR SCALDING.

For heating scalding water and rendering lard, when one has no kettles or
cauldrons ready to set in brick or stone, a simple method is to put down
two forked stakes firmly, as shown in Fig. 5, lay in them a pole to
support the kettles, and build a wood fire around them on the ground. A
more elaborate arrangement is shown in Fig. 6, which serves not only to
heat the water, but as a scalding tub as well. It is made of two-inch pine
boards, six feet long and two feet wide, rounded at the ends. A heavy
plate of sheet iron is nailed with wrought nails on the bottom and ends
Let the iron project fully one inch on each side. The ends, being rounded,
will prevent the fire from burning the woodwork. They also make it handier
for dipping sheep, scalding hogs, or for taking out the boiled food. The
box is set on two walls 18 inches high, and the rear end of the brickwork
is built into a short chimney, affording ample draft.

[Illustration: FIG. 6. PRACTICAL HEATING AND SCALDING VAT.]




CHAPTER IV.

SCALDING AND SCRAPING.


Next comes the scalding and dressing of the carcass. Lay the hog upon the
table near the boiler and let the scalders who stand ready to handle it
place it in the water heated nearly to a boiling point. The scalders keep
the hog in motion by turning it about in the water, and occasionally they
try the bristles to see if they will come away readily. As soon as
satisfied on this point, the carcass is drawn from the boiler and placed
upon the bench, where it is rapidly and thoroughly scraped. The bristles
or hair that grow along the back of the animal are sometimes sold to brush
makers, the remainder of the hair falling beside the table and gathered up
for the manure heap. The carcass must not remain too long in the hot
water, as this will set the hair. In this case it will not part from the
skin, and must be scraped off with sharp knives. For this reason an
experienced hand should attend to the scalding. The hair all off, the
carcass is hung upon the hooks, head down, nicely scraped and washed with
clean water preparatory to disemboweling.

[Illustration: FIG. 7. TACKLE FOR HEAVY HOGS.]


SCALDING TUBS AND VATS.

Various devices are employed for scalding hogs, without lifting them by
main force. For heavy hogs, one may use three strong poles, fastened at
the top with a log chain, which supports a simple tackle, Fig. 7. A very
good arrangement is shown in Fig. 8. A sled is made firm with driven
stakes and covered with planks or boards. At the rear end the scalding
cask is set in the ground, its upper edge on a level with the platform and
inclined as much as it can be and hold sufficient water. A large, long hog
is scalded one end at a time. The more the cask is inclined, the easier
will be the lifting.

[Illustration: FIG. 8. SCALDING CASK ON SLED.]

A modification of the above device is shown in Fig. 9. A lever is rigged
like a well sweep, using a crotched stick for the post, and a strong pole
for the sweep. The iron rod on which the sweep moves must be strong and
stiff. A trace chain is attached to the upper end, and if the end of the
chain has a ring instead of a hook, it will be quite convenient. In use, a
table is improvised, unless a strong one for the purpose is at hand, and
this is set near the barrel. A noose is made with the chain about the leg
of the hog, and he is soused in, going entirely under water, lifted out
when the bristles start easily, and laid upon the table, while another is
made ready.

[Illustration: FIG. 9. SCALDING IN A HOGSHEAD.]

Figure 10 shows a more permanent arrangement. It is a trough of plank with
a sheet iron bottom, which can be set over a temporary fireplace made in
the ground. The vat may be six feet long, three feet wide and two and
one-half feet deep, so as to be large enough for a good-sized hog. Three
ropes are fastened on one side, for the purpose of rolling the hog over
into the vat and rolling it out on the other side when it is scalded. A
number of slanting crosspieces are fitted in, crossing each other, so as
to form a hollow bed in which the carcass lies, with the ropes under it,
by which it can be moved and drawn out. These crosspieces protect the
sheet iron bottom and keep the carcass from resting upon it. A large,
narrow fireplace is built up in the ground, with stoned sides, and the
trough is set over it. A stovepipe is fitted at one end, and room is made
at the front by which wood may be supplied to the fire to heat the water.
A sloping table is fitted at one side for the purpose of rolling up the
carcass, when too large to handle otherwise, by means of the rope
previously mentioned. On the other side is a frame made of hollowed boards
set on edge, upon which the hog is scraped and cleaned. The right
temperature for scalding a hog is 180 degrees, and with a thermometer
there need be no fear of overscalding or a failure from the lack of
sufficient heat, while the water can be kept at the right temperature by
regulating the fuel under the vat. If a spot of hair is obstinate, cover
it with some of the removed hair and dip on hot water. Always pull out
hair and bristles; shaving any off leaves unpleasant stubs in the skin.


SINGEING PIGS.

A few years ago, "singers" were general favorites with a certain class of
trade wanting a light bacon pig, weighing about 170 lbs., the product
being exported to England for bacon purposes. Packers frequently paid a
small premium for light hogs suitable for this end, but more recently the
demand is in other directions. The meat of singed hogs is considered by
some to possess finer flavor than that of animals the hair of which has
been removed by the ordinary process. Instead of being scalded and scraped
in the ordinary manner, the singeing process consists in lowering the
carcass into an iron or steel box by means of a heavy chain, the
receptacle having been previously heated to an exceedingly high
temperature. After remaining there a very few seconds the hog is removed
and upon being placed in hot water the hair comes off instantly.

An old encyclopedia, published thirty years ago, in advocating the
singeing process, has this to say: "The hog should be swealed (singed),
and not scalded, as this method leaves the flesh firm and more solid. This
is done by covering the hog lightly with straw, then set fire to it,
renewing the fuel as it is burned away, taking care not to burn the skin.
After sufficient singeing, the skin is scraped, but not washed. After
cutting up, the flesh side of the cuts is rubbed with salt, which should
be changed every four or five days. The flitches should also be
transposed, the bottom ones at the top and the top ones at the bottom.
Some use four ounces saltpetre and one pound coarse sugar or molasses for
each hog. Six weeks is allowed for thus curing a hog weighing 240 lbs. The
flitches before smoking are rubbed with bran or very fine sawdust and
after smoking are often kept in clear, dry wood ashes or very dry sand."

[Illustration: FIG. 10. PERMANENT VAT FOR SCALDING.]




CHAPTER V.

DRESSING AND CUTTING.


When the carcasses have lost the animal heat they are put away till the
morrow, by which time, if the weather is fairly cold, the meat is stiff
and firm and in a condition to cut out better than it does when taken in
its soft and pliant state. If the weather is very cold, however, and there
is danger that the meat will freeze hard before morning, haste is made to
cut it up the same day, or else it is put into a basement or other warm
room, or a large fire made near it to prevent it from freezing. Meat that
is frozen will not take salt, or keep from spoiling if salted. Salting is
one of the most important of the several processes in the art of curing
good bacon, and the pork should be in just the right condition for taking
or absorbing the salt. Moderately cold and damp weather is the best for
this.


AS THE CARCASS IS DRESSED

it is lifted by a hook at the end of a swivel lever mounted on a post and
swung around to a hanging bar, placed conveniently. This bar has sliding
hooks made to receive the gambrel sticks, which have a hook permanently
attached to each so that the carcass is quickly removed from the swivel
lever to the slide hook on the bar. The upper edge of the bar is rounded
and smoothed and greased to help the hooks to slide on it. This serves to
hang all the hogs on the bar until they are cooled. If four persons are
employed this work may be done very quickly, as they may divide the work
between them; one hog is being scalded and cleaned while another is being
dressed.

[Illustration: FIG. 11. EASY METHOD OF HANGING A CARCASS.]

Divested of its coat, the carcass is washed off nicely with clean water
before being disemboweled. For opening the hog, the operator needs a sharp
butcher's knife, and should know how to use it with dexterity, so as not
to cut the entrails. The entrails and paunch, or stomach, are first
removed, care being taken not to cut any; then the liver, the "dead ears"
removed from the heart, and the heart cut open to remove any clots of
blood that it may contain. The windpipe is then slit open, and the whole
together is hung upon the gambrel beside the hog or placed temporarily
into a tub of water. The "stretcher," a small stick some sixteen inches
long, is then placed across the bowels to hold the sides well open and
admit the air to cool the carcass, and a chip or other small object is
placed in the mouth to hold it open, and the interior parts of the hog
about the shoulders and gullet are nicely washed to free them from stains
of blood. The carcass is then left to hang upon the gallows in order to
cool thoroughly before it is cut into pieces or put away for the night.

Where ten or twelve hogs are dressed every year, it will pay to have a
suitable building arranged for the work. An excellent place may be made in
the driveway between a double corncrib, or in a wagon shed or an annex to
the barn where the feeding pen is placed. The building should have a
stationary boiler in it, and such apparatus as has been suggested, and a
windlass used to do the lifting.


HOG KILLING MADE EASY.

In the accompanying cut, Fig. 11, the hoister represents a homemade
apparatus that has been in use many years and it has been a grand success.
The frames, _a_, _a_, _a_, _a_, are of 2x4 inch scantling, 8 ft. in
length; _b_, _b_, are 2x6 inch and 2 ft. long with a round notch in the
center of the upper surface for a windlass, _d_, to turn in; _c_, _c_ are
2x4 and 8 ft. long, or as long as desired, and are bolted to _a_, _a_. Ten
inches beyond the windlass, _d_, is a 4x4 inch piece with arms bolted on
the end to turn the windlass and draw up the carcass, which should be
turned lengthwise of the hoister until it passes between _c_, _c_. The
gambrel should be long enough to catch on each side when turned crosswise,
thus relieving the windlass so that a second carcass may be hoisted. The
peg, _e_, is to place in a hole of upright, _a_, to hold the windlass.
Brace the frame in proportion to the load that is to be placed upon it.
The longer it is made, the more hogs can be hung at the same time.


THE SAWBUCK SCAFFOLD.

Figure 12 shows a very cheap and convenient device for hanging either hogs
or beeves. The device is in shape much like an old-fashioned "sawbuck,"
with the lower rounds between the legs omitted. The legs, of which there
are two pairs, should be about ten feet long and set bracing, in the
manner shown in the engraving. The two pairs of legs are held together by
an inch iron rod, five or six feet in length, provided with threads at
both ends. The whole is made secure by means of two pairs of nuts, which
fasten the legs to the connecting iron rod. A straight and smooth wooden
roller rests in the forks made by the crossing of the legs, and one end
projects about sixteen inches. In this two augur holes are bored, in which
levers may be inserted for turning the roller. The rope, by means of which
the carcass is raised, passes over the rollers in such a way that in
turning, by means of the levers, the animal is raised from the ground.
When sufficiently elevated, the roller is fastened by one of the levers to
the nearest leg.

[Illustration: FIG. 12. RAISING A CARCASS.]


PROPER SHAPE OF GAMBRELS.

Gambrels should be provided of different lengths, if the hogs vary much in
size. That shown in Fig. 13 is a convenient shape. These should be of
hickory or other tough wood for safety, and be so small as to require
little gashing of the legs to receive them.

[Illustration: FIG. 13. A CONVENIENT GAMBREL.]


GALLOWS FOR DRESSED HOGS.

The accompanying device, Fig. 14, for hanging dressed hogs, consists of a
stout, upright post, six or eight inches square and ten feet long, the
lower three feet being set into the ground. Near the upper end are two
mortises, each 2x4 inches, quite through the post, one above the other, as
shown in the engraving, for the reception of the horizontal arms. The
latter are six feet long and just large enough to fit closely into the
mortises. They should be of white oak or hickory. At butchering time the
dead hogs are hung on the scaffold by slipping the gambrels upon the
horizontal crosspieces.


ADDITIONAL HINTS ON DRESSING.

Little use of the knife is required to loosen the entrails. The fingers,
rightly used, will do most of the severing. Small, strong strings, cut in
proper lengths, should be always at hand to quickly tie the severed ends
of any small intestines cut or broken by chance. An expert will catch the
entire offal in a large tin pan or wooden vessel, which is held between
himself and the hog. Unskilled operators, and those opening very large
hogs, need an assistant to hold this. The entrails and then the liver,
heart, etc., being all removed, thoroughly rinse out any blood or filth
that may have escaped inside. Removing the lard from the long intestines
requires expertness that can be learned only by practice. The fingers do
most of this cleaner, safer and better than a knife. A light feed the
night before killing leaves the intestines less distended and less likely
to be broken.

[Illustration: FIG. 14. SIMPLE SUPPORT FOR DRESSED HOG.]


HOW TO CUT UP A HOG.

With a sharp ax and a sharp butcher's knife at hand, lay the hog on the
chopping bench, side down. With the knife make a cut near the ear clear
across the neck and down to the bone. With a dextrous stroke of the ax
sever the head from the body. Lay the carcass on the back, a boy holding
it upright and keeping the forelegs well apart. With the ax proceed to
take out the chine or backbone. If it is desired to put as much of the hog
into neat meat as possible, trim to the chine very close, taking out none
of the skin or outside fat with it. Otherwise, the cutter need not be
particular how much meat comes away with the bone. What does not go with
the neat meat will be in the offal or sausage, and nothing will be lost.
Lay the chine aside and with the knife finish separating the two
divisions of the hog. Next, strip off with the hands the leaves or flakes
of fat from the middle to the hams. Seize the hock of the ham with the
left hand and with the knife in the other, proceed to round out the ham,
giving it a neat, oval shape. Be very particular in shaping the ham. If it
is spoiled in the first cutting, no subsequent trimming will put it into a
form to exactly suit the fastidious public eye. Trim off the surplus lean
and fat and projecting pieces of bone. Cut off the foot just above the
hock joint. The piece when finished should have nearly the form of a
regular oval, with its projecting handle or hock.

With the ax cut the shoulder from the middling, making the cut straight
across near the elbow joint. Take off the end ribs or "spare bone" from
the shoulder, trim the piece and cut off the foot. For home use, trim the
shoulder, as well as the other pieces, very closely, taking off all of
both lean and fat that can be spared. If care is taken to cut away the
head near the ear, the shoulder will be at first about as wide as long,
having a good deal of the neck attached. If the meat is intended for sale
and the largest quantity of bacon is the primary object, let the piece
remain so. But if it is preferred to have plenty of lard and sausage, cut
a smart strip from off the neck side of the shoulder and make the piece
assume the form of a parallelogram, with the hock attached to one end.
Trim a slice of fat from the back for lard, take off the "short ribs,"
and, if preferred, remove the long ribs from the whole piece. The latter,
however, is not often done by the farmers. Put the middling in nice shape
by trimming it wherever needed, which, when finished, will be very much
like a square in form, perhaps a little longer than broad, with a small
circular piece cut out from the end next the ham.

The six pieces of neat meat are now ready for the salter. The head is next
cut open longitudinally from side to side, separating the jowl from the
top or "head," so-called. The jawbone of the jowl is cut at the angle or
tip and the "swallow," which is the larynx or upper part of the windpipe,
is taken out. The headpiece is next cut open vertically and the lobe of
the brain is taken out, and the ears and nose are removed.

The bone of the chine is cut at several places for the convenience of the
cook, and the task of the cutter is finished. Besides the six pieces of
neat meat, there are the chine, souse, jowl, head, fat, sausage, two spare
and two short ribs and various other small bits derived from each hog. A
good cutter, with an assistant to carry away the pieces and help
otherwise, can cut out from 50 to 60 hogs in a day.




CHAPTER VI.

WHAT TO DO WITH THE OFFAL.


Aside from the pieces of meat into which a hog is usually cut, there will
be left as offal the chine or backbone, the jowl, the souse, the liver and
lungs, pig's feet, two spareribs and two short ribs or griskins. Nearly
every housekeeper knows what disposition to make of all this, yet too
often these wholesome portions of the hog are not utilized to best
advantage.


PORK SAUSAGE.

Sausage has formed a highly prized article of food for a good many hundred
years. Formed primarily as now, by chopping the raw meat very fine, and
adding salt and other flavoring materials, and often meal or bread crumbs,
the favorite varieties of to-day might not be considered any improvement
over the recipes of the ancient Romans were they to pass judgment on the
same. History tells us that these early Italian sausages were made of
fresh pork and bacon, chopped fine, with the addition of nuts, and
flavored with cumin seed, pepper, bay leaves and various pot herbs. Italy
and Germany are still celebrated for their bologna sausages and with many
people these smoked varieties are highly prized.

Like pure lard, sausage is too often a scarce article in the market. Most
city butchers mix a good deal of beef with the pork, before it is ground,
and so have a sausage composed of two sorts of meat, which does not
possess that agreeable, sweet, savory taste peculiar to nice fresh pork.
The bits of lean, cut off when trimming the pieces of neat meat, the
tenderloins, and slices of lean from the shoulders and hams, together with
some fat, are first washed nicely, cleared of bone and scraps of skin,
then put into the chopper, and ground fine. If a great deal of sausage is
wanted, the neat meat is trimmed very close, so as to take all the lean
that can be spared from the pieces. Sometimes whole shoulders are cut up
and ground. The heads, too, or the fleshy part, make good sausage. Some
housekeepers have the livers and "lights," or lungs, ground up and
prepared for sausage, and they make a tolerable substitute. This
preparation should be kept separate from the other, however, and be eaten
while cold weather lasts, as it will not keep as long as the other kind.

After sausage is properly ground, add salt, sage, rosemary, and red or
black pepper to suit the taste. The rosemary may be omitted, but sage is
essential. All these articles should be made fine before mixing them with
the meat. In order to determine accurately whether the sausage contains
enough of these ingredients, cook a little and taste it.

If sausage is to be kept in jars, pack it away closely in them, as soon as
it is ground and seasoned, and set the jars, securely closed, in a cool
room. But it is much better to provide for smoking some of it, to keep
through the spring and early summer. When the entrails are ready, stuff
them full with the meat, after which the ends are tied and drawn together,
and the sausage hung up in the smokehouse for smoking. This finishes the
process of making pork sausage. Put up in this way, it deserves the name
of sausage and it makes a dish good enough for any one. It is one of the
luxuries of life which may be manufactured at home.


BOLOGNA SAUSAGE.

The popular theory is that these familiar sausages originated in the
Italian city of that name, where the American visitor always stops for a
bit of "the original." Many formulas are used in the preparation of
bologna sausages, or rather many modifications of a general formula. Lean,
fresh meat trimmings are employed and some add a small proportion of
heart, all chopped very fine. While being chopped, spices and seasoning
are added, with a sufficient quantity of salt. The meat employed is for
the most part beef, to which is added some fresh or salted pork. When
almost completed, add gradually a small quantity of potato flour and a
little water. The mixture being of the proper consistency, stuff in beef
casings, tie the ends together into rings of fair length and smoke
thoroughly. This accomplished, boil until the sausages rise to the top,
when they are ready for use. Some recipes provide for two parts of beef
and one part of fat pork and the addition of a little ground coriander
seed to the seasoning.


WESTPHALIAN SAUSAGES

are made in much the same manner as frankforts, chopped not quite so fine,
and, after being cased, are smoked about a week.


FRANKFORT SAUSAGES.

Clean bits of pork, both fat and lean, are chopped fine and well moistened
with cold water. These may be placed in either sheep or hog casings
through the use of the homemade filler shown on another page.


SUABIAN SAUSAGES.

Chop very finely fat and lean meat until the mass becomes nearly a paste,
applying a sprinkling of cold water during the operation. Suabian
sausages are prepared by either smoking or boiling, and in the latter case
may be considered sufficiently cooked when they rise to the surface of the
water in which they are boiled.


ITALIAN PORK SAUSAGES.

The preparation of these requires considerable care, but the product is
highly prized by many. For every nine pounds of raw pork add an equal
amount of boiled salt pork and an equal amount of raw veal. Then add two
pounds selected sardines with all bones previously removed. Chop together
to a fine mass and then add five pounds raw fat pork previously cut into
small cubes. For the seasoning take six ounces salt, four ounces ground
pepper, eight ounces capers, eight ounces pistachio nuts peeled and boiled
in wine. All of these ingredients being thoroughly mixed, add about one
dozen pickled and boiled tongues cut into narrow strips. Place the sausage
in beef casings of good size. In boiling, the sausages should be wrapped
in a cloth with liberal windings of stout twine and allowed to cook about
an hour. Then remove to a cool place about 24 hours.


TONGUE SAUSAGE.

To every pound of meat used add two pounds of tongues, which have
previously been cut into small pieces, mixing thoroughly. These are to be
placed in large casings and boiled for about an hour. The flavor of the
product may be improved if the tongues are previously placed for a day in
spiced brine. Pickled tongues are sometimes used, steeped first in cold
water for several hours.


BLACK FOREST SAUSAGES.

This is an old formula followed extensively in years gone by in Germany.
Very lean pork is chopped into a fine mass and for every ten pounds,
three pounds of fat bacon are added, previously cut comparatively fine.
This is properly salted and spiced and sometimes a sprinkling of blood is
added to improve the color. Fill into large casings, place over the fire
in a kettle of cold water and simmer without boiling for nearly an hour.


LIVER SAUSAGE.

The Germans prepare this by adding to every five pounds of fat and lean
pork an equal quantity of ground rind and two and one-half pounds liver.
Previously partly cook the rind and pork and chop fine, then add the raw
liver well chopped and press through a coarse sieve. Mix all thoroughly
with sufficient seasoning. As the raw liver will swell when placed in
boiling water, these sausages should be filled into large skins, leaving
say a quarter of the space for expansion. Boil nearly one hour, dry, then
smoke four or five days.


ROYAL CAMBRIDGE SAUSAGES

are made by adding rice in the proportion of five pounds to every ten
pounds of lean meat and six pounds of fat. Previously boil the rice about
ten minutes, then add gradually to the meat while being chopped fine, not
forgetting the seasoning. The rice may thus be used instead of bread, and
it is claimed to aid in keeping the sausages fresh and sweet.


BRAIN SAUSAGES.

Free from all skin and wash thoroughly the brain of two calves. Add one
pound of lean and one pound of fat pork previously chopped fine. Use as
seasoning four or five raw grated onions, one ounce salt, one-half ounce
ground pepper. Mix thoroughly, place in beef casings and boil about five
minutes. Afterward hang in a cool place until ready for use.


TOMATO SAUSAGES.

Add one and one-half pounds pulp of choice ripe tomatoes to every seven
pounds of sausage meat, using an addition of one pound of finely crushed
crackers, the last named previously mixed with a quart of water and
allowed to stand for some time before using. Add the mixture of tomato and
cracker powder gradually to the meat while the latter is being chopped.
Season well and cook thoroughly.


SPANISH SAUSAGE

is made by using one-third each leaf lard, lean and fat pork, first
thoroughly boiling and chopping fine the meat. Add to this the leaf lard
previously chopped moderately fine, mix well and add a little blood to
improve the color and moisten the whole. This sausage is to be placed in
large casings and tied in links eight to twelve inches long. In an old
recipe for Spanish sausage seasoning it is made of seven pounds ground
white pepper, six ounces ground nutmeg, eight ounces ground pimento or
allspice and a sprinkling of bruised garlic.


ANOTHER SAUSAGE SEASONING.

To five pounds salt add two pounds best ground white pepper, three ounces
ground mace, or an equal quantity of nutmeg, four ounces ground coriander
seed, two ounces powdered cayenne pepper and mix thoroughly.


ADMIXTURE OF BREAD.

Very often concerns which manufacture sausage on a large scale add
considerable quantities of bread. This increases the weight at low cost,
thus cheapening the finished product, and is also said to aid in keeping
qualities. While this is no doubt thoroughly wholesome, it is not in vogue
by our most successful farmers who have long made a business of preparing
home-cured sausage. Bread used for sausages should have the crust removed,
should be well soaked in cold water for some time before required, then
pressed to remove the surplus moisture, and added gradually to the pork
while being chopped. Some sausage manufacturers add 10 to 15 per cent in
weight of crushed crackers instead of bread to sausage made during hot
weather. This is to render the product firm and incidentally to increase
the weight through thoroughly mixing the cracker crumbs or powder with an
equal weight or more of water before adding to the meat.


SAUSAGE IN CASES.

Many prefer to pack in sausage casings, either home prepared or purchased
of a dealer in packers' supplies. Latest improved machines for rapidly
filling the cases are admirably adapted to the work, and this can also be
accomplished by a homemade device. Figure 15 shows a simple bench and
lever arrangement to be used with the common sausage filler, which
lightens the work so much that even a small boy can use it with ease, and
any person can get up the whole apparatus at home with little or no
expense. An inch thick pine board one foot wide and four and one-fourth
feet long is fitted with four legs, two and one-half feet long, notched
into its edges, with the feet spread outward to give firmness. Two oak
standards eighteen inches high are set thirty-four inches apart, with a
slot down the middle of each, for the admission of an oak lever eight feet
long. The left upright has three or four holes, one above another, for the
lever pin, as shown in the engraving. The tin filler is set into the
bench nearer the left upright and projects below for receiving the skins.
Above the filler is a follower fitting closely into it, and its top
working very loosely in the lever to allow full play as it moves up and
down. The engraving shows the parts and mode of working.

[Illustration: FIG. 15. HOMEMADE SAUSAGE FILLER.]


PHILADELPHIA SCRAPPLE.

This is highly prized in some parts of the country, affording a breakfast
dish of great relish. A leading Philadelphia manufacturer has furnished us
with the following recipe: To make 200 lbs. of scrapple, take about 80
lbs. of good clean pork heads, remove the eyes, brains, snout, etc. Put in
about 20 gals. of water and cook until it is thoroughly done. Then take
out, separate the bones and chop the meat fine. Take about 15 gals, of the
liquor left after boiling the heads, and if the water has boiled down to a
quantity less than 15 gals., make up its bulk with hot water; if more than
15 gals. remain, take some of the water out, but be sure to keep some of
the good fat liquor. Put this quantity of the liquor into a kettle, add
the chopped meat, together with 10 oz. pure white pepper, 8 oz. sweet
marjoram, 2 lbs. fine salt. Stir well until the liquor comes to a good
boil. Have ready for use at this time 25 lbs. good Indian meal and 7 lbs.
buckwheat flour. As soon as the liquor begins to boil add the meal and
flour, the two being previously mixed dry. Be careful to put the meal in a
little at a time, scattering it well and stirring briskly, that it may not
burn to the kettle. Cook until well done, then place in pans to cool. The
pans should be well greased, also the dipper used, to prevent the scrapple
sticking to the utensils. When cold, the scrapple is cut into slices and
fried in the ordinary manner as sausage. Serve hot.


SOUSE.

After being carefully cleaned and soaked in cold water, the feet, ears,
nose and sometimes portions of the head may be boiled, thoroughly boned,
and pressed into bowls or other vessels for cake souse. But frequently
these pieces, instead of being boned, are placed whole in a vessel and
covered with a vinegar, and afterwards taken a little at a time, as
wanted, and fried.


JOWLS AND HEAD.

If not made into souse or sausage, these may be boiled unsmoked, with
turnips, peas or beans; or smoked and cooked with cabbage or salad. The
liver and accompanying parts, if not converted into sausage, may be
otherwise utilized.


THE SPARERIBS AND SHORT BONES

may be cooked in meat pies with a crust, the same as chicken, or they may
be fried or boiled. The large end of the chine makes a good piece for
baking. The whole chine may be smoked and will keep a long time.


CRACKNELS.

This is the portion of the fat meat which is left after the lard is
cooked, and is used by many as an appetizing food. The cracknels may be
pressed and thus much more lard secured. This latter, however, should be
used before the best lard put away in tubs. After being pressed the
cracknels are worked into a dough with corn meal and together made into
cracknel bread.


BRAWN

is comparatively little used in this country, though formerly a highly
relished dish in Europe, where it was often prepared from the flesh of the
wild boar. An ancient recipe is as follows: "The bones being taken out of
the flitches (sides) or other parts, the flesh is sprinkled with salt and
laid on a tray, that the blood may drain off, after which it is salted a
little and rolled up as hard as possible. The length of the collar of
brawn should be as much as one side of the boar will permit; so that when
rolled up the piece may be nine or ten inches in diameter. After being
thus rolled up, it is boiled in a copper or large kettle, till it is so
tender that you may run a stiff straw through it. Then it is set aside
till it is thoroughly cold, put into a pickle composed of water, salt, and
wheat-bran, in the proportion of two handfuls of each of the latter to
every gallon of water, which, after being well boiled together, is
strained off as clear as possible from the bran, and, when quite cold, the
brawn is put into it."


HEAD CHEESE.

This article is made usually of pork, or rather from the meat off the
pig's head, skins, and coarse trimmings. After having been well boiled,
the meat is cut into pieces, seasoned well with sage, salt, and pepper,
and pressed a little, so as to drive out the extra fat and water. Some add
the meat from a beef head to make it lean. Others add portions of heart
and liver, heating all in a big pan or other vessel, and then running
through a sausage mill while hot.


BLOOD PUDDINGS

are usually made from the hog's blood with chopped pork, and seasoned,
then put in casings and cooked. Some make them of beef's blood, adding a
little milk; but the former is the better, as it is thought to be the
richer.


SPICED PUDDINGS.

These are made somewhat like head-cheese, and often prepared by the German
dealers, some of whom make large quantities. They are also made of the
meat from the pig's chops or cheeks, etc., well spiced and boiled. Some
smoke them.




CHAPTER VII.

THE FINE POINTS IN MAKING LARD.


Pure lard should contain less than one per cent of water and foreign
matter. It is the fat of swine, separated from the animal tissue by the
process of rendering. The choicest lard is made from the whole "leaf."
Lard is also made by the big packers from the residue after rendering the
leaf and expressing a "neutral" lard, which is used in the manufacture of
oleomargarine. A good quality of lard is made from back-fat and leaf
rendered together. Fat from the head and intestines goes to make the
cheaper grades. Lard may be either "kettle" or "steam rendered," the
kettle process being usually employed for the choicer fat parts of the
animal, while head and intestinal fat furnish the so-called "steam lard."
Steam lard, however, is sometimes made from the leaf. On the other hand,
other parts than the leaf are often kettle rendered. Kettle rendered lard
usually has a fragrant cooked odor and a slight color, while steam lard
often has a strong animal odor.


TO REFINE LARD,

a large iron pot is set over a slow fire of coals, a small quantity of
water is put into the bottom of the pot, and this is then filled to the
brim with the fat, after it has first been cut into small pieces and
nicely washed, to free it from blood and other impurities. If necessary to
keep out soot, ashes, etc., loose covers or lids are placed over the
vessels, and the contents are made to simmer slowly for several hours.
This work requires a careful and experienced hand to superintend it.
Everything should be thoroughly clean, and the attendant must possess
patience and a practical knowledge of the work. It will not do to hurry
the cooking. A slow boil or simmer is the proper way. The contents are
occasionally stirred as the cooking proceeds, to prevent burning. The
cooking is continued until the liquid ceases to bubble and becomes clear.
So long as there is any milky or cloudy appearance about the fat, it
contains water, and in this condition will not keep well in summer--a
matter of importance to the country housekeeper.

It requires six to eight hours constant cooking to properly refine a
kettle or pot of fat. The time will depend, of course, somewhat upon the
size of the vessel containing it and the thickness of the fat, and also
upon the attention bestowed upon it by the cook. By close watching, so as
to keep the fire just right all the time, it will cook in a shorter
period, and vice versa. When the liquid appears clear the pots are set
aside for the lard to cool a little before putting it into the vessels in
which it is to be kept. The cracknels are first dipped from the pots and
put into colanders, to allow the lard to drip from them. Some press the
cracknels, and thus get a good deal more lard. As the liquid fat is dipped
from the pots it is carefully strained through fine colanders or wire
sieves. This is done to rid it of any bits of cracknel, etc., that may
remain in the lard. Some country people when cooking lard add a few sprigs
of rosemary or thyme, to impart a pleasant flavor to it. A slight taste of
these herbs is not objectionable. Nothing else whatever is put into the
lard as it is cooked, and if thoroughly done, nothing else is needed. A
little salt is sometimes added, to make it firmer and keep it better in
summer, but the benefit, if any, is slight, and too much salt is
objectionable.


LEAF LARD.

In making lard, all the leaf or flake fat, the two leaves of almost solid
fat that grow just above the hams on either side about the kidneys, and
the choice pieces of fat meat cut off in trimming the pork should be tried
or rendered first and separate from the remainder. This fat is the best
and makes what is called the leaf lard. It may be put in the bottom of the
cans, for use in summer, or else into separate jars or cans, and set away
in a cool place. The entrail fat and bits of fat meat are cooked last and
put on top of the other, or into separate vessels, to be used during cool
weather. This lard is never as good as the other, and will not keep sweet
as long; hence the pains taken by careful housewives to keep the two sorts
apart. It must be admitted, however, that many persons, when refining lard
for market, do not make any distinction, but lump all together, both in
cooking and afterward. But for pure, honest "leaf" lard not a bit of
entrail fat should be mixed with the flakes.


A PARTICULARLY IMPORTANT POINT

in making lard is to take plenty of time. The cooking must not be hurried
in the least. It requires time to thoroughly dry out all the water, and
the keeping quality of the lard depends largely upon this. A slow fire of
coals only should be placed under the kettle, and great care exercised
that no spark snaps into it, to set fire to the hot oil. It is well to
have at hand some close-fitting covers, to be put immediately over the
kettle, closing it tightly in case the oil should take fire. The mere
exclusion of air will put out the fire at once. Cook slowly in order not
to burn any of the fat in the least, as that will impart a very
unpleasant flavor to the lard. The attendants should stir well with a long
ladle or wooden stick during the whole time of cooking. It requires
several hours to thoroughly cook a vessel of lard, when the cracknels will
eventually rise to the top.

A cool, dry room, such as a basement, is the best place for keeping lard.
Large stone jars are perhaps the best vessels to keep it in, but tins are
cheaper, and wooden casks, made of oak, are very good. Any pine wood,
cedar or cypress will impart a taste of the wood. The vessels must be kept
closed, to exclude litter, and care should be observed to prevent ants,
mice, etc., from getting to the lard. A secret in keeping lard firm and
good in hot weather is first to cook it well, and then set it in a cool,
dry cellar, where the temperature remains fairly uniform throughout the
year. Cover the vessels after they are set away in the cellar with closely
fitting tops over a layer of oiled paper.




CHAPTER VIII.

PICKLING AND BARRELING.


For salt pork, one of the first considerations is a clean barrel, which
can be used over and over again after yearly renovation. A good way to
clean the barrel is to place about ten gallons of water and a peck of
clean wood ashes in the barrel, then throw in well-heated irons, enough to
boil the water, cover closely, and by adding a hot iron occasionally, keep
the mixture boiling a couple of hours. Pour out, wash thoroughly with
fresh water, and it will be as sweet as a new barrel. Next cover the
bottom of the barrel with coarse salt, cut the pork into strips about six
inches wide, stand edgewise in the barrel, with the skin next the outside,
until the bottom is covered. Cover with a thick coat of salt, so as to
hide the pork entirely. Repeat in the same manner until the barrel is
full, or the pork all in, covering the top thickly with another layer of
salt. Let stand three or four days, then put on a heavy flat stone and
sufficient cold water to cover the pork. After the water is on, sprinkle
one pound best black pepper over all. An inch of salt in the bottom and
between each layer and an inch and a half on top will be sufficient to
keep the pork without making brine.

When it is desired to pickle pork by pouring brine over the filled barrel,
the following method is a favorite: Pack closely in the barrel, first
rubbing the salt well into the exposed ends of bones, and sprinkle well
between each layer, using no brine until forty-eight hours after, and
then let the brine be strong enough to bear an egg. After six weeks take
out the hams and bacon and hang in the smokehouse. When warm weather
brings danger of flies, smoke a week with hickory chips; avoid heating the
air much. If one has a dark, close smokehouse, the meat can hang in it all
summer; otherwise pack in boxes, putting layers of sweet, dry hay between.
This method of packing is preferred by some to packing in dry salt or
ashes.

[Illustration: FIG. 16. BOX FOR SALTING MEATS.]


RENEWING PORK BRINE.

Not infrequently from insufficient salting and unclean barrels, or other
cause, pork placed in brine begins to spoil, the brine smells bad, and the
contents, if not soon given proper attention, will be unfit for food. As
soon as this trouble is discovered, lose no time in removing the contents
from the barrel, washing each piece of meat separately in clean water.
Boil the brine for half an hour, frequently removing the scum and
impurities that will rise to the surface. Cleanse the barrel thoroughly by
washing with hot water and hard wood ashes. Replace the meat after
sprinkling it with a little fresh salt, putting the purified brine back
when cool, and no further trouble will be experienced, and if the work be
well done, the meat will be sweet and firm. Those who pack meat for home
use do not always remove the blood with salt. After meat is cut up it is
better to lie in salt for a day and drain before being placed in the brine
barrel.


A HANDY SALTING BOX.

A trough made as shown at Fig. 16 is very handy for salting meats, such as
hams, bacon and beef, for drying. It is made of any wood which will not
flavor the meat; ash, spruce or hemlock plank, one and a half inches
thick, being better than any others. A good size is four feet long by two
and one-half wide and one and one-half deep. The joints should be made
tight with white lead spread upon strips of cloth, and screws are vastly
better than nails to hold the trough together.




CHAPTER IX.

CARE OF HAMS AND SHOULDERS.


In too many instances farmers do not have the proper facilities for curing
hams, and do not see to it that such are at hand, an important point in
success in this direction. A general cure which would make a good ham
under proper conditions would include as follows: To each 100 lbs. of ham
use seven and a half pounds Liverpool fine salt, one and one-half pounds
granulated sugar and four ounces saltpeter. Weigh the meat and the
ingredients in the above proportions, rub the meat thoroughly with this
mixture and pack closely in a tierce. Fill the tierce with water and roll
every seven days until cured, which in a temperature of 40 to 50 degrees
would require about fifty days for a medium ham. Large hams take about ten
days more for curing. When wanted for smoking, wash the hams in water or
soak for twelve hours. Hang in the smokehouse and smoke slowly forty-eight
hours and you will have a very good ham. While this is not the exact
formula followed in big packing houses, any more than are other special
recipes given here, it is a general ham cure that will make a first-class
ham in every respect if proper attention is given it.

Another method of pickling hams and shoulders, preparatory to smoking,
includes the use of molasses. Though somewhat different from the above
formula, the careful following of directions cannot fail to succeed
admirably. To four quarts of fine salt and two ounces of pulverized
saltpeter, add sufficient molasses to make a pasty mixture. The hams
having hung in a dry, cool place for three or four days after cutting up,
are to be covered all over with the mixture, more thickly on the flesh
side, and laid skin side down for three or four days. In the meantime,
make a pickle of the following proportions, the quantities here named
being for 100 lbs. of hams. Coarse salt, seven pounds; brown sugar, five
pounds; saltpeter, two ounces; pearlash or potash, one-half ounce; soft
water, four gallons. Heat gradually and as the skim rises remove it.
Continue to do this as long as any skim rises, and when it ceases, allow
the pickle to cool. When the hams have remained the proper time immersed
in this mixture, cover the bottom of a clean, sweet barrel with salt about
half an inch deep. Pack in the hams as closely as possible, cover them
with the pickle, and place over them a follower with weights to keep them
down. Small hams of fifteen pounds and less, also shoulders, should remain
in the pickle for five weeks; larger ones will require six to eight weeks,
according to size. Let them dry well before smoking.


WESTPHALIAN HAMS.

This particular style has long been a prime favorite in certain markets of
Europe, and to a small extent in this country also. Westphalia is a
province of Germany in which there is a large industry in breeding swine
for the express purpose of making the most tender meat with the least
proportion of fat. Another reason for the peculiar and excellent qualities
which have made Westphalian hams so famous, is the manner of feeding and
growing for the hams, and finally the preserving, curing, and last of all,
smoking the hams. The Ravensberg cross breed of swine is a favorite for
this purpose. They are rather large animals, having slender bodies, flat
groins, straight snouts and large heads, with big, overhanging ears. The
skin is white, with straight little bristles.

A principal part of the swine food in Westphalia is potatoes; these are
cooked and then mashed in the potato water. The pulp thus obtained is
thoroughly mixed with wheat bran in a dry, raw state; little corn is used.
In order to avoid overproduction of fat and at the same time further the
growth of flesh of young pigs, some raw cut green feed, such as cabbage,
is used; young pigs are also fed sour milk freely. In pickling the hams
they are first vigorously rubbed with saltpeter and then with salt. The
hams are pressed in the pickling vat and entirely covered with cold brine,
remaining in salt three to five weeks. After this they are taken out of
the pickle and hung in a shady but dry and airy place to "air-dry." Before
the pickled hams can be put in smoke they are exposed for several weeks to
this drying in the open air. As long as the outside of the ham is not
absolutely dry, appearing moist or sticky, it is kept away from smoke.

Smoking is done in special large chambers, the hams being hung from the
ceiling. In addition to the use of sawdust and wood shavings in making
smoke, branches of juniper are often used, and occasionally beech and
alder woods; oak and resinous woods are positively avoided. The smoking is
carried on slowly. It is recommended to smoke for a few days cautiously,
that is, to have the smoke not too strong. Then expose the hams for a few
days in the fresh air, repeating in this way until they are brown enough.
The hams are actually in smoke two or three weeks, thus the whole process
of smoking requires about six weeks. Hams are preserved after their
smoking in a room which is shady, not accessible to the light, but at the
same time dry, cool and airy.


THE PIG AND THE ORCHARD.

The two go together well. The pig stirs up the soil about the trees,
letting in the sunshine and moisture to the roots and fertilizing them,
while devouring many grubs that would otherwise prey upon the fruit. But
many orchards cannot be fenced and many owners of fenced orchards, even,
would like to have the pig confine his efforts around the trunk of each
tree. To secure this have four fence panels made and yard the pig for a
short time in succession about each tree, as suggested in the diagram,
Fig. 17.

[Illustration: FIG. 17. FENCE FOR ORCHARD TREE.]




CHAPTER X.

DRY SALTING BACON AND SIDES.


For hogs weighing not over 125 or 130 lbs. each, intended for dry curing,
one bushel fine salt, two pounds brown sugar and one pound saltpeter will
suffice for each 800 lbs. pork before the meat is cut out; but if the meat
is large and thick, or weighs from 150 to 200 lbs. per carcass, from a
gallon to a peck more of salt and a little more of both the other articles
should be taken. Neither the sugar nor the saltpeter is absolutely
necessary for the preservation of the meat, and they are often omitted.
But both are preservatives; the sugar improves the flavor of the bacon,
and the saltpeter gives it greater firmness and a finer color, if used
sparingly. Bacon should not be so sweet as to suggest the "sugar-cure;"
and saltpeter, used too freely, hardens the tissues of the meat, and
renders it less palatable. The quantity of salt mentioned is enough for
the first salting. A little more


NEW SALT IS ADDED AT THE SECOND SALTING

and used together with the old salt that has not been absorbed. If sugar
and saltpeter are used, first apply about a teaspoonful of pulverized
saltpeter on the flesh side of the hams and shoulders, and then taking a
little sugar in the hand, apply it lightly to the flesh surface of all the
pieces. A tablespoonful is enough for any one piece.

If the meat at the time of salting is moist and yielding to the touch,
rubbing the skin side with the gloved hand, or the "sow's ear," as is
sometimes insisted on, is unnecessary; the meat will take salt readily
enough without this extra labor. But if the meat is rigid, and the weather
very cold, or if the pieces are large and thick, rubbing the skin side to
make it yielding and moist causes the salt to penetrate to the center of
the meat and bone. On the flesh side it is only necessary to sprinkle the
salt over all the surface. Care must be taken to get some salt into every
depression and into the hock end of all joints. An experienced meat salter
goes over the pieces with great expedition. Taking a handful of the salt,
he applies it dextrously by a gliding motion of the hand to all the
surface, and does not forget the hock end of the bones where the feet have
been cut off. Only dry salt is used in this method of curing. The meat is
never put into brine or "pickle," nor is any water added to the salt to
render it more moist.


BEST DISTRIBUTION OF THE SALT.

A rude platform or bench of planks is laid down, on which the meat is
packed as it is salted. A boy hands the pieces to the packer, who lays
down first a course of middlings and then sprinkles a little more salt on
all the places that do not appear to have quite enough. Next comes a layer
of shoulders and then another layer of middlings, until all these pieces
have been laid. From time to time a little more salt is added, as appears
to be necessary. The hams are reserved for the top layer, the object being
to prevent them from becoming too salt. In a large bulk of meat the brine,
as it settles down, lodges upon the lower pieces, and some of them get
rather more than their quota of salt. Too much saltiness spoils the hams
for first-class bacon. In fact, it spoils any meat to have it too salt,
but it requires less to spoil the hams, because, as a rule, they are
mostly lean meat. The jowls, heads and livers, on account of the quantity
of blood about them, are put in a separate pile, after being salted. The
chines and spareribs are but slightly salted and laid on top of the bulk
of neat meat. The drippings of brine and blood from the meat are collected
in buckets and sent to the compost heaps. If there are rats, they must be
trapped or kept out in some way. Cats, also, should be excluded from the
house. Close-fitting boxes, which some use to keep the rats from the meat,
are not the best; the meat needs air.

In ten days to three weeks, according to weather and size of the meat,
break bulk and resalt, using the old salt again, with just a little new
salt added. In four to six weeks more, or sooner, if need be, break up and
wash the meat nicely, preparatory to smoking it. Some farmers do not wash
the salt off, but the meat receives smoke better and looks nicer, if
washed.


CURING PORK FOR THE SOUTH.

This requires a little different treatment. It is dry-salted and smoked.
The sides, hams and shoulders are laid on a table and rubbed thoroughly
with salt and saltpeter (one ounce to five pounds of salt), clear
saltpeter being rubbed in around the ends of the bones. The pieces are
laid up, with salt between, and allowed to lie. The rubbing is repeated at
intervals of a week until the meat is thoroughly salted through, and it is
then smoked. It must afterward be left in the smokehouse, canvased or
buried in a box of ashes, to protect it from the flies.




CHAPTER XI.

SMOKING AND SMOKEHOUSES.


For best quality of bacon, the proper meat is of first importance. Withes
or strings of basket wood, bear's grass, or coarse, stout twine, one in
the hock end of each ham and shoulder, and two in the thick side of each
middling, are fastened in the meat by which to suspend it for smoking.
Before it is hung up the entire flesh surface of the hams and shoulders,
and sometimes the middlings also, is sprinkled thickly with fine black
pepper, using a large tin pepper box to apply it. Sometimes a mixture of
about equal parts of black and red pepper helps very much to impart a good
flavor to the meat. It was thought formerly that black pepper, applied to
meat before smoking it, would keep the bacon bug (Dermestes) "skippers"
from being troublesome. But it is now known that the skipper skips just as
lively where the pepper is. The meat is hung upon sticks or on hooks
overhead very close together, without actually touching, and is ready for
smoking.


THE SMOKEHOUSE.

The meat house is of course one with an earth, brick, or cement floor,
where the fire for the smoke is made in a depression in the center of the
room, so as to be as far as possible from the walls. A few live coals are
laid down, and a small fire is made of some dry stuff. As it gets well to
burning, the fire is smothered with green hickory or oak wood, and a
basket of green chips from the oak or hickory woodpile is kept on hand and
used as required to keep the fire smothered so as to produce a great smoke
and but little blaze. If the chips are too dry they are kept wet with
water. Care is taken not to allow the fire to get too large and hot, so as
to endanger the meat hung nearest to it. Should the fire grow too strong,
as it sometimes will, a little water is thrown on, a bucketful of which is
kept always on hand. The fire requires constant care and nursing to keep
up a good smoke and no blaze. Oak and hickory chips or wood impart the
best color to meat. Some woods, as pine, ailanthus, mulberry and
persimmon, are very objectionable, imparting a disagreeable flavor to the
bacon. Corn cobs make a good smoke for meat, but they must be wet before
laying them on the fire. Hardwood sawdust is sometimes advantageously used
in making a fire for smoking meats. No blaze is formed, and if it burns
too freely can be readily checked by sprinkling a little water upon it.
This is a popular method in parts of Europe, and in that country damp
wheat straw is also sometimes used to some extent.


COMBINED SMOKEHOUSE AND OVEN.

The oven, shown in Fig. 18, occupies the front and that part of the
interior which is represented in our illustration by the dotted lines. The
smokehouse occupies the rear, and extends over the oven. The advantages of
this kind of building are the perfect dryness secured, which is of great
importance in preserving the meat, and the economy in building the two
together, as the smoke that escapes from the oven may be turned into the
smokehouse. This latter feature, however, will not commend itself to many
who prefer the use of certain kinds of fuel in smoking which are not
adapted to burning in a bake oven.

[Illustration: FIG. 18. COMBINATION SMOKEHOUSE AND OVEN.]

Cloudy and damp days are the best for smoking meat. It seems to receive
the smoke more freely in such weather, and there is also less danger of
fire. The smoke need not be kept up constantly, unless one is in a hurry
to sell the meat. Half a day at a time on several days a week, for two or
three weeks, will give the bacon that bright gingerbread color which is
generally preferred. It should not be made too dark with smoke. It is a
good plan, after the meat is smoked nearly enough, to smoke it
occasionally for half a day at a time all through the spring until late in
May. It is thought that smoke does good in keeping the Dermestes out of
the house. The work of smoking may be finished up in a week, if one
prefers, by keeping up the smoke all day and at night until bedtime. Some
smoke more, others less, according to fancy as to color. No doubt, the
more it is smoked, the better the bacon will keep through the summer. But
it need not, and, in fact, should not, be made black with smoke.

It is necessary, before the smoking is quite completed, to remove the meat
that is in the center just over the fire to one side, and to put the
pieces from the sides in the center. The meat directly over the smoke
colors faster than that on the sides, although the house is kept full of
smoke constantly. Some farmers do not care to risk the safety of their
meat by having an open fire under it, and so set up an old stove, either
in the room or on the outside, in which latter case a pipe lets the smoke
into the house. A smoldering fire is then kept up with corn cobs or chips.
But there is almost as much danger this way as the other. The stovepipe
may become so hot as to set fire to the walls of the house where it
enters, or a blaze may be carried within if there is too much fire in the
stove. There is some risk either way, but with a properly built
smokehouse, there is no great danger from the plan described.


THE MEAT IS NOW CURED

and, if these directions have been observed, the farmer has a supply of
bacon as good as the world can show. Some may prefer a "shorter cut" from
the slaughter pen to the baking pan, and with their pyroligenous acid may
scout the old-fashioned smoke as heathenish, and get their bacon ready for
eating in two hours after the salt has struck in. But they never can show
such bacon by their method as we can by ours. There is but one way to have
this first-class bacon and ham, and that way is the one herein portrayed.


TO MAKE A SMOKEHOUSE FIREPROOF

as far as the stove ashes are concerned, is not necessarily an expensive
job; all that is required is to lay up a row of brick across one end,
also two or three feet back upon each side, connecting the sides with a
row across the building, making it at least two feet high. As those who
have a smokehouse use it nearly every year, that part can also be made
safe from fire by the little arch built at the point shown in the
illustration, Fig. 19. The whole is laid up in mortar, and to add strength
to the structure an iron rod or bar may be placed across the center of the
bin and firmly imbedded in the mortar, two or three rows of brick from the
top. Of course, the rear of the arch is also bricked up. In most cases,
less than 250 brick will be all that is required.

[Illustration: FIG. 19. FIREPROOFING A SMOKEHOUSE.]


A WELL ARRANGED SMOKEHOUSE.

A simple but satisfactory smokehouse is shown in the illustration, Fig.
20, and can be constructed on the farm at small cost. It is so arranged as
to give direct action of smoke upon the meat within, and yet free from the
annoyance that comes from entering a smoke-filled room to replenish the
fire. The house is square, and of a size dependent upon the material one
may have yearly to cure by smoke. For ordinary use, a house ten feet
square will be ample. There are an entrance door on one side and a small
window near the top that can be opened from the outside to quickly free
the inside from the smoke when desired. At the bottom of one side is a
small door, from which extends a small track to the center of the room.
Upon this slides a square piece of plank, moved by an iron rod with a hook
on one end. On the plank is placed an old iron kettle, Fig. 21, with four
or five inches of earth in the bottom, and upon this is the fire to be
built. The kettle can be slid to the center of the room with an iron rod
and can be drawn to the small door at any time to replenish the fire
without entering the smoky room or allowing the smoke to come out. The
house has an earthen floor and a tight foundation of stone or brick. The
walls should be of matched boarding and the roof shingled. The building is
made more attractive in appearance if the latter is made slightly
"dishing."

[Illustration: FIG. 20. FARM SMOKEHOUSE.]

[Illustration: FIG. 21. FIRE, KETTLE AND TRACK.]


SMOKING MEATS IN A SMALL WAY.

A fairly good substitute for a smokehouse, where it is desired to
improvise something for temporary use in smoking hams or other meat, may
be found in a large cask or barrel, arranged as shown in the engraving,
Fig. 22. To make this effective, a small pit should be dug, and a flat
stone or a brick placed across it, upon which the edge of the cask will
rest. Half of the pit is beneath the barrel and half of it outside. The
head and bottom may be removed, or a hole can be cut in the bottom a
little larger than the portion of the pit beneath the cask. The head or
cover is removed, while the hams are hung upon cross sticks. These rest
upon two cross bars, made to pass through holes bored in the sides of the
cask, near the top. The head is then laid upon the cask and covered with
sacks to confine the smoke. Some coals are put into the pit outside of the
cask, and the fire is fed with damp corn cobs, hardwood chips, or fine
brush. The pit is covered with a flat stone, by which the fire may be
regulated, and it is removed when necessary to add more fuel.

[Illustration: FIG. 22. A BARREL SMOKEHOUSE.]


ANOTHER BARREL SMOKEHOUSE.

For those who have only the hams and other meats from one or two hogs to
smoke, a practicable smokehouse, like that shown in Fig. 23, will serve
the purpose fairly well. A large barrel or good-sized cask should be
used, with both heads removed. A hole about a foot deep is dug to receive
it, and then a trench of about the same depth and six or eight feet long,
leading to the fireplace. In this trench can be laid old stovepipe and the
ground filled in around it. The meat to be smoked is suspended in the
barrel and the lid put on, but putting pieces under it, so there will be
enough draft to draw the smoke through. By having the fire some distance
from the meat, one gets the desired amount of smoke and avoids having the
meat overheated.

[Illustration: FIG. 23. BARREL SMOKEHOUSE WITH FRENCH DRAFT.]




CHAPTER XII.


KEEPING BACONS AND HAMS.

The ideal meat house or smokehouse is a tall frame structure, twelve by
fifteen or fifteen by eighteen feet, underpinned solidly with brick set a
foot or more into the ground, or with a double set of sills, the bottom
set being buried in the soil. This mode of underpinning is designed to
prevent thieves from digging under the wall and into the house. Stout,
inch-thick boards are used for the weatherboarding, and sometimes the
studs are placed near enough together to prevent a person from getting
through between them. The house is built tall to give more room for meat
and to have it farther from the fire while it is being smoked. The
weatherboarding and the roof should be tight to prevent too free escape of
the smoke. No window, and but one door, is necessary. The floor should be
of clay, packed firm, or else laid in cement or brick. Indeed, it would be
better to have the entire walls built of brick, but this would add
considerably to the cost of construction.


THE ROOM SHOULD BE LARGE ENOUGH

to admit of a platform on one or both sides, upon which to pack the pork
when salted. There should be a salt barrel, a large wooden tray made of
plank, in which to salt the meat, and a short, handy ladder for reaching
the upper tier of joists. A large basket for holding chips, a tub for
water when smoking meat, a large chopping block and a meat axe, for the
convenience of the cook, are necessary articles for the meat house.
Nothing else should be allowed to cumber the room to afford a harbor for
rats or to present additional material for a blaze, in case a spark from
the fire should snap out to a distance. The house should be kept neatly
swept, and rats should not be allowed to make burrows under anything in
the room. The floor of the meat house should always be of some hard
material like cement or brick, or else clay pummeled very hard, so that
there would be no hiding place for the pupae of the Dermestes (parent of
the "skipper").

The skipper undergoes one or two moltings while in the meat, and at last
drops from the bacon to the floor, where, if the earth is loose, it
burrows into the ground and, remaining all winter, comes out a perfect
beetle in spring. A hard, impervious floor will prevent it from doing
this, and compel it to seek a nesting place elsewhere. The reason why
country bacon is sometimes so badly infested with the skipper is that the
house and floor afford or become an excellent incubator, as it were, for
the Dermestes, and the bacon bugs become so numerous that all the meat
gets infested with them. In case the floor of the smokehouse is soft and
yielding, it becomes necessary each winter, before the meat is packed to
salt, to remove about two inches of the soil and put in fresh earth or
clay in its place. Thus, many of the insects would be carried out, where
they would be destroyed. The walls and roof of the room on the interior
should also be swept annually to dislodge any pupae that might be
hibernating in the cracks and crevices. With these precautions, there
should not be many of the pests left within the building, though it is a
hard matter when a house once gets badly infested to dislodge them
entirely. There are so many hiding places about a plain shingle roof that
it is next to impossible not to have some of these insects permanently
lodged in the meat house. But with a good, hard floor, frequent sweeping
and the use of plenty of black pepper on the meat, the number of the
Dermestes should be reduced to the minimum.


BACON KEEPS NOWHERE SO WELL

as in the house where it is smoked, and if the bugs do not get too
numerous it is decidedly better to allow it to remain hanging there. Bacon
needs air and a cool, dry, dark room for keeping well in summer. The least
degree of dampness is detrimental, causing the bacon to mold. It has been
noticed, however, that moldy bacon is seldom infested with the skipper.
Hence some people, to keep away the skippers, hang their bacon in a cellar
where there is dampness, preferring to have it moldy rather than
"skippery." Some housekeepers preserve hams in close boxes or barrels, in
a cool, dark room, and succeed well. Others pack in shelled oats or bran,
or wrap in old newspapers and lay away on shelves or in boxes. Inclosing
in cloth sacks and painting the cloth is also practiced. All these plans
are more or less successful, but oblige the housekeeper to be constantly
on the watch to prevent mice and ants from getting to the bacon. But if
anyone should prefer


TO EXCLUDE THE BUGS ENTIRELY

from his meat the following contrivance is offered as a cheap and entirely
satisfactory arrangement: After the meat is thoroughly smoked, hang all of
it close together, or at least all the hams, in the center of the house,
and inclose it on all sides with a light frame over which is stretched
thin cotton cloth, taking care that there shall be no openings in the
cloth or frame through which the bugs might crawl. There let it hang all
summer. This contrivance will prevent the bug from getting at the meat to
deposit its eggs, and the thin, open fabric of the cloth will at the same
time admit plenty of air. The bottom or one side of the frame should be
fixed upon hinges, for convenience in getting at the bacon as wanted. As
the bacon bug comes out in March, or April farther south, in February it
is necessary to get the meat smoked and inclosed under the canvas before
the bug leaves its winter quarters. Hams may be thus kept in perfect
condition as long as may be desirable, and will remain sweet and nice many
months.


BOX FOR STORING BACON.

If the smokehouse is very dark and close, so that the flies or bugs will
not be tempted to or can get in, all that is necessary is to have the meat
hung on the pegs; but, if not, even when the meat is bagged, there is
still some risk of worms. To provide a box that will be bugproof,
ratproof, and at the same time cool, as seen in the illustration, Fig. 24,
make a frame one inch thick and two or three inches wide, with a close
plank bottom; cover the whole box with wire cloth, such, as is used for
screens. Let the wire cloth be on the outside, so that the meat will not
touch it. The top may be of plank and fit perfectly tight, so that no
insect can creep under. Of course, the box may be of any size desired. It
will be well to have the strips nailed quite closely together, say, about
one and a half inches apart. When the meat is put in, lay sticks between,
so that the pieces will not touch. If the box is made carefully, it is
bugproof and ratproof, affording ventilation at the same time, and so
preventing molding. Meat should be kept in a dry and cool place.

[Illustration: FIG. 24. SECURE BOX FOR STORING BACON.]




CHAPTER XIII.


SIDELIGHTS ON PORK MAKING.

The trade in country dressed hogs varies materially from year to year.
Since the big packing houses have become so prominent in the industry
there is, of course, less done in country dressed hogs, yet a market is
always found for considerable numbers. Thirty years ago Chicago received
as many as 350,000 dressed hogs in one year. With a growth of the packing
industry this business decreased, until 1892, when only 5000 were handled
at Chicago, but since that date there has been a revival of interest, with
as many as 60,000 received in 1894 and an ever changing number since that
date. Thirty years ago the number of hogs annually packed at Chicago was
about 700,000. This business has increased since to as many as 8,000,000
in a year, the industry in other packing centers being in much the same
proportion. At all packing centers in the west there are slaughtered
annually 20,000,000 to 24,000,000 hogs.

Compared with the enormous numbers fattened and marketed on the hoof, a
very small proportion of the hogs turned off the farms each year are sold
dressed. Yet with many farmers, particularly those who have only a small
number to dispose of, it is always a question as to which is the better
way to sell hogs, dressed or alive. No individual experience can be taken
as a criterion, yet here is a record of what one Michigan farmer did in
the way of experiment. He had two lots of hogs to sell. One litter of
seven weighed a total of 1605 lbs. alive, and dressed 1,335 lbs., which
was three pounds over a one-sixth shrinkage; one litter of five weighed
1540 lbs. and dressed 1320 lbs., losing exactly one-seventh, they being
very fat. The sow weighed 517 lbs. and dressed 425, dressing away about 18
lbs. to the 100 lbs. He was offered $3.80 per 100 lbs. live weight, for
all the hogs, and $3 for the sow. He finally sold the seven hogs, dressed,
at $5 per 100 lbs., the second lot of five at $4.75, and the sow at $4.25.
He decided that by dressing the hogs before selling, he gained about
$12.50, aside from lard and trimmings. The experience here noted would not
necessarily hold good anywhere and any time. Methods employed in packing
hogs have been brought down to such a fine point, however, with
practically every portion utilized, that unless a farmer has a
well-defined idea where he can advantageously sell his dressed pork, it
would not pay, as a general thing, to butcher any considerable number of
hogs, with a view of thus disposing of them.


AN EASILY FILLED PIG TROUGH.

To get swill into a pig trough is no easy matter if the hogs cannot be
kept out until it is filled. The arrangement shown in Fig. 25 will be
found of much value and a great convenience. Before pouring in the swill,
the front end of the pen, in the form of a swinging door suspended from
the top, is placed in the position shown at _b_. The trough is filled and
the door allowed to assume the position shown at _a_.

[Illustration: FIG. 25. PIG TROUGH ATTACHMENT.]


AN AID IN RINGING HOGS.

A convenient trap for holding a hog while a ring is placed in its nose
consists of a trunk or a box without ends, 6 feet long, 30 inches high and
18 inches wide, inside measure. This trunk has a strong frame at one end,
to which the boards are nailed. The upper and lower slats are double, and
between them a strong lever has free play. To accommodate large or small
pigs, two pins are set in the lower slat, against which the lever can
bear. The pins do not go through the lever. This trunk is placed in the
door of the pen, and two men are required to hold it and ring the hogs.
When a hog enters and tries to go through, one man shoves the lever up,
catching him just back of the head, and holds him there. The second man
then rings him, and he is freed. Fig. 26 exhibits the construction of the
trap, in the use of which one can hold the largest hog with ease.

[Illustration: FIG. 26. TRAP FOR HOLDING HOG.]


AVERAGE WEIGHTS OF LIVE HOGS.

The average weight of all hogs received at Chicago in 1898 was 234 lbs.;
in 1896, 246 lbs. The average weight of all hogs received at Chicago in
1895 was 230 lbs.; in 1894, 233 lbs.; in 1893, 240 lbs.


EXTREMES IN MARKET PRICE OF PORK AND LARD.

The highest price of mess pork at Chicago during the last forty years,
according to the Daily Trade Bulletin, was $44 per bbl. in 1864, and the
lowest price $5.50 per bbl., paid in 1896. The highest price of lard was
naturally also in war times, 30c per lb. in 1865; the lowest price a shade
more than 3c, in 1896.


NET TO GROSS.

Good to prime hogs, when cut up into pork, hams, shoulders and lard, will
dress out 73 to 75 per cent, according to the testimony of the large
packing concerns. That is, for every 100 lbs. live weight, it is fair to
estimate 73 to 75 lbs. of product of the classes named. If cut into ribs
instead of pork, prime hogs would net 70 to 72 per cent, while those which
are not prime run as low as 65 per cent. For comparative purposes, it may
be well to note here that good farm-fed cattle will dress 54 to 56 per
cent of their live weight in beef, the remainder being hide, fat, offal,
etc., and sheep will dress 48 to 54 per cent, 50 per cent being a fair
average.


RELATIVE WEIGHTS OF PORTIONS OF CARCASS.

To determine the relation of the different parts of the hog as usually
cut, to the whole dressed weight, the Alabama experiment station reports
the following results. The test was made with a number of light hogs
having an average dressed weight of 137 lbs. The average weight of head
was 12.2 lbs.; backbone, 6.8 lbs.; the two hams, 25.4 lbs.; the two
shoulders, 33.1 lbs.; leaf lard, 8.3 lbs.; ribs, 5.5 lbs.; the two
"middling" sides, 35 lbs.; tender loin, 1.1 lbs.; feet, 3.6 lbs.


GATES FOR HANDLING HOGS.

The device shown in the accompanying illustrations for handling hogs when
they are to be rung or for other purposes, is very useful on the ordinary
farm. Fig. 27 represents a chute and gate which will shut behind and
before the hog and hold him in position. There is just room enough for him
to stick his nose out, and while in this position rings can be inserted.
The sides of the chute must be much closer together than shown in the
engraving, so that the hog cannot turn about. In fact, the width should be
just sufficient to allow the hog to pass through. Fig. 28 represents the
side view of another gate and pen, so arranged that the door can be opened
and shut without getting into the pen.

[Illustration: FIG. 27. HOG CHUTE.]

[Illustration: FIG. 28. DEVICE FOR OPENING GATE.]




CHAPTER XIV.


PACKING HOUSE CUTS OF PORK.

While considering primarily the proper curing of pork for use on the farm
and for home manufacture by farmers, it will not be out of the way to
become acquainted with some of the leading cuts of meat as made by the
big pork packers at Chicago and elsewhere. In the speculative markets, a
large business is done in "mess pork," "short ribs" and lard. These are
known as the speculative commodities in pork product. The prices
established, controlled largely by the amount offered and the character of
the demand, regulate to a considerable extent the market for other cuts of
pork, such as long clear middles, hams and shoulders. Our illustrations of
some of the leading cuts of meats, furnished us through the courtesy of
Hately Bros., prominent pork packers in Chicago, together with
accompanying descriptions, give a very good idea of the shape pork product
takes as handled in the big markets of the world.

[Illustration: FIG. 29. MESS PORK.]

[Illustration: FIG. 30. SHORT RIBS.]

[Illustration: FIG. 31. SHOULDER.]


MESS PORK.

This standard cut, Fig. 29, is made from heavy fat hogs. The hog is first
split down the back, the backbone being left on one side. Ham and
shoulders taken off, the sides are then cut in uniform strips of four or
five pieces. Equal portions of both sides are then packed in barrels, 200
lbs. net, the pieces numbering not more than sixteen nor less than nine.
Barrels to be filled with a pickle made with 40 lbs. of salt to each
barrel.


SHORT RIBS.

These are made from the sides, with the ham and shoulder taken off and
backbone removed; haunchbone and breastbone sawed or cut down smooth and
level with the face of the side. The pieces (Fig. 30) are made to average
32 lbs. and over.


SHOULDERS.

Regular shoulders (Fig. 31), or commonly called dry salted shoulders, are
cut off the sides between first and second ribs, so as not to expose
forearm joint. Shank cut off at knee joint. Neck bone taken out and neck
trimmed smooth. Shoulders butted off square at top. Made to average 12 to
14, 14 to 16, and 16 to 18 lbs. On the wholesale markets can usually be
bought at about the price per pound of live hogs.


HAMS.

American cut hams are cut short inside the haunchbone, are well rounded at
butt and all fat trimmed off the face of the hams to make as lean as
possible. See Fig. 32. Cut off above the hock joint. Hams are made to
average 10 to 12, 12 to 14, 14 to 16, 16 to 18, and 18 to 20 lbs.


PICNIC HAMS.

This is a contradictory term, for the picnic ham is in truth a shoulder.
Picnic hams (Fig. 33) are made from shoulders cut off sides between
second and third ribs. Shank bone cut off one inch above knee joint, and
neck bone taken out. Butt taken off through the middle of the blade and
nicely rounded to imitate a ham. Made to average 5 to 6, 6 to 8, 8 to 10,
and 10 to 14 lbs.


WILTSHIRE CUT BACON.

This cut (Fig. 34) is from hogs weighing about 150 lbs. Formerly the hair
was removed by singeing, but this method is not so much employed now. The
Wiltshire bacon is consumed almost entirely in London, Bristol and the
south of England generally.

[Illustration: FIG. 32. AMERICAN CUT HAM.]

[Illustration: FIG. 33. PICNIC HAM.]


STANDARD LARD.

The following is the rule in force at Chicago for the manufacture of
standard prime steam lard: Standard prime steam lard shall be solely the
product of the trimmings and other fat parts of hogs, rendered in tanks by
the direct application of steam and without subsequent change in grain or
character by the use of agitators or other machinery, except as such
change may unavoidably come from transportation. It must have proper
color, flavor and soundness for keeping, and no material which has been
salted must be included. The name and location of the renderer and the
grade of the lard shall be plainly branded on each package at the time of
packing.


NEUTRAL LARD.

This is made at the big packing houses from pure leaf lard, which after
being thoroughly chilled is rendered in open tanks at a temperature of
about 120 degrees. The portion rendered at this temperature is run into
packages and allowed to cool before closing tightly.

Lard stearine is made from the fat of hogs which is rendered and then
pressed and the oil extracted. The oil is used for lubricating purposes,
and the stearine by lard refiners in order to harden the lard, especially
in warm weather.




CHAPTER XV.

MAGNITUDE OF THE SWINE INDUSTRY.


Were it not for the foreign demand for our pork and pork product there
would be much less profit in fattening hogs for market than there is,
irrespective of the price of corn and other feeds. England is our best
customer, taking by far the larger part of our entire exports of all lard,
cured meats and other hog product, but there is an encouraging trade with
other foreign countries. The authorities at Washington are making every
effort to enlarge this foreign outlet. Certain European countries, notably
France and Germany, place irksome embargoes on American pork product.
Ostensibly, these foreign governments claim the quality and healthfulness
of some of the American pork are in question, but in reality back of all
this is the demand from the German and French farmers that the competition
afforded by American pork must be kept down. It is believed that
eventually all such restrictions will be swept away, through international
agreement, and that thus our markets may be further extended, greatly
benefiting the American farmer. Our exports of hog product, including
pork, bacon, hams and lard, represent a value annually of about
$100,000,000.


THE WORLD'S SUPPLY OF BACON

is derived chiefly from the United States, which enjoys an enormous trade
with foreign consuming countries, notably England and continental Europe.
Irish bacon is received with much favor in the English markets, while
Wiltshire and other parts of England also furnish large quantities,
specially cured, which are great favorites among consumers. Some idea of
the magnitude of the foreign trade of the United States, so far as hog
product is concerned, may be formed by a glance at the official figures
showing our exports in a single year. During the twelve months ended June
30, 1899, the United States exported 563,000,000 lbs. bacon, 226,000,000
lbs. ham, 137,000,000 lbs. pickled pork and 711,000,000 lbs. lard, a total
of 1,637 million pounds pork product. On the supposition that live hogs
dress out, roughly speaking, 70 per cent product, this suggests the
enormous quantity of 2,340 million pounds of live hogs taken for the
foreign trade in one year. Estimating the average weight at 240 lbs., this
means nearly 10,000,000 hogs sent to American slaughterhouses in the
course of one year to supply our foreign trade with pork product. The
United Kingdom is by far our best customer, although we export liberal
quantities to Belgium, Holland, Germany, France, Canada, Brazil, Central
America and the West Indies. Total value of our 1899 exports of pork
product was $116,000,000.

[Illustration: FIG. 34. WILTSHIRE CUT BACON.]

The enormous business of the big packing houses, located chiefly in the
west, with a few in the east, can scarcely be comprehended in its extent.
Chicago continues to hold the prestige of the largest packing center in
the world, but other western cities are crowding it. In 1891 Chicago
received 8,600,000 hogs, the largest on record, most of which were packed
in that city, and the product shipped all over the world. In recent years
the Chicago receipts have averaged smaller, but the proportion going to
the packing concerns remains about the same. It is estimated that the hogs
received at that city in 1898 had a value of $84,000,000.


CO-OPERATIVE CURING HOUSES IN DENMARK.

About half the pork exported to England from Denmark is cured by the
co-operative curing houses, established first in 1888 and since that date
greatly increased in number. Enormous quantities of cheap Black Sea barley
have been brought into Denmark the last few years, used principally for
fodder. The principal advantage of the co-operative system, doing away
with the middleman, applies to these establishments. Farmers who raise
hogs in a given district of say ten to twenty miles' circumference, unite
and furnish the money necessary for the construction and operation of the
co-operative curing establishment. The farmers bind themselves to deliver
all hogs that they raise to the curing house, and severe fines are
collected when animals are sold elsewhere. At every curing house there is
a shop for the sale of sausage, fat, etc., these as a rule paying well and
forming an important part of the profits in this co-operation.


HOG PRICES AT CHICAGO, PER 100 POUNDS.

                  Heavy packing,   Mixed packing,    Light bacon.
  Year.          260 to 450 lbs.   200 to 250 lbs.  150 to 200 lbs.

  1899               $3.10@4.75     $3.50@5.00     $3.75@5.00
  1898                3.25@4.80      3.30@4.75      3.00@4.65
  1897                3.00@4.50      3.20@4.60      3.20@4.65
  1896                2.40@4.45      2.75@4.45      2.80@4.45
  1895                3.25@5.45      3.25@5.55      3.25@5.70
  1894                3.90@6.75      3.90@6.65      3.50@6.45
  1893                3.80@8.75      4.25@8.65      4.40@8.50
  1892                3.70@7.00      3.65@6.70      3.60@6.85
  1891                3.25@5.70      3.25@5.75      3.15@5.95


TOTAL PACKING AND MARKETING OF HOGS.

[Year Ended March 1--Cincinnati Price Current.]

                                           Receipts.
                  Western      Eastern    N. Y., Phil.
                  Packing.     Packing.    and Balto.   Total.

  1898-99        23,651,000   3,162,000   2,978,000   29,791,000
  1897-98        20,201,000   3,072,000   2,861,000   26,134,000
  1896-97        16,929,000   2,791,000   2,950,000   22,670,000
  1895-96        15,010,000   2,603,000   2,867,000   20,480,000
  1894-95        16,003,000   3,099,000   2,517,000   21,619,000
  1893-94        11,605,000   2,701,000   2,483,000   16,789,000
  1892-93        12,390,000   3,016,000   2,790,000   18,196,000
  1892           14,457,000   2,771,000   3,684,000   20,912,000
  1891           17,713,000   2,540,000   3,713,000   23,966,000


RECEIPTS OF HOGS AT LEADING POINTS BY YEARS.

[Stated in thousands--From American Agriculturist Year Book for 1898.]

                   1897   1896   1895   1894   1893   1892   1891

  Chicago          8,364  7,659  7,885  7,483  6,057  7,714  8,601
  Kansas City      3,351  2,606  2,458  2,547  1,948  2,397  2,599
  Omaha            1,605  1,198  1,188  1,904  1,435  1,706  1,462
  St. Louis        1,627  1,618  1,085  1,147    777    848    841
                    ----   ----   ----   ----   ----   ----   ----
      Total       14,947 13,081 12,616 13,081 10,217 12,665 13,503

  [1]Cincinnati      875    823    773    639    592    587    816
  Indianapolis     1,253  1,255  1,109    964    879  1,123  1,320
  Cleveland          750    500    375    295    270     ..     ..
  Detroit            320    224    189    164    149    134     87
                    ----   ----   ----   ----   ----   ----   ----
      Total        3,198  2,802  2,346  1,062  1,890  1,844  2,223

  New York         1,578  1,845  1,763  1,656  1,488  1,826  2,177
  Boston           1,420  1,435  1,400  1,673  1,373  1,636  1,473
  Buffalo          5,621  4,941  5,256  5,626  6,058  6,112  7,167
  Pittsburg        1,894  1,340  1,063  1,074    999  1,347  1,428
  Philadelphia       250    278    259    280    275    337    377
                    ----   ----   ----   ----   ----   ----   ----
      Total       10,763  9,839  9,741 10,317 10,193 11,258 12,622

  St. Paul           225    314    364    327    194    239    263
  Sioux City         350    279    341    499    329    413    397
  Cedar Rapids       487    358    365    317    293    409    502
  St. Joseph, Mo     400    193    252    398    240    289    178
  Ft. Worth, Tex     114    141     60     ..     ..     ..     ..
  New Orleans         18     28     26     26     30     36     33
  Denver              75     57     48     94     62     83     80
                    ----   ----   ----   ----   ----   ----   ----
      Total        1,669  1,370  1,456  1,661  1,148  1,769  1,453

  Montreal            93     89     74     87     70     52     43
  Toronto             77    194    154    140     75     74     51
                    ----   ----   ----   ----   ----   ----   ----
      Total          170    283    228    227    145    126     94



                   1889   1888   1887

  Chicago          5,999  4,922  5,471
  Kansas City      2,074  2,009  2,423
  Omaha            1,207  1,284  1,012
  St. Louis          773    652    772
                    ----   ----   ----
      Total       10,053  8,867  9,678

  [1]Cincinnati       ..     ..     ..
  Indianapolis     1,158    896  1,149
  Cleveland           ..     ..     ..
  Detroit            114     21     49
                    ----   ----   ----
      Total           ..     ..     ..


  New York         1,762  1,550  1,792
  Boston           1,152  1,046  1,047
  Buffalo          5,776  5,333  5,074
  Pittsburg        1,205  1,161  1,259
  Philadelphia       332    281    274
                    ----   ----   ----
      Total       10,247  9,371  9,446

  St. Paul           249    273     ..
  Sioux City         593    431     ..
  Cedar Rapids       346    307    847
  St. Joseph, Mo     253    258     ..
  Ft. Worth, Tex      ..     ..     ..
  New Orleans         ..     ..     ..
  Denver              75     64     54
                    ----   ----   ----
      Total        1,516  1,333     ..

  Montreal            23     26     ..
  Toronto             57     36     35
                    ----   ----   ----
      Total           80     62     35


       [1] For year ended March 31.


CRATE FOR MOVING SWINE OR OTHER ANIMALS.

It is often desirable to move a small animal from one building to another,
or from one pasture enclosure to another. The illustration, Fig. 35, shows
a crate on wheels, with handles permitting it to be used as a wheelbarrow.
Into this the pig can be driven, the door closed and the crate wheeled
away. It will also be found a very useful contrivance in bringing in
calves that have been dropped by their dams in the pasture.

[Illustration: FIG. 35. HANDY MOVABLE CRATE.]




CHAPTER XVI.

DISCOVERING THE MERITS OF ROAST PIG.

By Charles Lamb.


The art of roasting, or rather broiling (which I take to be the elder
brother) was accidentally discovered in the manner following. The
swineherd, Ho-ti, having gone out into the woods one morning, as his
manner was, to collect mast for his hogs, left his cottage in the care of
his eldest son, Bo-bo, a great, lubberly boy, who, being fond of playing
with fire, as younkers of his age commonly are, let some sparks escape
into a bundle of straw, which, kindling quickly, spread the conflagration
over every part of their poor mansion, till it was reduced to ashes.
Together with the cottage (a sorry, antediluvian makeshift of a building,
you may think it), what was of much more importance, a fine litter of
new-farrowed pigs, no less than nine in number, perished. China pigs have
been esteemed a luxury all over the east, from the remotest periods that
we read of. Bo-bo was in the utmost consternation, as you may think, not
so much for the sake of the tenement, which his father and he could easily
build up again with a few dry branches, and the labor of an hour or two,
at any time, as for the loss of the pigs.

While he was thinking what he should say to his father, and wringing his
hands over the smoking remnants of one of those untimely sufferers, an
odor assailed his nostrils, unlike any scent which he had before
experienced. What could it proceed from?--not from the burnt cottage--he
had smelt that smell before--indeed, this was by no means the first
accident of the kind which had occurred through the negligence of this
unlucky firebrand. Much less did it resemble that of any known herb, weed
or flower. A premonitory moistening at the same time overflowed his nether
lip. He knew not what to think. He next stooped down to feel the pig, if
there were any signs of life in it. He burnt his fingers, and to cool them
he applied them in his booby fashion to his mouth. Some of the crumbs of
the scorched skin had come away with his fingers, and for the first time
in his life (in the world's life, indeed, for before him no man had known
it), he tasted--crackling!

Again he felt and fumbled at the pig. It did not burn him so much now,
still he licked his fingers from a sort of habit. The truth at length
broke into his slow understanding, that it was the pig that smelt so, and
the pig that tasted so delicious, and, surrendering himself up to the
new-born pleasure, he fell to tearing up whole handfuls of the scorched
skin with the flesh next it, and was cramming it down his throat in his
beastly fashion, when his sire entered amid the smoking rafters, armed
with retributory cudgel, and, finding how affairs stood, began to rain
blows upon the young rogue's shoulders, as thick as hailstones, which
Bo-bo headed not any more than if they had been flies. The tickling
pleasure, which he experienced in his lower regions, had rendered him
quite callous to any inconveniences that he might feel in those remote
quarters. His father might lay on, but he could not beat him from his pig
till he had made an end of it, when, becoming a little more sensible of
his situation, something like the following dialogue ensued:

"You graceless whelp, what have you got there devouring? Is it not enough
that you have burnt me down three houses with your dog's tricks, and be
hanged to you! but you must be eating fire, and I know not what--what have
you got there, I say?"

"O, father, the pig, the pig! do come and taste how nice the burnt pig
eats."

The ears of Ho-ti tingled with horror. He cursed his son, and he cursed
himself that ever he should beget a son that should eat burnt pig.

Bo-bo, whose scent was wonderfully sharpened since morning, soon raked out
another pig, and fairly rending it asunder, thrust the lesser half by main
force into the fists of Ho-ti, still shouting out, "Eat, eat, eat the
burnt pig, father, only taste--O Lord!" with suchlike barbarous
ejaculations, cramming all the while as if he would choke.

Ho-ti trembled in every joint while he grasped the abominable thing,
wavering whether he should not put his son to death for an unnatural young
monster, when the crackling scorched his fingers, as it had done his
son's, and applying the same remedy to them, he in his turn tasted some of
its flavor, which, make what sour mouths he would for a pretence, proved
not altogether displeasing to him. In conclusion, both father and son
fairly sat down to the mess, and never left off till they had dispatched
all that remained of the litter.




CHAPTER XVII.

COOKING AND SERVING PORK.

FIRST PRIZE WINNERS IN THE AMERICAN AGRICULTURIST CONTEST FOR BEST RECIPES
FOR COOKING AND SERVING PORK.


PORK PIE.

Unless you have a brick oven do not attempt this dish, as it requires a
long and even baking, which no stove oven can give. Make a good pie crust
and line a large pan, one holding about 6 quarts; in the bottom put a
layer of thin slices of onions, then a layer of lean salt pork, which has
been previously browned in the frying pan, next place a layer of peeled
apples, which sprinkle with a little brown sugar, using 1/2 lb. sugar to 3
lbs. apples; then begin with onions, which sprinkle with pepper, pork and
apples again, and so on until the dish is full. Wet the edges of the
crust, put on the top crust, well perforated, and bake at least four
hours, longer if possible. These pies are eaten hot or cold and are a
great favorite with the English people. Potatoes may be used in place of
apples, but they do not give the meat so fine a flavor.


PORK POTPIE.

Three pounds pork (if salt pork is used, freshen it well), cut into inch
cubes. Fry brown, add a large onion sliced, and a teaspoon each of chopped
sage, thyme and parsley. Cover with 5 pints of water and boil for two
hours, add a large pepper cut small or a pinch of cayenne, and a
tablespoon of salt if fresh pork has been used. Add also 3 pints
vegetables, carrots, turnips and parsnips cut small, boil half an hour
longer, when add a pint of potatoes cut into small pieces, and some
dumplings. Cover closely, boil twenty minutes, when pour out into a large
platter and serve. The dumplings are made of 1 pint of flour, 1 teaspoon
salt, and 1 teaspoon baking powder, sifted together. Add 2 eggs, well
beaten and 1 cup of milk. Mix out all the lumps and drop by spoonfuls into
the stew. Serve this potpie with a salad of dandelion leaves, dressed with
olive oil, vinegar, salt and pepper.


PORK GUMBO.

Cut into small dice 2 lbs. lean pork. (In these recipes where the pork is
stewed or baked in tomatoes or water, salt pork may be used, provided it
is well freshened.) Fry the pork a pale brown, add 2 sliced onions, and
when these are brown add 3 bell peppers sliced, and 2 quarts peeled
tomatoes, with 2 teaspoons salt. Let boil gently, stirring frequently, for
1-1/2 hours. Peel and cut small 1 pint of young tender okra pods, and add.
Cover again and boil half an hour longer. Cook in a lined saucepan, as tin
will discolor the okra. With this serve a large dish of rice or hominy.
Corn may be used in place of okra if the latter is disliked. The corn
should be cut from the cobs and added half an hour before dinner time.


SUCCOTASH.

Boil a piece of lean pork (about 5 lbs. in weight) in 3 quarts water,
until the meat is tender. The next day take out the pork, and remove the
grease risen on the liquor from the pork during cooking. To 3 pints of the
liquor add 1 pint of milk and 1-1/2 pints lima beans. Let them boil until
tender--about one hour--when add 1-1/2 pints corn cut from the cob. Let
the whole cook for ten minutes, add a teaspoon of salt if necessary, half
a teaspoon of pepper, and drop in the pork to heat. When hot, pour into a
tureen and serve.


PORK PILLAU.

Take a piece of pork (about 4 lbs.) and 2 lbs. bacon. Wash and put to boil
in plenty of water, to which add a pepper pod, a few leaves of sage and a
few stalks of celery. One hour before dinner, dip out and strain 2 quarts
of the liquor in which the pork is boiling, add to it a pint of tomatoes
peeled, a small onion cut fine, and salt if necessary; boil half an hour,
when add 1 pint of rice well washed. When it comes to a boil draw to the
back of stove and steam until the rice is cooked and the liquor absorbed.
The pork must boil three or four hours. Have it ready to serve with the
rice. This makes a good dinner, with a little green salad, bread and
butter and a good apple pudding.


PORK ROLL.

Chop fine (a meat chopper will do the work well and quickly) 3 lbs. raw
lean pork and 1/4 lb. fat salt pork. Soak a pint of white bread crumbs in
cold water. When soft squeeze very dry, add to the chopped meat with a
large onion chopped fine, 1 tablespoon chopped parsley, 1/2 teaspoon each
of chopped sage and thyme, and 1/2 teaspoon black pepper. Mix together
thoroughly and form into a roll, pressing it closely and compactly
together. Have ready about a tablespoon of fat in a frying pan, dredge the
roll thickly with flour and brown it in the fat, turning it until nicely
browned on all sides. Then place it in a baking pan, and bake in a hot
oven for one hour. Baste it every ten minutes with water. Do not turn or
disturb the meat after it has been put into the oven. Half an hour before
dinner add 12 or 14 small carrots that have been parboiled in salted
boiling water for fifteen minutes. When done, place the roll on a platter,
surround it with plain boiled macaroni, dot with the carrots and pour over
all a nicely seasoned tomato sauce.


PEPPER POT.

Cut 3 lbs. rather lean pork into 2-inch cubes, fry until brown, place in a
3-quart stone pot (a bean jar is excellent for this purpose) having a
close-fitting lid; add 2 large onions sliced, 6 large green peppers (the
bell peppers are the best, being fine in flavor and mild), a tablespoon of
salt (if fresh pork was used), and 3 large tomatoes peeled and cut small.
Fill the pot with water and place in the oven or on the back of the stove
and allow to simmer five or six hours, or even longer. The longer it is
cooked the better it will be. Persons who ordinarily cannot eat pork will
find this dish will do them no harm. The sauce will be rich and nicely
flavored, and the meat tender and toothsome. Serve with it plenty of
boiled rice or potatoes.


PORK CROQUETTES (IN CABBAGE LEAVES).

To 1 lb. lean pork chopped fine add 1 teaspoon salt, 1/2 teaspoon each of
pepper, chopped sage and thyme, 1 teaspoon chopped parsley and a large
onion also chopped. Mix well and stir in 2-3 cup (half-pint cup) of
well-washed raw rice. Wash a large cabbage, having removed all the
defective outer leaves. Plunge it whole into a large pot of boiling salted
water and boil for five minutes, remove and drain. This will render the
leaves pliable. Let cool a little, when pull the leaves apart, and wrap in
each leaf a tablespoon of the pork and rice. Wrap it up securely and
neatly as if tying up a parcel and secure with wooden toothpicks or twine.
When all are done, lay in a baking dish and cover with a quart of tomatoes
peeled and cut fine, mixed with half a pint of water, and a teaspoon of
salt. Bake one hour in a hot oven, turning the croquettes occasionally. If
the sauce becomes too thick, dilute with a little hot water. When done,
dish, pour over the sauce and serve with potatoes or hominy. These are
very good indeed. If desired the croquettes may be steamed over hot water
in a steamer for three hours, or plunged directly into a kettle of boiling
water and boiled for one hour. They are not so delicate as when baked.


PORK WITH PEA PUDDING (ENGLISH STYLE).

Boil the pork as directed above, and do not omit the vegetables, as they
flavor the meat and the pudding. Use the yellow split peas and soak a pint
in cold water over night. Drain and tie them loosely in a pudding bag and
boil with the pork for three hours. An hour before dinner remove and press
through a colander, add a teaspoon salt, half a teaspoon pepper and 3 eggs
well beaten. Chop enough parsley to make a teaspoonful, add to the peas
with a little grated nutmeg. Beat up well, sift in half a pint of flour
and pour into a pudding bag. The same bag used before will do if well
washed. Tie it up tightly, drop into the pork water again and boil another
hour. Remove, let drain in the colander a few minutes, when turn out onto
a dish. Serve with the pork, and any preferred sauce; mint sauce is good
to serve with pork, and a tomato sauce is always good. In fact, it is a
natural hygienic instinct which ordains a tart fruit or vegetable to be
eaten with pork. The Germans, who are noted for their freedom from skin
diseases, add sour fruit sauces to inordinately fat meats.


PORK WITH SAUERKRAUT (GERMAN STYLE).

Boil a leg of pork for three or four hours, wash 2 quarts sauerkraut, put
half of it into an iron pot, lay on it the pork drained from the water in
which it was cooking and cover with the remainder of sauerkraut, add 1
quart water in which the pork was cooking, cover closely and simmer gently
for one hour.


PORK CHOWDER.

Have ready a quart of potatoes sliced, 2 large onions sliced, and 1 lb.
lean salt pork. Cut the pork into thin slices and fry until cooked, drain
off all but 1 tablespoon fat and fry the onions a pale brown. Then put the
ingredients in layers in a saucepan, first the pork, then onions, potatoes
and so on until used, adding to each layer a little pepper. Add a pint of
water, cover closely and simmer fifteen minutes, then add a pint of rich
milk, and cover the top with half a pound of small round crackers. Cover
again and when the crackers are soft, serve in soup plates. If you live
where clams are plentiful, add a quart of cleaved clams when the potatoes
are almost done and cook ten minutes.


SEA PIE.

Make a crust of 1 quart flour, 2 teaspoons baking powder, 1 teaspoon salt,
mix well, rub in a tablespoon of fat--pork fat melted or lard--and mix
into a smooth paste with a pint of water. Line a deep pudding dish with
this, put in a layer of onions, then potatoes sliced, then a thin layer of
pork in slices, more onions, etc., until the dish is full. Wet the edges,
put on a top crust. Tie a floured cloth over the top and drop into a pot
of boiling water. Let the water come up two-thirds on the dish, and keep
the water boiling for four hours. Invert on a dish, remove the mold and
serve hot.


_For Fresh Pork Only._

CORN AND PORK SCALLOP.

Cut about 2 lbs. young pork into neat chops and reject all fat and bone.
Fry them until well cooked and of a pale brown, dust with salt and pepper.
Cut some green corn from the cob. Take a 2-quart dish, put a layer of corn
in the bottom, then a layer of pork, and so on until the dish is full, add
1 pint of water, cover and bake for one hour. Remove the cover fifteen
minutes before serving, so the top may be nicely browned. Serve with
potatoes and a lettuce salad. Onions and pork may be cooked in the same
manner.


STUFFED SHOULDER OF PORK.

Take a shoulder of pork and bone it. Cut out the shoulder blade, and then
the leg bone. After the cut made to extract the shoulder blade, the flesh
has to be turned over the bone as it is cut, like a glove-finger on the
hand; if any accidental cut is made through the flesh it must be sewed up,
as it would permit the stuffing to escape. For the stuffing, the following
is extra nice: Peel 4 apples and core them, chop fine with 2 large onions,
4 leaves of sage, and 4 leaves of lemon thyme. Boil some white potatoes,
mash them and add 1 pint to the chopped ingredients with a teaspoon of
salt and a little cayenne. Stuff the shoulder with this and sew up all the
openings. Dredge with flour, salt and pepper and roast in a hot oven,
allowing twenty minutes to the pound. Baste frequently, with hot water at
first, and then with gravy from the pan. Serve with currant jelly,
potatoes and some green vegetables. Another extra good stuffing for pork
is made with sweet potatoes as a basis. Boil the potatoes, peel and mash.
To a half pint of potato add a quarter pint of finely chopped celery, 2
tablespoons chopped onions, 1/2 teaspoon pepper, teaspoon each of salt and
chopped parsley and a tablespoon of butter.


PORK ROASTED WITH TOMATOES.

Take a piece for roasting and rub well with salt and pepper, dredge with
flour, and pour into the pan a pint of hot water, and place in a brisk
oven. This must be done two or three hours before dinner, according to the
size of roast; baste the meat often. An hour before dinner peel some
tomatoes (about a quart), put them into a bowl and mash with the hands
till the pulp is in fine pieces, add to them a chopped onion, a teaspoon
of chopped parsley and 1/2 teaspoon each of sage and thyme. Draw the pan
containing the roast to the mouth of oven and skim all the fat from the
gravy; pour the tomatoes into the pan, and bake for one hour. With this
serve a big dish of rice.


PORK WITH SWEET POTATOES.

Prepare the roast as described above, either stuffed or otherwise. When
partly done, peel and cut some sweet potatoes into slices about three
inches long. Bank these all around the meat, covering it and filling the
pan. Baste often with the gravy and bake one hour. Serve with this a
Russian salad, made of vegetables. Young carrots may be used in place of
sweet potatoes.


RARE OLD FAMILY DISHES, DESCRIBED FOR THIS WORK BY THE BEST COOKS IN
AMERICA. EVERY ONE OF THESE RECIPES IS A SPECIAL FAVORITE THAT HAS BEEN
OFTEN TRIED AND NEVER FOUND WANTING. NONE OF THESE RECIPES HAS EVER BEFORE
BEEN PRINTED, AND ALL WILL BE FOUND SIMPLE, ECONOMICAL AND HYGIENIC.


_Ham._

BOILED.

Wash well a salted, smoked pig's ham, put this in a large kettle of
boiling water and boil until tender, remove from the kettle, take off all
of the rind, stick in a quantity of whole cloves, place in a baking pan,
sprinkle over with a little sugar, pour over it a cup of cider, or, still
better, sherry. Place in the oven and bake brown.


FOR LUNCH.

Mince cold ham fine, either boiled or fried, add a couple of hard-boiled
eggs chopped fine, a tablespoon of prepared mustard, a little vinegar and
a sprinkling of salt. Put in a mold. When cold cut in thin slices or
spread on bread for sandwiches.


BONED.

Having soaked a well-cured ham in tepid water over night, boil it until
perfectly tender, putting it on in warm water; take up, let cool, remove
the bone carefully, press the ham again into shape, return to the boiling
liquor, remove the pot from the fire and let the ham remain in it till
cold. Cut across and serve cold.


POTTED.

Mince left-over bits of boiled ham and to every 2 lbs. lean meat allow 1/2
lb. fat. Pound all in a mortar until it is a fine paste, gradually adding
1/2 teaspoon powdered mace, the same quantity of cayenne, a pinch of
allspice and nutmeg. Mix very thoroughly, press into tiny jars, filling
them to within an inch of the top; fill up with clarified butter or
drippings and keep in a cool place. This is nice for tea or to spread
picnic sandwiches.


STEW.

A nice way to use the meat left on a ham bone after the frying slices are
removed is to cut it off in small pieces, put into cold water to cover
and let it come to a boil. Pour off the water and add enough hot to make
sufficient stew for your family. Slice an onion and potatoes into it.


WITH VEAL.

A delicious picnic dish is made of ham and veal. Chop fine equal
quantities of each and put into a baking dish in layers with slices of
hard-boiled eggs between; boil down the water in which the veal was
cooked, with the bones, till it will jelly when cold; flavor with celery,
pepper and salt and pour over the meat. Cover with a piecrust half an inch
thick and bake until the crust is done. Slice thin when cold.


OMELET.

Beat 6 eggs very light, add 1/2 teaspoon salt, 3 tablespoons sweet milk,
pepper to taste, have frying pan very hot with 1 tablespoon butter in;
turn in the mixture, shake constantly until cooked, then put 1 cup finely
chopped ham over the top and roll up like jelly cake, cut in slices.


BAKED.

Most persons boil ham. It is much better baked, if baked right. Soak it
for an hour in clean water and wipe dry. Next spread it all over with thin
batter and then put it into a deep dish, with sticks under it to keep it
out of the gravy. When it is fully done, take off the skin and batter
crusted upon the flesh side, and set away to cool. It should bake from six
to eight hours. After removing the skin, sprinkle over with two
tablespoonfuls of sugar, some black pepper and powdered crackers. Put in
pan and return to the oven to brown; then take up and stick cloves through
the fat, and dust with powdered cinnamon.


WITH CORN MEAL.

Take bits of cold boiled ham, cut into fine pieces, put in a frying pan
with water to cover, season well. When it boils, thicken with corn meal,
stirred in carefully, like mush. Cook a short time, pour in a dish to
mold, slice off and fry.


BALLS.

Chop 1/2 pint cold boiled ham fine. Put a gill of milk in a saucepan and
set on the fire. Stir in 1/2 teacup stale bread crumbs, the beaten yolks
of 2 eggs and the ham. Season with salt, cayenne and a little nutmeg. Stir
over the fire until hot, add a tablespoon chopped parsley, mix well and
turn out to cool. When cold make into small balls, dip in beaten egg, then
in bread crumbs and fry in boiling fat.


TOAST.

Remove the fat from some slices of cold boiled ham, chop fine. Put 2
tablespoonfuls of butter into a saucepan on the stove, add the chopped ham
and half a cup of sweet cream or milk. Season with pepper and salt; when
hot, remove from the stove and stir in quickly 3 well-beaten eggs. Pour
onto toast and serve at once.


FLAVORED WITH VEGETABLES.

Take a small ham, as it will be finer grained than a large one, let soak
for a few hours in vinegar and water, put on in hot water, then add 2
heads of celery, 2 turnips, 3 onions and a large bunch of savory herbs. A
glass of port or sherry wine will improve the flavor of the ham. Simmer
very gently until tender, take it out and remove the skin, or if to be
eaten cold, let it remain in the liquor until nearly cold.


PATTIES.

One pint of ham which has previously been cooked, mix with two parts of
bread crumbs, wet with milk. Put the batter in gem pans, break 1 egg over
each, sprinkle the top thickly with cracker crumbs and bake until brown. A
nice breakfast dish.


PATTIES WITH ONIONS.

Two cups bread crumbs moistened with a little milk, and two cups cooked
ham thoroughly mixed. If one likes the flavor, add a chopped onion. Bake
in gem pans. Either break an egg over each gem or chop cold hard-boiled
egg and sprinkle over them. Scatter a few crumbs on top. Add bits of
butter and season highly with pepper and salt, and brown carefully.


FRIED PATTIES.

One cup cold boiled ham (chopped fine), 1 cup bread crumbs, 1 egg, salt
and pepper to taste, mix to the right thickness with nice meat dressing or
sweet milk, mold in small patties and fry in butter.


HAM SANDWICHES.

Mince your ham fine and add plenty of mustard, 3 eggs, 1 tablespoon flour,
1 tablespoon butter and as much chopped cucumber pickles as you have ham.
Beat this thoroughly together and pour into 1 pint of boiling vinegar, but
do not let the mixture boil. When it cools, spread between your
sandwiches.


_Salt Pork._

FRIED WITH FLOUR.

Slice the pork thinly and evenly, placing it in a large frying pan of
water, and turning it twice while freshening. This prevents it humping in
the middle, as pork, unless the slices are perfectly flat, cannot be fried
evenly. When freshened sufficiently, drain, throw the water off, and,
rolling each slice in flour, return to the frying pan. Fry a delicate
brown, place on a platter dry, add slices of lemon here and there. Drain
all the frying fat off, leaving a brown sediment in the pan. Pour 1 cup of
rich milk on this, and when it thickens (keep stirring constantly until of
the consistency of rich, thick cream), pour into a gravy boat, and dust
with pepper.--[M. G.


FRIED PORK AND GRAVY.

Cut the rind from a firm piece of fat salt pork that has a few streaks of
lean (if preferred). Slice thin, scald in hot water, have the frying pan
smoking hot, put in the slices of pork and fry (without scorching) until
crisp. Then pour off nearly all the fat, add some hot water after the
slices have been removed from the pan, and stir in some flour moistened
with cold water for a thickened gravy.--[Farmer's Wife.


FRIED IN BATTER OR WITH APPLES.

Slice thin and fry crisp in a hot frying pan, then dip in a batter made as
follows: One egg well beaten, 3 large spoons rich milk, and flour enough
to make a thin batter. Fry once more until the batter is a delicate brown,
and if any batter remains it may be fried as little cakes and served with
the pork. Instead of the batter, apples, sliced, may be fried in the fat,
with a little water and sugar added, or poor man's cakes, made by scalding
4 spoons granulated (or other) corn meal with boiling water, to which add
a pinch of salt and 1 egg, stirred briskly in.--[F. W.


SWEET FRIED.

Take nice slices of pork, as many as you need, and parboil in buttermilk
for five minutes, then fry to a golden brown. Or parboil the slices in
skimmilk, and while frying sprinkle on each slice a little white sugar and
fry a nice brown. Be watchful while frying, as it burns very easily after
the sugar is on.--[I. M. W.


TO FRY IN BATTER.

Prepare as for plain fried pork, fry without dipping in flour, and when
done, dip into a batter made as follows: One egg beaten light, 2
tablespoonfuls of milk and the same of sifted flour, or enough to make a
thin batter. Stir smooth, salt slightly, dip the fried pork into it and
put back into the hot drippings. Brown slightly on both sides, remove to a
hot platter and serve immediately.--[R. W.


FRIED WITH SAGE.

Freshen the pork in the usual manner with water or soaking in milk, partly
fry the pork, then put three or four freshly picked sprigs of sage in the
frying pan with the pork. When done, lay the crisp fried sage leaves on
platter with the pork.--[Mrs. W. L. R.


MRS. BISBEE'S CREAMED PORK.

Slice as many slices as your frying pan will hold, pour on cold water,
place upon the range to freshen; when hot, pour off the water and fry
until crispy; take out upon a platter, pour the fat in a bowl. Pour some
milk, about a pint, in the frying pan, boil, thicken and pour upon the
fried pork. Serve at once.--[Mrs. G. A. B.


BAKED.

Take a piece of salt pork as large as needed, score it neatly and soak in
milk and water half an hour, or longer if very salt; put into a baking pan
with water and a little flour sprinkled over the scoring. Bake until
done. Always make a dressing to eat with this, of bread and cracker
crumbs, a lump of butter, an egg, salt, pepper and sage to taste; mix with
hot milk, pack in a deep dish and bake about twenty minutes. Keep water in
the baking dish after the meat is taken up, pour off most of the fat and
thicken the liquor. Tomatoes go well with this dish, also cranberry sauce.


BOILED.

Boil 4 or 5 lbs. of pork having streaks of lean in it, in plenty of water,
for one and one-half hours. Take out, remove skin, cut gashes across the
top, sprinkle over powdered sage, pepper and rolled crackers. Brown in the
oven. Slice when cold.


CREAMED IN MILK AND WATER.

Freshen 10 or 12 slices of fat pork and fry a nice brown, then take up the
pork and arrange on a deep platter. Next pour off half the fat from the
frying pan and add 1 cup of milk and 1 of boiling water, and 1 tablespoon
flour mixed with a little cold milk or water, or else sifted in when the
milk and water begin to boil, but then a constant stirring is required to
prevent it from being lumpy. Next add a pinch of salt and a dust of
pepper, let it boil up, and pour over the pork. Enough for six.


EGG PORK.

Take slices of pork and parboil in water, sprinkle a little pepper on the
pork and put into the frying pan with a small piece of butter and fry.
Take 1 egg and a little milk and beat together. When the meat is nearly
done, take each slice and dip into the egg, lay back in the pan and cook
until done.


CREAMED PORK.

Take 6 slices nice pork, or as many as will fry in the frying pan, and
parboil for five minutes, then take out of the water and roll one side of
each slice in flour and fry to a golden brown. When fried, turn nearly all
of the fat off and set the pan on the stove again and turn on a cup of
nice sweet cream; let it boil up, then serve on a platter.


_Soups, Stews, Etc._

PORK SOUP.

Put pork bones in pot of cold salted water. Add the following ingredients,
in a cheesecloth bag: A few pepper seeds, a bit of horse-radish, mace, and
1 sliced turnip. Boil as for beef soup; strain and add a teaspoon of rice
flour to each pint, and let come to a boil. Serve with crackers.


PORK STEW

Slice and fry in a kettle from 1/4 to 1/2 lb. salt pork, drain off the fat
and save for shortening, add 3 pints boiling water, 2 or 3 onions sliced
thin, 1 quart potatoes sliced and pared, a sprinkling of pepper, large
spoon flour mixed in 1 cup of cold water. Let the onions boil a few
moments before adding the potatoes and flour. Five minutes before serving,
add 1 dozen crackers, split and moistened with hot water, or make
dumplings as for any stew.


DRY STEW.

Place slices of pork in the frying pan and fill full with chipped
potatoes; pour over a little water and cover tightly, and cook until the
pork begins to fry, then loosen from the bottom with a wide knife and
pour over more water, and so on until done. Pepper and salt and a bit of
butter.


OLD-FASHIONED STEW.

Place 6 large slices of pork in the kettle with nearly a quart of water,
let it boil half an hour, then add 8 sliced potatoes and 2 sliced onions,
and when nearly done add a little flour, pepper and salt, and a lump of
butter.


CHOWDER.

Cut 4 slices of salt pork in dice, place in kettle and fry, add 6
good-sized onions chopped fine, let fry while preparing 8 potatoes, then
add 1 quart boiling water and the potatoes sliced thin. Season with salt
and pepper to taste. Boil one-half hour.


_Miscellaneous._

BACON, BROILED OR FRIED.

The first essential is to have the bacon with a streak of lean and a
streak of fat, and to cut or slice it as thin as possible. Then lay it in
a shallow tin and set it inside a hot stove. It will toast evenly and the
slices will curl up and be so dry that they may be taken in the fingers to
eat. The lard that exudes may be thickened with flour, a cup of sweet new
milk and a pinch of black pepper added, and nice gravy made. Or if
preferred, the bacon, thinly sliced, may be fried on a hot skillet, just
turning it twice, letting it slightly brown on both sides. Too long in the
hot skillet, the bacon gets hard and will have a burned taste.


BRAINS.

Lay the brains in salt and water for an hour to draw out the blood. Pick
them over and take out any bits of bone and membrane. Cook for half an
hour in a small quantity of water. When cooked drain off the water, and to
each brain add a little pepper, nearly an even teaspoon of salt, a
tablespoon of butter and 1 beaten egg. Cook until the egg thickens. Or
when the brains are cooked, drain off the water, season with salt, pepper
and sage.


PORK AND BEANS.

Pick over and let soak over night 1 quart beans; in the morning wash and
drain, and place in a kettle with cold water, with 1/2 teaspoon soda, boil
about twenty minutes, then drain and put in earthen bean dish with 2
tablespoons molasses, season with pepper. In the center of the beans put 1
lb. well-washed salt pork, with the rind scored in slices or squares, rind
side uppermost. Cover all with hot water and bake six hours or longer, in
a moderate oven. Keep covered so they will not burn on the top, but an
hour or so before serving remove the pork to another dish and allow it to
brown. Beans should also brown over the top.


BOILED DINNER.

Put a piece of salt pork to cook in cold water about 9 o'clock. At 10
o'clock add a few beets, at 11 o'clock a head of cabbage, quartered.
One-half hour later add the potatoes. Serve very hot.


GERMAN WICK-A-WACK.

Save the rinds of salt pork, boil until tender, then chop very fine, add
an equal amount of dried bread dipped in hot water and chopped. Season
with salt, pepper and summer savory; mix, spread one inch deep in baking
dish, cover with sweet milk. Bake one-half hour. Very nice.


BROILED PORK.

Soak the pork in cold water over night. Wipe dry and broil over coals
until crisp. Pour over it 1/2 pint sweet cream. Ham cooked this way is
delicious.


LUNCH LOAF.

Chop remnants of cold boiled ham or salt pork, add crushed crackers and
from 3 to 6 eggs, according to the amount of your meat. Bake in a round
baking powder box, and when cold it can be sliced for the table.


PORK HASH.

Take scraps of cold pork and ham, chop very fine, put in frying pan, add a
very little water, let cook a few minutes, then add twice this amount of
chopped potato. Salt and pepper to taste, fry and serve hot.


FOR SUNDAY LUNCHEON.

Take the trimmings saved from ribs, backbone, jowl, shanks of ham and
shoulder, and all the nice bits of meat too small for ordinary use; place
in a kettle with sufficient water to barely cover meat, and boil slowly
until quite tender. Fit a piece of stout cheesecloth in a flat-bottomed
dish and cover with alternate strips of fat and lean meat while hot;
sprinkle sparingly with white pepper, add another layer of meat and a few
very thin slices of perfectly sound tart apples. Repeat until pork is
used, then sew up the ends of the cloth compactly, place between agate
platters and subject to considerable pressure over night. Served cold this
makes a very appetizing addition to Sunday suppers or luncheon.


PORK CHEESE.

Cut 2 lbs. cold roast pork into small pieces, allowing 1/4 lb. fat to each
pound of lean; salt and pepper to taste. Pound in a mortar a dessert
spoon minced parsley, 4 leaves of sage, a very small bunch of savory
herbs, 2 blades of mace, a little nutmeg, half a teaspoon of minced lemon
peel. Mix thoroughly with the meat, put into a mold and pour over it
enough well-flavored strong stock to make it very moist. Bake an hour and
a half and let it cool in the mold. Serve cold, cut in thin slices and
garnished with parsley or cress. This is a cooking school recipe. For
ordinary use the powdered spices, which may be obtained at almost any
country store, answer every purpose. Use 1/4 teaspoon sage, 1/2 teaspoon
each of summer savory and thyme, and a pinch of mace.


PORK FLOUR-GRAVY.

Take the frying pan after pork has been fried in it, put in a piece of
butter half as large as an egg, let it get very hot, then put in a
spoonful of flour sprinkled over the bottom of the pan. Let this get
thoroughly browned, then turn boiling water on it, say about a pint. Now
take a tablespoon of flour, heaping, wet it up with a cup of sweet milk
and stir into the boiling water, add salt and pepper to taste, and a small
piece more butter, cook well and serve.


PORK OMELET.

Cut the slices of pork quite thin, discarding the rind, fry on both sides
to a light brown, remove from the spider, have ready a batter made of from
2 or 3 eggs (as the amount of pork may require), beaten up with a little
flour and a little sweet milk, pouring half of this batter into the
spider. Then lay in the pork again, and pour the remaining part of the
batter over the pork. When cooked on the one side, cut in squares and
turn. Serve hot. Sometimes the pork is cut in small squares before adding
the batter.


ANOTHER OMELET.

Put 1 cup cold fried salt pork (cut in dice) and 3 tablespoons sweet milk
on back of stove to simmer, then beat 6 eggs and 1 teaspoon salt until
just blended. Put 2 tablespoons butter in frying pan. When hot add eggs
and shake vigorously until set, then add the hot creamed pork, spread over
top, fold, and serve immediately.


PIG'S FEET.

Cut off the feet at the first joint, then cut the legs into as many pieces
as there are joints, wash and scrape them well and put to soak over night
in cold, slightly salted water; in the morning scrape again and change the
water; repeat at night. The next morning put them on to boil in cold water
to cover, skim carefully, boil till very tender, and serve either hot or
cold, with a brown sauce made of part of the water in which they were
boiled, and flavored with tomato or chopped cucumber pickles. If the pig's
feet are cooled and then browned in the oven, they will be much nicer than
if served directly from the kettle in which they were boiled. Save all the
liquor not used for the sauce, for pig's feet are very rich in jelly; when
cold, remove the fat, which should be clarified, and boil the liquor down
to a glaze; this may be potted, when it will keep a long time and is
useful for glazing, or it may be used for soups either before or after
boiling, down.--[R. W.


PICKLED PIG'S FEET.

Clean them well, boil until very tender, remove all the bones. Chop the
meat, add it to the water they were boiled in, salt to taste. Add enough
vinegar to give a pleasing acid taste, pour into a dish to cool. When
firm, cut in slices. Or leave out the vinegar and serve catsup of any
kind with the meat. Or before cooking the feet, wrap each one in cloth and
boil seven hours. When cold take off the cloth and cut each foot in two
pieces. Serve cold with catsup or pepper sauce or horse-radish. Or the
feet may be put into a jar and covered with cold vinegar, to which is
added a handful of whole cloves.--[A. L. N.


KIDNEY ON TOAST.

Cut a kidney in large pieces and soak in cold water an hour. Drain and
chop fine, removing all string and fiber; also chop separately one onion.
Put a tablespoonful of butter in a frying pan, and when melted add the
chopped kidney and stir till the mixture turns a whitish color, then add
the onion. Cook five minutes, turn into a small stewpan, season and add a
cupful of boiling water. Simmer an hour and thicken with a teaspoonful of
cornstarch wet with cold water. Cook five minutes longer, pour over slices
of nicely browned toast and serve.


_Pork Fritters._

CORN MEAL FRITTERS.

Make a thick batter of corn meal and flour, cut a few slices of pork and
fry until the fat is fried out; cut a few more slices, dip them in the
batter, and drop them in the bubbling fat, seasoning with salt and pepper;
cook until light brown, and eat while hot.

FRITTERS WITH EGG.

Fry slices of freshened fat pork, browning both sides, then make a batter
of 1 egg, 1 cup milk, 1 teaspoon baking powder sifted through enough flour
to make a rather stiff batter, and a pinch of salt. Now remove the pork
from the frying pan and drop in large spoonfuls of the batter, and in the
center of each place a piece of the fried pork, then cover the pork with
batter, and when nicely brown, turn and let the other side brown. Currant
jelly is nice with them.

FRICATELLE.

Chop raw fresh pork very fine, add a little salt and plenty of pepper, 2
small onions chopped fine, half as much bread as there is meat, soaked
until soft, 2 eggs. Mix well together, make into oblong patties and fry
like oysters. These are nice for breakfast. If used for supper, serve with
sliced lemon.

CROQUETTES.

Raw pork chopped fine, 2 cups, 1 small onion chopped very fine, 1 teaspoon
powdered sage, 1 cup bread crumbs rubbed fine, salt and pepper to taste, 2
eggs beaten light. Mix thoroughly, make small flat cakes, roll lightly in
flour and fry in hot lard.


_Pork Pies, Cakes and Puddings._

PORK PIE.

Cut fresh pork in small inch and half-inch pieces, allowing both fat and
lean. Boil until done in slightly salted water. Lay away in an earthen
dish over night. In the morning it will be found to be surrounded with a
firm meat jelly. Will not soak pie crust. Make a rich baking powder
biscuit paste. Roll out thin, make top and bottom crust, fill with the
prepared pork. Bake.--[H. M. G.


A HINT FOR PORK PIE.

Every housekeeper knows how to make pork pie, but not every one knows that
if the bottom crust is first baked with a handful of rice to prevent
bubbling--the rice may be used many times for the same purpose--and the
pork partially cooked before the upper crust is added, the pie will be
twice as palatable as if baked in the old way. The crust will not be soggy
and the meat juices will not lose flavor by evaporation.--[Mrs. O. P.


PORK PIE WITH APPLES.

Line a deep pudding dish with pie crust. Place a layer of tart apples in
the dish, sprinkle with sugar and a little nutmeg, then place a layer of
thin slices of fat salt pork (not cooked), sprinkle lightly with black
pepper. Continue to add apples and pork until the dish is full. Cover with
a crust and bake until the apples are cooked, when the pork should be
melted. Serve as any pie.--[M. C.


SPARERIB PIE.

Chop the small mussy pieces of meat, put in a pudding or bread tin, add
some of the gravy and a little water. Make a biscuit crust, roll half an
inch thick and put over the top and bake. A tasty way is to cut the crust
into biscuits, place close together on top of the meat and bake. More
dainty to serve than the single crust. A cream gravy or some left from the
rib is nice with this pie. Any of the lean meat makes a nice pie, made the
same as the above.


PORK CAKE WITHOUT LARD.

Over 1 lb. fat salt pork, chopped very fine, pour a pint of boiling water.
While it is cooling, sift 9 cups flour with 1 heaping teaspoon soda and 2
of cream tartar, stir in 2 cups sugar and 1 of molasses, 4 eggs, teaspoon
of all kinds spice, 2 lbs. raisins, 1 lb. currants and 1/2 lb. citron.
Lastly, thoroughly beat in the pork and water and bake slowly. This will
keep a long time.


PORK CAKE.

Take 1/2 cup sugar, 1/2 cup strong coffee, 1/2 cup molasses, 1/2 cup
chopped salt pork, 1/4 cup lard, 1 cup raisins, stoned and chopped, 2 cups
flour, 2 eggs, 1 teaspoon soda, dissolved in coffee, 1 teaspoon cloves,
cinnamon and nutmeg.


PORK PUDDING.

This is made somewhat after the style of the famous English beefsteak
pudding--differs only in two points. Cut up the pieces of fresh pork and
stew in the skillet, in slightly salted water, till soft. Make a rich
biscuit dough or plain pie paste. Line a quart basin and fill with the
stewed pork. Add pepper, a few chopped potatoes if desired, cover all with
the paste pinched tightly over, tie a small cloth tightly over the basin,
then place basin in a larger cloth, gather the corners together and tie
snugly over top, boil in a kettle for half an hour. Be sure the water is
boiling hot before placing the basin in, and keep it boiling, with a tight
lid.


_Roasts._

FRESH LEG.

Score the leg with sharp knife in half-inch gashes, fill with a filling
made of chopped onion, sage, bread crumbs and mixed with the beaten yolks
and whites of 2 eggs, salt; stuff knuckle and gashes also. Pepper freely
and roast it well. A leg weighing 8 lbs. requires three hours of a steady
fire. Drain off fat from roasting tin and make a brown gravy. Serve with
tart apple sauce.


WITH BUTTERMILK.

Take a piece of pork that is quite lean, soak over night in buttermilk and
boil until about half done, then put it in the baking pan, cut through the
rind in slices, sprinkle with pepper and sugar and bake to a golden brown.


DANISH PORK ROAST.

Braise the roast, and between each slit insert a bit of sage--which may be
removed before serving; place in a deep stewpan and fill the corners and
crevices with prunes that have been previously soaked in water long enough
to regain their natural size. Roast in moderate oven, basting as usual,
taking care not to break the prunes. When half done, take up the prunes,
remove pits, crush and add to a dressing made as follows: Moisten 2 cups
bread crumbs--one-third corn bread is preferable to all wheat--season with
salt, pepper and a mere hint of onions. Put into a cheesecloth
bag--saltbag if at hand--and bake beside the roast for half an hour,
taking care to prevent scorching. Serve in slices with the roast.


SPARERIB.

Season well with salt, pepper and a little sage. Put in roasting pan with
a little water, bake a nice brown. By cracking the ribs twice, you can
roll up and fasten with skewers, or tie up with coarse twine. Put the
stuffing inside, same as turkey. After it is done, take meat from pan. If
the water is not all cooked out, set on top of stove until none remains.
Pour out the grease, leaving about half a cup. Set back to cool so as not
to cook the gravy too fast at first. Stir 2 spoons or more of flour into
the grease and let brown. Add boiling water to make the required amount of
gravy. Before removing from fire, add 1/2 cup sweet cream. Baked or
mashed potatoes with cold slaw are in order with sparerib, with currant,
cranberry or apple sauce. Very nice cold with fried potatoes or chips for
supper.


_Liver._

WITH BACON.

Pour salted boiling water over the liver and let it stand a few minutes,
drain and slice. Crisp thin slices of bacon in a hot frying pan, lay them
neatly around the edge of a platter or deep dish, and set the dish where
it will keep hot. Fry the liver in the drippings from the bacon and put it
in the middle of the dish. Pour a little boiling water into the frying
pan, season to taste with pepper and salt, thicken with browned flour and
pour over the liver or serve separately.--[R. F.


LIVER AND ONIONS.

Use two frying pans. In both have a generous supply of fryings or salted
lard. Cut the liver in thin, even slices, and wash in cold water. Wipe
each slice dry before placing it in the hot grease; fill the frying pan
full, pepper and salt all, cover with lid and set over a brisk fire. Slice
the onions and place them in the second frying pan of hot grease, pepper,
salt and stir frequently. Turn the liver once, each slice. When done,
place on a platter, with the onions heaped over and around.--[H. M. G.


HASHED.

Parboil the liver, chop it fine and put it into a hot frying pan with just
enough of the liquor it was boiled in to moisten it so it won't be hard
and dry. When hot, season with salt, pepper and butter, and serve with
mashed potato. Or you can chop cold boiled potatoes with the liver and
make a regular hash of it if preferred.--[R. L.


_Heart._

STUFFED.

Take three hearts, remove the ventricles and dividing wall, wash and wipe
out dry. Fill with 3 tablespoons chopped ham, 4 tablespoons bread crumbs,
a little melted butter, some pepper and salt; beat up an egg and mix the
meat, etc., with as much of the egg as is needed to bind it together. Tie
each heart in a piece of cloth and boil three hours, or till tender, in
salt and water. Remove the cloths carefully, so as to keep the dressing in
place, rub them over with butter and sprinkle with a little flour, and
brown in a brisk oven. Reduce the liquor and thicken it. Serve with mashed
potatoes and apple jelly.


BOILED.

Make a biscuit dough rather stiff, sprinkle a well-cleaned heart over with
a little pepper and salt, roll the heart securely in the biscuit dough,
wrap all in a clean white cloth and sew or baste together loosely, then
put in a kettle of hot water and boil about four hours. Serve hot by
removing cloth and slicing.


_Sausage._

SAUSAGE WITH DRIED BEEF.

To 10 lbs. meat allow 5 tablespoons salt, 4 of black pepper, 3 of sage,
and 1/2 tablespoon cayenne. Some persons prefer to add a little ginger,
thinking that it keeps the sausage from rising on the stomach. Mix the
spices thoroughly through the meat, which may be put into skins or muslin
bags and hung in a cold, dry place, or partly cooked and packed in jars
with a covering of lard. Every housekeeper uses fried and baked sausages,
but sausage and dried beef is a more uncommon dish. Cut the sausage into
small pieces, put it into a stewpan with water to cover, and put on to
cook. Slice the dried beef and tear it into small pieces, removing fat and
gristle, and put into the stew pan. When done, thicken slightly with
flour, season and stir an egg quickly into it. Don't get the gravy too
thick and don't beat the egg--it wants to show in little flakes of white
and yellow.--[Rosalie Williams.


SAUSAGE ROLLS.

Make a rich pie paste, roll out thin and cut, with a large cooky cutter or
a canister lid, large discs of the paste. Take a small cooked sausage, and
placing it on the edge of the circle of paste, roll it up and pinch the
ends together. Bake in a quick oven and serve hot or cold.


WITH CABBAGE.

Put some pieces of fat and lean pork through the sausage mill; add a
finely chopped onion, pepper, salt and a dash of mace. Cut a large, sound
head of cabbage in two, scoop out the heart of both halves and fill with
sausage meat; tie up the head securely with stout twine, put into salted
water sufficient to cover the cabbage, and boil one hour and a half. Drain
thoroughly and save the liquid, which should not exceed one cupful in all.
Brown a tablespoonful of butter over a hot fire, stir in a teaspoon of
browned flour and add the liquid; pour over cabbage and serve hot.


GOOD SAUSAGE.

This sausage recipe has been proved good. Take 30 lbs. pork and 12 oz.
salt, 2 oz. pepper, 2 oz. sage. Put sage in a pan and dry in oven, then
sift. You can add two ounces of ground mustard if you wish. Add 2 or 3
lbs. sugar, mix all together, salt, pepper, etc., and mix with meat before
it is chopped. After it is well mixed, cut to your liking.


_Fresh Pork._

CUTLETS.

Cut them from a loin of pork, bone and trim neatly and cut away most of
the fat. Broil fifteen minutes on a hot gridiron, turning them three or
four times, until they are thoroughly done but not dry. Dish, season with
pepper and salt and serve with tomato sauce or with small pickled
cucumbers as a garnish.


BREADED CUTLETS.

A more elaborate dish is made by dipping the cutlets into beaten egg
seasoned to taste with salt, pepper and sage, then into rolled cracker or
bread crumbs. Fry slowly till thoroughly done, and serve with mashed
potatoes.


CUTLETS FROM COLD ROAST PORK.

Melt an ounce of butter in a saucepan, lay in the cutlets and an onion
chopped fine, and fry a light brown; then add a dessertspoon of flour,
half a pint of gravy, pepper and salt to taste, and a teaspoon each of
vinegar and made mustard. Simmer gently a few minutes and serve.


PORK CHOPS.

The white meat along the backbone (between the ribs and ham) is not always
sufficiently appreciated, and is often peeled from the fat, cut from the
bones and put into sausage, which should never be done, as it is the
choicest piece in the hog to fry. Leave fat and lean together, saw through
the bone, fry or broil. The meat gravy should be served in a gravy boat.


BREADED PORK CHOPS.

Cut chops about an inch thick, beat them flat with a rolling pin, put them
in a pan, pour boiling water over them, and set them over the fire for
five minutes; then take them up and wipe them dry. Mix a tablespoon of
salt and a teaspoon of pepper for each pound of meat; rub each chop over
with this, then dip, first into beaten egg, then into crackers, rolled, as
much as they will take up. Fry in hot lard.


BARBECUED PORK.

Put a loin of pork in a hot oven without water, sprinkle with flour,
pepper and salt, baste with butter, cook two or three hours, or until very
brown. Pour in the gravy half a teacup of walnut catsup. Serve with fried
apples.


_Roast Pig._

SUCKING PIG.

Scald carefully and scrape clean, wipe dry, chop off the toes above first
joint, remove entrails, and although some cook head entire, it is not
advisable. Remove brains, eyes, upper and lower jaws, leaving skin
semblance of head, with ears thoroughly scraped and cleaned. Make a
dressing composed of one large boiled onion chopped, powdered sage, salt,
pepper, 4 cups stale bread crumbs, a bit of butter, and all mixed with
well-beaten eggs. Stuff the body part with this. Stitch it up. Previously
boil the heart in salted water and stuff this into the boneless head skin
to preserve its shape and semblance. Place it down on its feet, head
resting on front feet, hind legs drawn out, just as you want it to lie on
the platter when served or sent to table. Roast three hours, constantly
basting.


TO ROAST WHOLE.

A pig ought not to be under four nor over six weeks old, and ought to be
plump and fat. In the city, the butcher will sell you a shoat already
prepared, but in the country, we must prepare our own pig for roasting. As
soon as the pig is killed, throw it into a tub of cold water to make it
tender; as soon as it is perfectly, cold, take it by the hind leg and
plunge into scalding water, and shake it about until the hair can all be
removed, by the handful at a time. When the hair has all been removed, rub
from the tail up to the end of the nose with a coarse cloth. Take off the
hoofs and wash out the inside of the ears and nose until perfectly clean.
Hang the pig up, by the hind legs, stretched open so as to take out the
entrails; wash well with water with some bicarbonate of soda dissolved in
it; rinse again and again and let it hang an hour or more to drip. Wrap it
in a coarse, dry cloth, when taken down, and lay in a cold cellar, or on
ice, as it is better not to cook the pig the same day it is killed. Say
kill and clean it late in the evening and roast it the next morning.
Prepare the stuffing of the liver, heart and haslets, stewed, seasoned and
chopped fine. Mix with these an equal quantity of boiled Irish potatoes,
mashed, or bread crumbs, and season with hard-boiled eggs, chopped fine,
parsley and sage, or thyme, chopped fine, pepper and salt. Scald the pig
on the inside, dry it and rub with pepper and salt, fill with the stuffing
and sew up. Bend the forelegs under the body, the hind legs forward, and
skewer to keep in position. Place in a large baking pan and pour over it
one quart of boiling water. Rub fresh butter all over the pig and sprinkle
pepper and salt over it, and put a bunch of parsley and thyme, or sage, in
the water. Turn a pan down over it and let it simmer in a hot oven till
perfectly tender. Then take off the pan that covers the pig, rub it with
more butter and let brown, basting it frequently with the hot gravy. If
the hot water and gravy cook down too much, add more hot water and baste.
When of a fine brown, and tender and done all through, cover the edges of
a large, flat china dish with fresh green parsley and place the pig,
kneeling, in the center of the dish. Place in its mouth a red apple, or an
ear of green corn, and serve hot with the gravy; or serve cold with grated
horse-radish and pickle. Roast pig ought to be evenly cooked, through and
through, as underdone pork of any kind, size or age is exceedingly
unwholesome. It ought also to be evenly and nicely browned on the outside,
as the tender skin when cooked is crisp and palatable. It is easily
scorched, therefore keep a pig, while roasting, covered till tender and
almost done.


_Tongue._

The tongues should be put into the pickle with the hams; boil after three
or four weeks, pickle in vinegar which has been sweetened. Add a
tablespoon ground mustard to a pint of vinegar. Will keep months. They
should be pickled whole. Also nice when first cooked without pickling.
Slice cold, to be eaten with or without mayonnaise dressing. Sliced thin,
and placed between thin slices of bread, make delicious sandwiches.
Chopped fine, with hard-boiled eggs and mayonnaise, make nice sandwiches.
Many boil pork and beef tongues fresh. An old brown tongue is an
abomination. The saltpeter gives the pink look canned tongues have; the
salt and sugar flavor nicely.

When fresh, tongues are nice for mince pies. They may be corned with the
hams and boiled and skinned and hot vinegar seasoned with salt and pepper
poured over them; or are nice sliced with cold potatoes, garnished with
cress or lettuce and a cream salad dressing poured over them. Cream salad
dressing: Stir thoroughly together 1 teaspoon sugar, six tablespoons thick
sweet cream and 2 tablespoons vinegar, salt and pepper or mustard to
taste. The cream and vinegar should be very cold, and the vinegar added to
the cream a little at a time, or it will curdle. Stir till smooth and
creamy.


_Souse._

Take off the horny parts of feet by dipping in hot water and pressing
against them with a knife. Singe off hair, let soak in cold water for 24
hours, then pour on boiling water, scrape thoroughly, let stand in salt
and water a few hours; before boiling wrap each foot in a clean white
bandage, cord securely to keep skin from bursting, which causes the
gelatine to escape in the water. Boil four hours. Leave in bandage until
cold. If you wish to pickle them, put in a jar, add some of the boiling
liquor, add enough vinegar to make a pleasant sour, add a few whole
peppers. Very nice cold. If you want it hot, put some of the pickle and
feet in frying pan. When boiling, thicken with flour and serve hot.--[Nina
Gorton.

See that the feet are perfectly clean, the toes chopped off and every
particle cleanly scraped, washed and wiped. Boil for three hours
continually, or until every particle falls apart, drain from liquid, pick
out all the bones, chop slightly, return to the liquid, add 1/2 cup
vinegar, 2 tablespoons sugar, pepper, salt and a dash of nutmeg. (Do not
have too much liquid.) Boil up once more and turn all out into a mold,
press lightly, and cut cold.--[H. M. Gee.

Thoroughly clean the pig's feet and knock off the horny part with a
hatchet. Pour boiling water over them twice and pour it off, then put them
on to cook in plenty of water. Do not salt the water. Boil until very
tender, then take out the feet, pack in a jar, sprinkle each layer with
salt, whole pepper and whole cloves, and cover with equal portions of
vinegar and the broth in which the feet were boiled. Put a plate over the
top with a weight to keep the souse under the vinegar. If there remains
any portion of the broth, strain it and let stand until cold, remove the
fat and clarify the broth with a beaten white of egg. It will be then
ready for blancmange or lemon jelly and is very delicate.


_Scrapple._

Take hog's tongue, heart, liver, all bones and refuse trimmings (some use
ears, snout and lights, I do not), soak all bloody pieces and wash them
carefully, use also all clean skins, trimmed from lard. Put into a kettle
and cover with water, boil until tender and bones drop loose, then cut in
sausage cutter while hot, strain liquor in which it was boiled, and
thicken with good corn mush meal, boil it well, stirring carefully to
prevent scorching. This mush must be well cooked and quite stiff, so that
a stick will stand in it. When no raw taste is left, stir in the chopped
meat and season to taste with salt, pepper and herb, sage or sweet
marjoram, or anything preferred. When the meat is thoroughly mixed all
through the mush, and seasoning is satisfactory, dip out into pans of
convenient size, to cool. Better lift off fire and stir carefully lest it
scorch. When cold, serve in slices like cheese, or fry like mush (crisp
both sides) for breakfast, serving it with nice tomato catsup. It tastes
very much like fried oysters. Some prefer half buckwheat meal and half
corn. To keep it, do not let it freeze, and if not covered with grease
melt some lard and pour over, or it will mold. This ought to be sweet and
good for a month or more in winter, but will crumble and fry soft if it
freezes.--[Mrs. R. E. Griffith.


_Head Cheese._

Have the head split down the face, remove the skin, ears, eyes and brains,
and cut off the snout; wash thoroughly and soak all day in cold salted
water; change the water and soak over night, then put on to cook in cold
water to cover. Skim carefully and when done so the bones will slip out,
remove to a hot pan, take out every bone and bit of gristle, and chop the
meat with a sharp knife as quickly as possible, to keep the fat from
settling in it. For 6 lbs. meat allow 2 tablespoons salt, 1 teaspoon black
pepper, a little cayenne, 1/4 teaspoon clove and 2 tablespoons sage. Stir
the meat and seasoning well together and put into a perforated mold or tie
in a coarse cloth, put a heavy weight on it and let it stand till cold and
firm. The broth in which the meat was cooked may be used for pea soup, and
the fat, if clarified, may be used for lard.--[R. W.

Cut the head up in suitable pieces to fit the receptacle you wish to boil
it in, first cutting off all pieces that are not to be used. If too fat,
cut off that, too, and put with the lard to be rendered. Take out the
brains and lay them in a dish of cold water, then put the head on to boil
till tender. Be sure to skim well. When it begins to boil, cook till the
meat is ready to drop off the bones, then take up, remove all bones or
gristle and grind or chop, not too fine; put in salt, pepper and cloves to
taste, also sage if liked, mix all well together, heat it all together,
and pour in a cloth, which is laid in a crock, tie it up tight and put on
a weight, to press it. Next day remove the cloth and the head cheese is
ready for the table. Skim the fat off the liquor the head was boiled in
and set aside for future use. Heat the liquor to a boil and stir in nicely
sifted corn meal. After salting, take up in crock and let it get cold,
then cut off in slices and fry a nice brown. Nice for breakfast.--[Mrs. A.
Joseph.


_Pig's Head._

English Brawn: Cut off the hearty cheek or jowl, and try it out for
shortening. Saw the pig's head up in small pieces, carefully removing the
brains, snoot, eyes, jawbones or portions of teeth sockets. (It is
surprising with saw and a keen, sharp-pointed knife how much of the
unpleasant pieces of a pig's head can be removed before it is consigned to
the salt bath.) Soak all night in salt and water, drain in the morning and
set over the fire to boil in slightly salted water. Place the tongue in
whole also. When the flesh leaves the bone, take out and strip all into a
wooden chopping bowl, reserving the tongue whole. Skin the tongue while
warm. Chop the head pieces fine, add pepper, salt, powdered sage to suit
taste. Pack all in a deep, narrow mold and press the tongue whole into the
middle of the mass. Weight down and set away all night to cool. Keep this
always in a cold place until all is used, and, as usual, use a sharp knife
to slice.--[Aunt Ban.


_To Keep Hams and Shoulders._

We pack them for a few days with a sprinkle of dry salt, then lift and
wipe dry (both barrel and meat), repack and cover with brine, which may be
prepared thus: To 16 gals. brine (enough to carry an egg) placed in a
kettle to boil add 1/4 lb. saltpeter, 3 pts. syrup molasses and a large
shovel of hickory ashes tied in a clean saltbag or cloth; boil, skim and
cool.--[Mrs. R. E. Griffith.

To prepare smoked ham for summer use: Slice the ham and cut off the rind.
Fill a spider nearly full, putting the fat pieces on top. Place in the
oven and bake. When partly cooked, pack the slices of hot ham closely in a
stone jar and pour the meat juice and fat over the top. Every time that
any of the meat is taken out, a little of the lard should be heated and
poured back into the jar to keep the meat fresh and good. Be very careful
each time to completely cover the meat with lard.--[Marion Chandler.




INDEX


  Albuminoids, 5

  Animal heat, 18

  Average weights of hogs, 66


  Backbone, average weight of, 67

  Bacon and hams, 59
    and sides, dry salting, 48
    box for storing, 62
    bug, season for, 62
    dampness detrimental, 61
    distribution of salt, 49
    exports, 76
    hogs, prices of, 77
    pig, 16
    preservatives, 48
    quality wanted, 6
    second salting, 48
    weight of hogs, 48
    Wiltshire cut, 72
    world's supply, 74

  Black pepper for skippers, 51

  Bleeding the hog, 9

  Blood puddings, preparation of, 36

  Boiler for scalding, 10

  Box for salting meats, 42

  Brain sausages, 30

  Brawn, 35

  Breeding, 9

  Brine, purifying, 42

  Bristles, 14

  Butchering on joint account, 2

  Butcher knife in slaughtering, 9


  Carcass, raising a, 21

  Care of hams and shoulders, 44

  Cauldrons, 11

  Census of hogs, 2
    of live stock, 2

  Chine, 23

  Chute for handling hogs, 68

  Control of smoke house, 52

  Cooling the carcass, 19

  Co-operative curing houses, 76

  Corn a fat producer, 5

  Corn cobs for smoking, 52

  Country dressed hogs, 64

  Cracknels, 34

  Crate for moving swine, 79

  Crushed crackers in sausage, 32

  Curing houses, co-operative, 76

  Cutting up a hog, 23


  Dermestes, 51

  Devices for scalding, 14

  Division of work, 18

  Dressing and cutting, 18
    bench, 10
    hints on, 22
    the carcass, 18

  Dry salt for bacon, 49


  Entrails, 22

  Exclusion of insects, 61

  Exports of pork product, 76
    value of, 76


  Farm price of hogs, 2

  Fat forming foods, 5
    producers, 5

  Feeding chart, 5
    for flesh, 5

  Fence for orchard tree, 47

  Flesh forming foods, 5

  Fires in smoke house, 52

  Fire proof smoke house, 54

  Foods for flesh and fat, 5

  Frozen meat, 18

  Fuel for smoke houses, 52


  Gallows for dressed hogs, 22

  Gambrels, 22

  Gate, device for opening, 68

  Gates for handling hogs, 67

  Griskins, 26


  Hair, removal of, 14

  Hams, a general cure, 44
    American cut, 71
    and shoulders, 44
    in close boxes, 61
    in cloth sacks, 61
    in pickling vat, 46
    in shelled oats or bran, 61
    pickling with molasses, 44
    picnic, 71
    shaping, 24
    Westphalian, 45

  Handy salting box, 43

  Hanging carcasses, 18

  Head, average weight of, 67
    cheese, 35
    for sausage, 27

  Heavy hogs, handling, 14

  Hints on dressing, 22

  Hog feeding convenience, 7
    packing for a series of years, 77
    prices at Chicago, 77
    product, exports, 76
    product, foreign outlet, 74
    product, our best customer, 74
    farm price, 2
    movement at leading points, 78
    Normandy, 6
    on the farm, 2
    receipts at Chicago, 76

  Hoister for carcass, 20


  Ideal meat house, 59

  Insects, avoidance of, 60

  Intestines, 22


  Jawbone, 25

  Jowls and head, preparation of, 34


  Kettle for heating water, 10

  Knife, use of, 19, 22


  Lard, an important point in, 39
    boiling, safeguards, 39
    cheaper grades, 37
    cooking, 38
    fine points in making, 37
    from back fat, 37
    in hot weather, 40
    kettle or steam rendered, 37
    leaf, 37, 39
    neutral, 37, 73
    standard, 72
    stearine, 73
    storing, 40
    time of cooking, 38
    to refine, 37
    water in, 37

  Leading cuts of meat, 69

  Light packing hogs, 16

  Lights, use of, 27

  Liver sausage, 30


  Meat house, 59
    care of, 60
    earthen floor, 60

  Meat packed for home use, 43

  Meats, box for salting, 42

  Mess pork, 70

  Methods now in use, 1

  Middlings, 24

  Molasses in curing pork, 45


  Neat meat, 23

  Net to gross, 67

  Neutral lard, 73

  Normandy hogs, 6


  Offal, 26

  Oven and smoke house combined, 52


  Packing and marketing hogs, 77
    at eastern cities, 77
    centers, 76
    house cuts of pork, 69
    western, 77

  Penetration of salt, 49

  Pepper in pickled pork, 41

  Pickling and barreling, 41

  Picnic hams, 71

  Pigpen, automatic door, 7
    self-closing door, 6
    traveling, 3

  Pigs in orchard, 47

  Pork, barrel, cleaning, 41
    brine, renewing, 42
    for the south, 50
    making, side lights on, 64
    packing in barrels, 41
    packing in boxes, 42
    pickled without brine, 41
    product of commerce, 70

  Possibilities of profit, 2

  Potatoes for swine food, 46

  Prices of hogs at Chicago, 77
    of pork and lard, 67

  Prime steam lard, 72

  Profit in home pork making, 1

  Protein diet, 5

  Pyroligenous acid, 54


  Rations, 5
    for bacon purposes, 6

  Receipts of hogs, 78

  Relative weights, 67

  Removing bristles, 16

  Renewal of pork brine, 42

  Resalting bacon, 50

  Ringing hogs, 66

  Roast pig, merits of, 80


  Salt penetration, 49

  Saltpeter in bacon, 48
    in curing hams, 44

  Sausage bench, 32
    Black Forest, 29
    Bologna, 28
    brain, 30
    Frankfort, 28
    homemade filler, 32
    in cases, 32
    in jars, 27
    Italian pork, 29
    liver, 30
    making, 26
    of pork and beef, 26
    packed in jars, 27
    Royal Cambridge, 30
    seasoning, 27, 31
    smoked, 27
    Spanish, 31
    stuffing, 27
    Suabian, 28
    tomato, 31
    tongue, 29
    Westphalian, 28
    with bread, 31
    with sardines, 29
    wrapped for boiling, 29

  Sawbuck scaffold, 20

  Scalding, 11
    cask on sled, 14
    in hogshead, 15
    tub, 11
    vat, 11

  Scraping, 12
    and washing, 14

  Scrapple, Philadelphia, 35

  Season for killing, 1

  Seasoning sausage, 31

  Shaping the ham, 24

  Short bones, 34
    cut in smoking, 54
    ribs, 71

  Shoulders, shape described, 71

  Singeing pigs, 16

  Singers, 16

  Skippers, 51

  Slaughtering, best methods, 9

  Sled and cask for scalding, 14

  Small hams in pickle, 45

  Smoked meat, best color, 53

  Smoke house, and oven combined, 52
    barrel, 57
    cheap substitute for, 56
    fire proof, 54
    floors, 59
    hardwood sawdust for, 52
    objectional fuel, 52
    substitute, 56
    with French draft, 58
    with kettle track, 56

  Smoking and smoke houses, 51
    best color, 53
    best days for, 53
    best meat for, 51
    care of fire, 52
    meats in a small way, 56
    preparation of meat, 51
    use of old stove, 54

  Souse, preparation of, 34

  Spanish sausage, 31

  Spare bone, 24

  Spareribs, 34

  Speculative commodities, 70

  Spice puddings, preparation of, 36

  Standard cuts of pork, 70
    lard, 72

  Stearine, 73

  Stretcher, 19

  Substitute for smoke house, 56

  Sugar cured hams, 45

  Swallow, 25

  Swealed hogs, 17

  Sweet bacon objectionable, 48

  Swill, control of, 65

  Swine industry, magnitude of, 74


  Tackle for heavy hogs, 13

  Temperature for scalding, 16

  Tenderloin, average weight of, 67

  Tin filled for sausage, 33

  Trimming for bacon, 24
    for lard and sausage, 24

  Trough for pigs, 65
    protected, 8


  Vat, permanent, for scalding, 15


  Weather for dressing, 18

  Weight dressed out, 67

  Weights of hogs, 66
    of portions, relative, 67

  Wheat straw for smoking, 52

  Wild boar, 35

  Wiltshire cut bacon, 72


  Yard attachment, 3


  _RECIPES_

  Fresh Pork.
    barbecued pork, 113
    breaded cutlets, 112
    breaded pork chops, 113
    corn and pork scallop, 89
    cutlets, 112
    cutlets from cold roast pork, 112
    pork chops, 112
    roasted with sweet potatoes, 90
    roasted with tomatoes, 90
    stuffed shoulder of pork, 89

  Ham.
    baked, 92
    balls, 93
    boiled, 90
    boned, 91
    flavored, 93
    for lunch, 91
    omelet, 92
    patties, 94
    patties fried, 94
    patties with onions, 94
    potted, 91
    sandwiches, 94
    stew, 91
    toast, 93
    with corn meal, 93
    with veal, 92

  Heart.
    boiled, 110
    stuffed, 110

  Liver.
    washed, 109
    with bacon, 109
    with onions, 109

  Miscellaneous.
    bacon, broiled or fried, 99
    boiled dinner, 100
    brains, 99
    broiled pork, 101
    English brawn, 118
    for Sunday luncheon, 101
    German wick-a-wack, 100
    hams and shoulders, to keep, 119
    headcheese, 117
    kidney on toast, 104
    lunch loaf, 101
    omelet, 102, 103
    pepper pot, 86
    pickled pigs' feet, 103
    pig's feet, 103
    pig's head, 118
    pork and beans, 100
    pork cheese, 101
    pork flour-gravy, 102
    pork hash, 101
    pork roll, 85
    pork pillau, 85
    pork with pea pudding, 87
    pork with sauer kraut, 87
    scrapple, 117
    souse, 116
    tongue, 115

  Pork Fritters.
    corn meal fritters, 104
    croquettes, 86, 105
    fricatelle, 105
    fritters with egg, 104

  Pork Pies, Cakes and Puddings.
    a hint for pork pie, 105
    cake, 107
    cake without lard, 106
    pork pie, 83, 105
    pork pie with apples, 106
    pork potpie, 83
    pork pudding, 107
    sea pie, 88
    sparerib pie, 106

  Roasts.
    Danish pork roast, 108
    fresh leg, 107
    sparerib, 108
    sucking pig, 113
    to roast whole pig, 113
    with buttermilk, 108

  Salt Pork.
    baked, 96
    boiled, 97
    creamed, 98
    creamed in milk and water, 97
    creamed, Mrs. Bisbee's, 96
    egg pork, 97
    fried in batter, 96
    fried with apples, 95
    fried with flour, 94
    fried with gravy, 95
    fried with sage, 96
    sweet fried, 95

  Sausage.
    good sausage, 111
    sausage rolls, 111
    with cabbage, 111
    with dried beef, 110

  Soups, Stews, etc.
    chowder, 88, 99
    dry stew, 98
    old-fashioned stew, 99
    pork gumbo, 84
    pork soup, 98
    pork stew, 98
    succotash, 84
SANDWICHES


Sandwiches may be made from one of three or four kinds of bread; whole
wheat bread, Boston brown or oatmeal bread, white bread and rye bread
made into square, deep loaves; in fact, all bread used for sandwiches
should be made especially for the purpose, so that the slices may be in
good form, and sufficiently large to cut into fancy shapes.

The butter may be used plain, slightly softened or it may be seasoned
and flavored with just a suspicion of paprika, a little white pepper,
and a few drops of Worcestershire sauce.

For ordinary sandwiches use the bread without toasting. For canapés,
toast is to be preferred. Sandwiches are principally used for buffet
lunches or evening sociables, where only a light, substantial lunch is
required. In these days they are made in great varieties. Almost all
sorts of meat, if properly seasoned, may be made into delicious
sandwiches. If the meat is slightly moistened with cream or olive oil,
sandwiches for traveling, provided each one is carefully wrapped in
oiled paper, will keep fresh three or four days. The small French rolls
may have the centres scooped out, the spaces filled with chicken salad
or chopped oysters, and served as sandwiches. The rolls may be made
especially for that purpose, not more than two inches long and one and a
half inches wide; with coffee, they make an attractive meal easily
served.

Ordinary sandwiches may be made either square, triangular, long, narrow,
round or crescent shaped. One slice of bread will usually make one round
sandwich and one crescent, provided the cutting is done economically.
Meat used for sandwiches should be chopped very fine and slightly
moistened with cream, melted butter, olive oil or mayonnaise dressing
well seasoned. Fish should be rubbed or pounded in a mortar; add enough
sauce tartare to make it sufficiently moist to easily spread.

Turkey, chicken, game, tongue, beef and mutton, with their proper
seasonings, moistened with either mayonnaise or French dressing, make
exceedingly nice sandwiches.


To Keep Sandwiches

It is frequently necessary to make sandwiches several hours before they
are needed. As they dry quickly they must be carefully wrapped or they
will be unpalatable. Wring from cold water two ordinary tea towels; put
one on top of the other. An old tablecloth will answer the purpose very
well. As fast as the sandwiches are made put them on top of the damp
towel; when you have the desired quantity, cover the top with moist
lettuce leaves; fold over the towels, and put outside of this a
perfectly dry, square cloth. Sandwiches will keep in this way for
several hours, and in perfectly good condition. On a very warm day they
may be covered all over with moist lettuce leaves; use the green ones
that are not so palatable or sightly for garnishing.


Bread

To make good sandwiches, especially when one is a long way from a city,
it is quite necessary to know how to make sandwich bread, which is quite
different, or should be, from ordinary bread. Compressed yeast is always
to be preferred, but if one cannot get it, the next best is good
home-made yeast. Bread for sandwiches must be baked in rather large
square pans, and must be just a little lighter and softer than bread for
the table. The following recipes will, I am sure, help the "out of town"
housewife. Nut bread is usually made into simple bread and butter
sandwiches; the nuts in the bread are quite sufficient filling.


Yeast

  4 good sized potatoes
  1 quart of boiling water
  2 tablespoonfuls of sugar
  1 tablespoonful of salt

Pare and grate the potatoes into the hot water, stir over the fire
until it reaches boiling point, and simmer gently for five minutes. Take
from the fire, add the sugar and salt, and when lukewarm add a cupful of
yeast, or two dry yeast cakes that have been moistened in a little
water, or one cake of compressed yeast. Turn the mixture into a jar and
cover with a saucer. Stir it down as fast as it comes to the top of the
jar. When it falls, or ceases to be very light, which will be five or
six hours, pour it into a bottle, put the cork in very loosely and stand
it in a cold place. Use one cupful of this to each two loaves of bread.


German Potato Bread

Boil one potato until tender; mash it through a sieve, add to it a half
pint of warm water and a teaspoonful of sugar. Stir in one cupful of
flour and one cupful of yeast; let this stand for two hours, or until
very light. It is better to make this at seven o'clock, so the bread may
be sponged at nine or ten. Scald a pint of milk, add to it a pint of
water, beat in a quart and a pint of flour. The batter should be thick
enough to drop, rather than pour from the spoon. Then stir in the potato
starter, and stand in a place about 65° Fahr. over night. Next morning
knead thoroughly, adding flour. Put this aside until very light, about
two hours, then mold into loaves, put it into square greased pans, and
when light bake in a moderately quick oven three-quarters of an hour.

This recipe will make two box loaves and a dozen rolls.


Nineteenth Century Bread

Scald a pint of milk, add a pint of water, a teaspoonful of salt, and
when lukewarm, one compressed yeast cake moistened in a little warm
water. Add sufficient whole wheat flour to make a batter, beat
thoroughly, cover and stand aside two and a half hours; then stir,
adding more whole wheat flour until you have a dough. Knead quickly,
separate into loaves, put each in a square greased pan, cover and stand
in a warm place about one hour, until very light. Slash the top with a
sharp knife, brush with water and bake in a moderate oven three-quarters
of an hour.


White Bread

Add a pint of water to a pint of scalded milk; when lukewarm add one
compressed yeast cake, moistened, and a teaspoonful of salt. Add
sufficient flour gradually, beating all the while, to make a dough.
Knead this dough until it is soft and elastic, and free from stickiness.
Put it into a greased bowl, stand it in a warm place three hours.
Separate it into loaves, knead five minutes, put the loaves in square
greased pans and stand aside until very light. Slash the top with a
sharp knife, brush with water, and bake in a moderate oven
three-quarters of an hour. This should make two loaves, or a dozen bread
sticks and a dozen rolls.


Nut Bread

   1 quart of flour
   4 level teaspoonfuls of baking powder
   1 teaspoonful of salt
   1 cupful of chopped nuts
  1½ cupfuls of milk

Add the baking powder and salt to the flour and sift them. Add the nuts,
mix thoroughly and gradually add the milk. Knead this into a loaf, put
it into a square pan, brush the top with melted butter, let it stand
twenty minutes, and bake in a moderate oven three-quarters of an hour.


Anchovy Sandwiches

Beat a quarter of a pound of butter to a cream, adding gradually two
tablespoonfuls of lemon juice, a saltspoonful of paprika, two
tablespoonfuls of anchovy paste. Spread this on thin slices of bread,
put two together, trim off the crusts, and cut into triangles.


Anchovy and Egg Sandwiches

Mash the yolks of four hard-boiled eggs with two tablespoonfuls of
melted butter or olive oil, add a half teaspoonful of salt, a dash of
paprika and a tablespoonful of anchovy paste or two mashed anchovies.
Spread this between thin slices of buttered bread, press the slices
together, trim off the crusts and cut into triangles.

Sardines may be used in the place of anchovies.


Cold Beef Sandwiches

Take the remains of cold roasted beef, and chop very fine; put it into
a bowl; to each half pint of meat, add a half teaspoonful of salt, a
tablespoonful of tomato catsup, a teaspoonful of Worcestershire sauce
and a teaspoonful of melted butter; work this together. Cut the crust
from the ends of a loaf of whole wheat bread; butter lightly and slice;
so continue until you have the desired number of slices; spread the
slices with a layer of the seasoned meat; put two slices together, and
cut into desired shapes.


Caviar Sandwiches No. 1

Beat a quarter of a pound of butter to a cream; add two tablespoonfuls
of onion juice, the same of lemon, a saltspoonful of paprika, and
gradually four tablespoonfuls of caviar. Spread this on thin slices of
brown bread or pumpernickel, put two together, press lightly and cut
into long, narrow shapes.


Caviar Sandwiches No. 2

Cut slices of bread in crescent-shaped pieces, butter one side and
toast. Have ready two hard-boiled eggs, remove yolks, put them through
sieve, chop whites very fine, and spread toast with layer of caviar;
then sprinkle over first a little of whites, then a little of the yolks
of the eggs. Put over in the form of a ring a piece of onion, the onion
having first been cut into thin slices, and then separated.


Celery Sandwiches

Cut slices of bread, butter one side and toast. Cut the white part of
celery into thin slices, cover it over the bread, then cover this with a
layer of mayonnaise dressing, cover with another piece of toast, cut
into squares and serve. All sandwiches of this kind must be used as soon
as made.


Celery Salad Sandwiches

Put four eggs into warm water; bring to the boiling point, and keep
there, without boiling, for fifteen minutes. Take the white portion from
one head of celery; wash and chop it very fine. Remove the shells from
the hard-boiled eggs, and either chop them very fine or put through a
vegetable press, and mix with them the celery; add a half teaspoonful of
salt and a dash of pepper. Butter the bread before you cut it from the
loaf. After you have a sufficient quantity cut, put over each slice a
layer of the mixed egg and celery; put right in the center of this a
teaspoonful of mayonnaise dressing, and sort of smooth it all over. Put
two pieces together and press them lightly. Trim off the crusts, and cut
the sandwiches into pieces about two inches wide and the length of the
slices.


Rolled Bread and Butter Sandwiches

Beat the butter to a cream. Remove the crusts from the loaf, butter each
slice before you cut it off, and roll at once. These may be tied with
narrow baby ribbon or wrapped at once in waxed paper, fringing and
twisting the ends.


Rolled Chicken Sandwiches

Trim the crusts from the entire loaf, butter each slice and cut it off
as thin as possible; spread it quickly with the mixture, roll and wrap
it at once in waxed paper. If the bread is home-made and cracks in the
rolling, put a colander over a kettle of boiling water, throw in it a
few slices at a time, as soon as they have softened spread them with
soft butter, then cover with the mixture, roll and wrap in waxed paper.

To make the mixture, chop sufficient cold boiled chicken to make a
pint. Rub together two level tablespoonfuls of butter and two of flour,
add slowly a half cupful of hot milk, stir over the fire for a minute,
then add the chicken, a level teaspoonful of salt, a half teaspoonful of
celery seed, a saltspoonful of white pepper, a dash of red pepper, a
teaspoonful of onion juice and a grating of nutmeg; mix and cool. This
will make four dozen rolled sandwiches.


Sandwiches à la Rorer

Chop sufficient white meat of cooked chicken to make a half pint.
Select two fine bunches of cress, and with a sharp knife shave it very
fine. Wash and dry the crisp portion from a head of lettuce. Put the
yolks of two eggs into a saucepan, add the juice from two lemons and
stir over hot water until the mixture is thick; take from the fire and
add slowly two tablespoonfuls of olive oil; add this to the chicken and
season with a half teaspoonful of salt and a dash of pepper. Butter a
slice of white bread, put over a rather thick layer of the chicken
mixture, then a slice of brown bread, buttered on both sides; cover this
with a thick layer of cress, dust it lightly with salt and pepper, then
another slice of white bread, buttered; press these firmly together,
trim the crusts and cut into fingers.


Chicken and Almond Sandwiches

Chop sufficient cold cooked chicken to make a half pint. Chop a quarter
of a pound of blanched almonds, add them to the chicken, add four
tablespoonfuls of cream, a half teaspoonful of salt and a dash of
pepper; mix thoroughly, put between thin slices of buttered bread and
cut into crescents or rounds.


Chicken and Lettuce à la Kendall

Put sufficient cold boiled chicken through the meat chopper to make a
half pint, pound it in a mortar or rub it in a bowl with the hard-boiled
yolks of four eggs, four tablespoonfuls of thick cream, a half
teaspoonful of salt, a dash of pepper, and if you have it, two
saltspoonfuls of celery seed; in the winter you may add a half cupful of
finely chopped celery. Butter thin slices of white bread, cover them
with this mixture, place on top a slice of brown bread buttered on both
sides, then a thick layer of shredded celery, with a tablespoonful of
mayonnaise in the middle, then another slice of buttered white bread;
press together, trim the crusts and cut into fingers.


Princess Sandwiches

Chop sufficient cold chicken to make a half pint, add the juice of half
a lemon, two tablespoonfuls of melted butter or olive oil, twelve
walnuts chopped very fine, a half teaspoonful of paprika and a half
teaspoonful of salt. Put this mixture between thin slices of buttered
bread, trim the crusts and cut into fingers.


Windsor Sandwiches

Chop sufficient cold boiled chicken to make a half pint, add a half
cupful of finely chopped celery, a half teaspoonful of salt, a dash of
pepper and four tablespoonfuls of cream; mix. Chop sufficient cold
boiled ham or tongue to make a half pint, add a tablespoonful of tomato
catsup, a few drops of Worcestershire sauce and a dash of pepper. Trim
the crusts from an entire loaf of bread, butter the end of the loaf and
cut off a thin slice, and so continue until you have the desired
quantity of bread.

Shred one head of Romaine or a bunch of cress. This of course must be
crisp and dry. Put a layer of the chicken mixture on the buttered side
of a slice of bread, put on top another slice of buttered bread, then a
thick layer of the shredded cress or Romaine. Put a thick layer of the
tongue mixture on another slice of bread and cover it over the cress.
Press firmly together and cut the slices directly into halves the long
way. Wrap in waxed paper or tie with baby ribbon. Served at afternoon
teas. If well made, they are the most elaborate and dainty of all
sandwiches.


Tea Biscuit Sandwiches

Put one quart of flour into a bowl; add four level teaspoonfuls of
baking powder, a teaspoonful of salt, and sift. Rub in two level
tablespoonfuls of butter and add sufficient milk to make a dough. This
dough must not be soft, but must be sufficiently stiff to handle
quickly. Knead quickly and roll into a sheet a quarter of an inch thick.
Cut into good-sized round biscuits; they must be at least two and a half
to three inches in diameter. Brush them with milk and bake in a quick
oven. When done, cut the center from each biscuit, leaving a wall one
inch thick; take out the crumb. Fill this space with deviled chicken.
Chop sufficient cold cooked chicken to make a pint; add gradually eight
tablespoonfuls of melted butter, cream or olive oil, a dash of cayenne,
a saltspoonful of white pepper, a saltspoonful of celery seed and a
saltspoonful of paprika. When thoroughly mixed fill the spaces just even
and send at once to the table. These are nice for porch suppers, and may
be served with either tea, coffee or chocolate, or may be used as an
accompaniment to mayonnaise of tomatoes.


Cheese Sandwiches No. 1

Butter thin slices of pumpernickel or brown bread; put between each two
slices a very thin layer of Swiss cheese, put two together, and cut into
triangles; garnish with cress.


Cheese Sandwiches No. 2

Chop fine a quarter of a pound of soft American cheese; put it into a
saucepan, add the yolk of one egg beaten with two tablespoonfuls of
cream, a saltspoonful of salt, a dash of red pepper and half a
teaspoonful of Worcestershire sauce. Have ready cut and buttered a
sufficient number of slices of bread, either white or whole wheat. Stir
the cheese over the fire until it is thoroughly melted; take from the
fire and when cool spread it between the slices of bread and butter;
that is, spread it on one slice and cover with the other; press two
together and cut into forms.


Cheese Sandwiches No. 3

Rub or pound until perfectly smooth or well mixed one tablespoonful of
butter, two tablespoonfuls of soft club-house cheese, a tablespoonful of
grated Parmesan, a saltspoonful of salt, and a teaspoonful of anchovy
paste; add a teaspoonful of tarragon vinegar and a half saltspoonful of
pepper. Cut the bread into thin slices, toast it until it is crisp, not
hard; spread this mixture on one slice, cover it with another, and cut
into shapes.


Workman's Cheese Sandwiches

Cut slices of brown bread about a half inch thick. Do not remove the
crusts. Take a half pint of cottage cheese; press it through a sieve;
add to it two tablespoonfuls of melted butter, a half teaspoonful of
salt and two tablespoonfuls of thick cream. Beat until smooth and light.
Spread each slice of bread thickly with the cheese mixture, then put a
very thin slice of white bread on top of the cheese, then cheese and
brown bread, press together. Have the outside brown bread with a layer
of cheese on each, and between the layers of cheese a slice of white
bread. These are palatable, and are very much better for the average
workman than bread and ham.


German Sandwiches

Put a half pound of Swiss cheese through the meat grinder; add to it the
yolks of two eggs, four tablespoonfuls of olive oil, a dash of cayenne
and a half teaspoonful of salt. Rub until you have a perfectly smooth
paste. Put this mixture between layers of buttered rye bread and serve.
Do not trim the crusts nor cut.


Honolulu Sandwiches

Put two Spanish sweet peppers (pimientos), one Neufchatel cheese, one
pared and quartered apple and twelve blanched almonds through the meat
grinder. These may be put through alternately, or mixed as you grind.
Rub the mixture, add a half teaspoonful of salt and a saltspoonful of
paprika. Spread this between thin slices of buttered white or brown
bread. Press, cut the crusts and cut into fingers.


My Favorite

  ½ pound of American cheese
  ½ cupful of thick sour cream
  1 teaspoonful of Worcestershire sauce
  1 tablespoonful of tomato catsup
  ½ teaspoonful of salt
  ½ teaspoonful of paprika

Chop or mash the cheese, add gradually the cream, and when smooth add
all the other ingredients. Spread this mixture on thin slices of
buttered bread, cover the top with chopped cress, then cover with
another slice of bread, press the two together, trim off the crusts and
cut into triangles.


Creole Sandwiches

Put a half pound of American cheese through your meat grinder, add to
it one Neufchatel cheese, mix well together; add one fresh peeled
chopped tomato. Peel the tomato and cut it into halves; squeeze out the
seeds and chop the flesh quite fine. Add one finely chopped sweet red
pepper. Add a half teaspoonful of salt and a little black pepper; mix
and spread between slices of white bread, or you may use one slice of
white with one slice of whole wheat bread. These are usually served cut
into rounds with an ordinary cake cutter. If you cut these economically
you can make one good sized round sandwich and a crescent from each, or
if you use a very small cutter you should make four round sandwiches.


Curry Sandwiches

Rub one Neufchatel or Philadelphia cream cheese to a paste. Add one
pimiento, chopped fine; a dozen almonds put through the meat grinder; a
dozen pecan meats, also ground; a tablespoonful of tomato catsup, a
level teaspoonful of curry and two tablespoonfuls of desiccated grated
cocoanut. Mix thoroughly, add sufficient olive oil to make a smooth
paste, and spread between thin, unbuttered slices of white bread; trim
the crusts and cut into long fingers. These are nice to serve with plain
lettuce salad at dinner.


Deviled Cheese Sandwiches

Put one pound of American cheese through your meat chopper. Add two
tablespoonfuls of tomato catsup, one teaspoonful of Worcestershire
sauce, a half teaspoonful of paprika, a dash of cayenne, two
tablespoonfuls of olive oil or melted butter, four tablespoonfuls of
sherry and a half teaspoonful of salt. Mix until perfectly smooth, and
spread between thin slices of buttered bread; trim the crusts and cut
into triangles.


Roquefort Sandwiches

Mash a quarter of a pound of Roquefort cheese, adding gradually
sufficient melted butter to make a paste. Spread this between slices of
buttered bread, press together, trim the crusts, and cut into fingers.


Camembert Sandwiches

Spread Camembert cheese between slices of buttered whole wheat bread,
trim the crusts and cut into shape. These may be served after lunch with
coffee, or are exceedingly nice for picnics or for afternoons where
coffee is served.


Cottage Cheese Sandwiches

These are nice for country picnics. The cottage cheese should be made
rather dry. After it has drained and is quite dry, moisten it by adding
either thick cream or melted butter; do not make it too soft. Add a
saltspoonful of black pepper and a palatable seasoning of salt. Spread
between slices of buttered whole wheat or white bread, press the two
together, trim the crusts and cut into shape.


Salt-Cucumber Sandwiches

Spread the bread, and cut the slices about half an inch thick. Then cut
a German or Holland cucumber into very thin slices; put these slices all
over the bread. Take the center from a head of lettuce; hold it
together, and slice it down in sort of shreds; put this over the
cucumber, and have ready some white meat of chicken, cut into the
thinnest possible slices, and cover the lettuce with chicken; then
sprinkle over more shredded lettuce and a little mayonnaise; put over
another slice of buttered bread; press the two together, trim into shape
and serve on a napkin in a pretty wicker basket.


Cucumber Sandwiches

These are very nice to serve with a fish course in place of bread or
rolls and a salad. Slice the cucumbers very thin and soak them in ice
water for one or two hours. They must be crisp and brittle and made just
at serving time. Beat together three tablespoonfuls of olive oil, one
tablespoonful of vinegar, a saltspoonful of salt and a dash of pepper;
stand this dressing on the ice until it thickens. Butter thin slices of
bread, cover them with a layer of cucumbers that have been drained and
dried on a napkin, sprinkle over the dressing, put on another layer of
buttered bread. Press together, trim the crusts and cut into triangles.
Heap these at once on a napkin and send to the table.


Curried Oyster Sandwiches

Butter a slice of bread before you take it off the loaf; cut it about a
half inch thick and remove the crusts. First of all, cover each slice
with a thin layer of hard-boiled egg that has been pressed through a
sieve or chopped very fine. In the center of this sandwich put the soft
parts of six pickled oysters. Put a tablespoonful of butter and one of
flour into a little saucepan; mix without melting; add a gill of thick
cream, a teaspoonful of onion juice and a teaspoonful of curry and a
half teaspoonful of turmeric. Bring to boiling point; beat and stand
away until perfectly cold. When you are ready to serve the sandwiches,
cover each one with a thin layer of this sauce; put a slice of bread on
top, press together, and serve. The sauce must not go over the
sandwiches until you are ready to serve; and then, remember, you have
but one layer between two slices of bread.


Curried Egg Sandwiches

Hard boil four eggs, remove the yolks from the whites; chop the whites
very, very fine, and press the yolks through a sieve. Add to the yolks
gradually four tablespoonfuls of melted butter or olive oil, a half
teaspoonful of salt, a teaspoonful of onion juice, a half teaspoonful of
curry, and rub until thoroughly smooth. Spread thin slices of bread,
cover them with a very thin layer of the yolk mixture, then a layer of
the chopped whites, another slice of buttered bread. Press together,
trim the crusts and cut into shapes.


Curried Sardine Sandwiches

Remove the heads, tails and bones from one large box of sardines. Rub
them to a paste, add a tablespoonful of melted butter, a half
teaspoonful of curry powder and a saltspoonful of salt. Spread this
mixture between slices of buttered bread, press the two together, trim
the crusts and cut into shape.


Curried Chicken Sandwiches

Chop sufficient cold boiled chicken to make a half pint. Rub together
one tablespoonful of butter and one tablespoonful of flour; add a half
cupful of cold milk, and stir over hot water until you have a smooth,
thick paste. Add the chicken gradually to this, mashing and rubbing all
the while. Add a level teaspoonful of curry powder, a half teaspoonful
of salt, a teaspoonful of onion juice and a teaspoonful of lemon juice.
When cold, spread between layers of buttered bread, trim the crusts and
cut into shapes.

Almost any bits of left-over meat may be substituted for the chicken and
made into sandwiches of this kind.


Crab Sandwiches

Remove the meat from six hard-boiled crabs; mix it with four
tablespoonfuls of mayonnaise dressing; put it between slices of bread
and butter and press two together; trim off the crusts, cut into
triangles and serve at once.

Crab and lobster sandwiches should not be allowed to stand for more than
an hour, and then must be wrapped carefully in a clean, damp cloth.


Cream of Chicken Sandwiches

Take sufficient white meat of chicken to make a half cup; chop and
pound it; reduce it to a paste. Put a teaspoonful of granulated gelatin
in two tablespoonfuls of cold water; then stand it over the fire until
it has dissolved. Whip a half pint of cream to a stiff froth. Add the
gelatin to the chicken; add a teaspoonful of grated horseradish and a
half teaspoonful of salt. Stir this until it begins to thicken, cool and
add carefully the whipped cream and stand it away until very cold. When
ready to make the sandwiches, butter the bread and cut the slices a
little thicker than the usual slices for sandwiches. Cover each slice
with this cream mixture; trim off the crusts and cut sandwiches into
fancy shapes. Garnish the top with olives cut into rings. In the center
of each sandwich make just a little mound of capers, using the olives at
the four corners; each sandwich may be garnished in a different way.
Little pieces of celery, with the white top attached, make also a pretty
garnish. These sandwiches are not covered with a second slice of bread.


Deviled Sandwiches

Chop a quarter of a pound of cold, boiled tongue very fine; add to it
two tablespoonfuls of olive oil, a dash of red pepper, a teaspoonful of
Worcestershire sauce, and a saltspoonful of paprika; mix and add the
hard-boiled yolks of three eggs that have been pressed through a sieve.
Put this between thin slices of bread and butter, and garnish with water
cress.


Egg Sandwiches No. 1

Take the hard-boiled yolks of six eggs and rub them to a paste, adding
gradually two tablespoonfuls of olive oil or thick cream. Add a dash of
paprika, one-half teaspoonful of salt, spread and finish precisely the
same as tongue sandwich.


Egg Sandwiches No. 2

Put thin slices of hard-boiled eggs between slices of brown bread and
butter; dust the egg slightly with salt and pepper. Trim the edges of
the sandwiches with either cress or lettuce, and cut into triangles or
squares.


Fish Sandwiches

Rub to a smooth paste a quarter of a pound of cold, boiled fish; add
half a teaspoonful of Worcestershire sauce, a tablespoonful of olive
oil, a half saltspoonful of salt, and a half saltspoonful of black
pepper. Spread the slices of bread on the loaf, cut them off about a
half inch in thickness; trim off the crusts, put on each slice dainty
lettuce leaves, and fill the center with the fish mixture. Cover with
another layer of buttered bread from which you have trimmed the crusts,
and press the two together.


Flaked Fish Sandwiches

Flake cold boiled white fleshed fish, dust it with salt and pepper and
sprinkle it with lemon juice. Butter thin slices of brown bread; do not
trim off the crusts. Put on one slice a layer of thin crisp cucumber,
cover this with flaked fish, put a tablespoonful of mayonnaise in the
center, put on another layer of chopped cress, then a slice of buttered
brown bread. Press together and cut into halves.


Spanish Sandwiches

Mash the hard-boiled yolks of three eggs, add twelve boiled shrimps,
either pounded in a mortar or chopped very fine. Add three
tablespoonfuls of olive oil or butter, a tablespoonful of tomato catsup,
two saltspoonfuls of paprika, four tablespoonfuls of chopped parsley, a
half teaspoonful of salt, and at last stir in four tablespoonfuls of
mayonnaise dressing. Spread this between thin slices of buttered bread,
trim the crusts and cut into shape.


Salmon Sandwiches

Flake cold boiled salmon, or open a can of salmon, drain it free from
oil and break the fish apart in good-sized flakes; sprinkle them with
salt, pepper and lemon juice. Butter slices of whole wheat or brown
bread, cover with a layer of the salmon, then a thick layer of chopped
cress or shredded celery. Put a tablespoonful of mayonnaise in the
middle and cover with another slice of buttered bread. Press together,
trim the crusts and cut into triangles.


Swedish Sandwiches

Flake any cold cooked fish, dust it with salt, pepper and lemon juice.
Rub the bottom of a bowl with a clove of garlic, add a half cupful of
mayonnaise, four finely chopped gherkins, twelve chopped olives and two
tablespoonfuls of capers. Mix and stir in two tablespoonfuls of finely
chopped parsley. Spread a thin layer of this dressing over a plain slice
of bread, do not butter the bread, cover it with fish, put on top a
crisp lettuce leaf, then cover with another slice of bread that has been
spread with the dressing. Press, trim the crusts and cut into fingers.


French Chicken Sandwiches

Chop the white meat of one chicken very fine; pound to a paste. Add
one-half teaspoonful of salt and a dash of red pepper. Cover one
tablespoonful of gelatin, with a tablespoonful of cold water, soak it
for about five minutes, then add to it ten tablespoonfuls of thick
cream; stand this over teakettle and stir until gelatin is dissolved.
Now, beat into this the chicken, stand it aside in a square pan until
cold. Cut the chicken into very thin slices; put a slice on a slice of
buttered bread; cover this with another slice of bread and cut into
shape.


Game Sandwiches

Remove the breasts from two partridges after they have been baked or
roasted. Chop the meat rather fine; reduce two sardines to a paste.
While you are mashing the sardines, add gradually about two
tablespoonfuls of soft butter, a dash of red pepper and a half
teaspoonful of salt. Spread the bread first with the sardine paste; then
sprinkle over the chopped game; dust this with salt and a little pepper;
cover with another slice of bread, press lightly; trim into shape.


German Sandwiches

Cut thin slices of rye bread; butter before you take them from the loaf.
Spread each slice with a thin layer of limburger cheese. Cut bologna
sausage into the thinnest possible slices; cover the limburger with the
sliced bologna, and then a thin piece of pumpernickel; cover with
another slice of bread that has been coated with a layer of cheese.
Press the two together; do not remove the crusts. Serve on a napkin in a
wicker basket.


Ham Sandwiches

Chop cold boiled ham very fine. To each cupful of this ham, after it
has been chopped, stir in two tablespoonfuls of melted butter, dash of
red pepper and about one-half teaspoonful of onion juice. Have bread
sufficiently stale to cut nicely. Remove end crust, butter and cut a
very thin slice; remove the crusts, and spread with the ham paste. Serve
same as tongue sandwiches.


Indian Sandwiches

Take two sardines, remove skin and bones, put them into mortar and pound
fine; add a teaspoonful of anchovy paste, a dash of salt and red pepper
and the hard-boiled yolks of six eggs, rubbed smooth; stir two
tablespoonfuls of olive oil into the mixture at the last. Cut bread into
slices about half an inch thick, remove crusts, then cut into
crescent-shaped pieces, toast, butter and cover with the mixture, serve
at once.


Lettuce Sandwiches

Have bread made into a large, square loaf, take off the crust from one
end, butter and then cut into slices. Take the white part of lettuce,
wash and wipe it perfectly dry; have ready three hard-boiled eggs,
remove the yolks, put them through a sieve and rub to a perfectly smooth
paste with four tablespoonfuls of very thick cream. Add one-half
tablespoonful lemon juice and then stir in about four tablespoonfuls of
whipped cream; season with red pepper and add teaspoonful of salt. Cover
slices of bread with leaves of lettuce, put on a goodly quantity of
dressing and then on top of this another slice of bread. This may be
served in squares tied together with ribbon, or they may be pressed and
cut into long narrow pieces. Of course, they must be made only a short
time before serving.


Lobster Sandwiches

Whole wheat bread or the ordinary Boston brown bread is the most
desirable for these sandwiches. Plunge the lobster into hot water; bring
to boiling point, and simmer gently three-quarters of an hour; remove
the meat, and cut it with a silver knife into dice. Now, sprinkle the
lobster with a little salt, red pepper and a tablespoonful of tarragon
vinegar. Allow it to stand for a few minutes, and then sprinkle over two
or three tablespoonfuls of melted butter. As soon as the butter has
chilled on the lobster, put a goodly layer over a slice of buttered
bread; cover with another slice of bread; press the two together, and
remove the crusts. Remember, there is only one layer of lobster between
two slices of bread.


Lobster Salad Sandwiches

Cut fine the solid portion from one boiled lobster, put it into a bowl,
dust it lightly with salt and pepper and sprinkle over two
tablespoonfuls of lemon juice. Make a half cupful of mayonnaise from the
yolk of one egg and eight tablespoonfuls of olive oil. Select crisp
lettuce leaves. Mix the mayonnaise with the lobster, put a thin layer
over a slice of buttered bread, cover with a lettuce leaf, put another
thin layer of lobster on top of the lettuce leaf, then a second slice of
buttered bread. Press firmly together, cut off the crusts and cut the
slices into halves long ways, or you may make it into three fingers.


Mutton Sandwiches

Chop a half pound of cold, cooked mutton very fine; add two
tablespoonfuls of cream or olive oil, a tablespoonful of capers, half a
teaspoonful of salt, and a saltspoonful of pepper; mix thoroughly.
Butter the slices on the loaf; cut them one-half inch thick, and trim
off the crusts. Spread thickly with the mixture; put at each of the four
corners a mint leaf; put on top another slice of buttered bread, from
which you have trimmed the crust, press the two together, and cut from
corner to corner making four triangles.

These sandwiches may also be flavored with tomato catsup.


Mutton Club Sandwiches

Cut brown bread into rounds or circles with an ordinary cake cutter.
Chop one-half pound of cold, boiled mutton rather fine; add two
tablespoonfuls of olive oil, half a teaspoonful of salt, and a
saltspoonful of paprika. Peel four or five quite solid tomatoes, cut
them into slices and push out the seeds. Put a slice of tomato on top of
a round of bread, fill the space from which you have taken the seeds
with the mutton mixture; put on top another round of buttered bread, and
press the two together. You may, if you like, put on top of the tomato a
lettuce leaf, and in the center of that half a teaspoonful of mayonnaise
dressing. Nice for luncheon on a warm day.


English Mutton Sandwiches

Chop sufficient cold boiled mutton to make a pint. Add to it two
tablespoonfuls of capers, a half teaspoonful of salt, six tablespoonfuls
of cream or olive oil and a saltspoonful of pepper. Mash carefully and
put between layers of buttered bread; trim the crusts and cut into
triangles.


Spring Lamb Sandwiches

Grind sufficient lamb to make a half pint, putting through the meat
grinder with the lamb the leaves from six stalks of mint. Add a half
teaspoonful of salt, two tablespoonfuls of melted butter or cream, and a
saltspoonful of pepper. Rub this to a paste and spread between toasted
English muffins. Leaves of mint may be put over the top of the lamb
before putting the muffins together.


Turkish Sandwiches

Chop sufficient cold roasted mutton to make a pint; add two solid
tomatoes from a can of tomatoes, or two fresh tomatoes, peeled, the
seeds pressed out and the flesh chopped fine. Add a half cupful of
piñons or pine nuts, and sufficient olive oil to bind the whole
together. Spread this between thin, warm milk or beaten biscuits and
serve for afternoon tea or supper.


Picnic Sandwiches

Take the ordinary French rolls; make a round opening in the top of
each, and then, with your finger, scoop out all the crumb, leaving the
roll in shape with a very small opening on top. Save the little piece of
crust from the top of the opening. Mix together four olives, one
gherkin, a tablespoonful of capers and one large green, sweet pepper,
chopped very fine. Chop fine two ounces of tongue, and mix it with the
white meat of one chicken, chopped fine. Mix together, and moisten with
a well-made mayonnaise dressing. Fill this into the roll, put on the
top, and arrange neatly on a napkin in a wicker basket; serve at once.
The rolls may be prepared and the mixture made some time before serving,
but the two should be put together at the last moment.


Potato Sandwiches

Mash four good-sized boiled potatoes; add a level teaspoonful of salt,
four tablespoonfuls of thick cream, and the yolks of four hard-boiled
eggs rubbed to a smooth paste, a saltspoonful of pepper, two
tablespoonfuls of olive oil; mix thoroughly until you have a perfectly
smooth paste. Put this between slices of brown bread and butter, trim
off the crusts, and cut into triangles. The top may be garnished with
cress or lettuce.


Salad Sandwiches

Chop fine half a pound of cold, cooked chicken; mix with it six
tablespoonfuls of mayonnaise dressing; add half a teaspoonful of salt
and a saltspoonful of pepper; put this between slices of bread and
butter, and cut into fancy shapes.

These sandwiches may also be trimmed with lettuce or cress, and almost
any meat may be substituted for the chicken. If beef is used, a
tablespoonful of tomato catsup may be added; with mutton a tablespoonful
of capers. Beef is much better garnished with cress, mutton with mint,
chicken with lettuce or celery.

Lobsters and crabs may be mixed with mayonnaise and used as a salad
sandwich; garnish of course with lettuce.


Fish Salad Sandwiches

Flake one can of salmon, or an equal quantity of cold boiled fish. Add
to it a half teaspoonful of salt, a dash of cayenne and one ordinary
cucumber, grated and drained. Just before serving time butter the bread,
cut it into thin slices, put over the top a layer of the flaked fish,
then a thin layer of mayonnaise or sandwich dressing and another
covering of bread. Press together, trim the crusts and cut directly
across the slice, making two long sandwiches about an inch and a half to
two inches wide.


Sardine Salad Sandwiches

These, like salmon sandwiches, are made from materials usually in every
household, and can be made at a moment's notice. Stir four
tablespoonfuls of oil into an egg, add a few drops of vinegar or lemon
juice. Remove the sardines from the oil, take off the tails and heads
and remove the bones. Mash them in a bowl, add a tablespoonful of
vinegar, or the same amount of lemon juice. If you have lettuce or
cress, either shred it, or put one leaf between the fish and the
buttered bread.


Sardine Sandwiches

Cut slices of bread about one-half an inch thick, butter and toast; trim
off the crust. Remove skin and bones from the sardines, lay them
carefully over toast; have ready, chopped very fine, some olives and
capers, mixed together; sprinkle these over the sardines, then a
teaspoonful of lemon juice to each sandwich. Cut into any shape you may
desire and they are ready to serve.


Swiss Sandwiches

Put half a pound of ordinary schmierkase into a bowl, rub it perfectly
smooth; add, a teaspoonful at a time, four tablespoonfuls of thick
cream, two tablespoonfuls of melted butter, half a teaspoonful of salt,
and a saltspoonful of pepper. Butter the slices of bread on the loaf;
cut each off about a half inch in thickness, trim off the crusts and
spread with the cheese mixture; put on top a layer of pumpernickel or
rye bread; on top of that another thin layer of cheese, and on top of
that another layer of white bread and butter; press these lightly
together. If the crusts have been trimmed off, cut the slices into three
or four finger shaped sandwiches. They should be the length of the slice
and about one inch wide. These are exceedingly nice garnished with
cress.

In arranging them for serving, put a layer of sandwiches and a layer of
cress all through the basket or dish.


Tongue Sandwiches

Chop cold boiled tongue very fine. To each cupful stir in two
tablespoonfuls of melted butter, dash of red pepper and about one-half
teaspoonful of onion juice. Have bread sufficiently stale to cut nicely.
Remove end crust, butter and cut a very thin slice; remove the crusts.
Spread it with the tongue paste, roll each sandwich carefully, tie with
narrow ribbon and put away until wanted. These can be made several hours
before serving.


Sandwich Dressing

Put four tablespoonfuls of vinegar and three of water into a saucepan
over the fire; add a half teaspoonful of salt and a half saltspoonful of
pepper. Beat the yolks of four eggs until creamy, add slowly to them the
hot mixture. Stir over hot water until it is the consistency of
mayonnaise dressing. Take from the fire and add carefully two level
tablespoonfuls of butter.


Farmer's Sandwiches

Butter each slice on the loaf, slice it off very thin. Remove the
crusts, lay a crisp lettuce leaf on one half the buttered slices, spread
with sandwich dressing and cover with a slice of buttered bread. Press
the two together and cut into triangles. Cress, Romaine, or bleached
chicory may be used in place of lettuce. These are more appetizing than
ordinary bread and butter sandwiches, and are made from materials found
in every household.


Farmer's Egg Sandwiches

Put six eggs into warm water, bring to a boil and keep at boiling point,
without boiling hard, for a half hour. Throw them into cold water,
remove the shells and cut them into slices lengthwise. A very fine wire
is best for cutting eggs. Butter the slices on the loaf, then cut them
off, cover with slices of hard-boiled eggs, dust lightly with salt and
pepper. Spread the eggs carefully with sandwich dressing, put on another
slice of buttered bread, press the two together and cut into triangles.
If you have lettuce or cress put a leaf over the dressing.


Deviled Beef Sandwiches

Chop remains of cold cooked beef very fine. To each pint add one
tablespoonful of tomato catsup, a dash of cayenne, two tablespoonfuls of
melted butter, a teaspoonful of Worcestershire sauce, a half teaspoonful
of paprika and a tablespoonful of onion juice. Rub to a paste and put
between thin slices of buttered bread, trim off the crusts and cut into
triangles.


Corned Beef Sandwiches

Chop sufficient cold cooked corned beef to make a pint. Add to it a
teaspoonful of horseradish, four tablespoonfuls of melted butter or
olive oil and four or five tablespoonfuls of finely-shredded water
cress. Put this between slices of buttered whole wheat or brown bread;
trim the crusts and cut into triangles.


Plain Corned Beef Sandwiches

Butter an equal quantity of white and whole wheat bread. Cut the cooked
corned beef into very thin slices. Put a slice on a slice of buttered
bread, put on top a teaspoonful of creamed horseradish sauce, spread it
out, cover with cress leaves, or crisp lettuce leaf, put on a slice of
whole wheat bread, press the two together, trim the crusts and cut into
fingers about one inch wide.

To make the creamed horseradish sauce, stir thick, dry whipped cream
into dry horseradish. If the horseradish is in vinegar, press out the
vinegar and then fold in the whipped cream.


Sandwiches à la Stanley

Cut cold beef loaf or roll into very thin slices. Bake three or four
bananas, and make a creamed horseradish sauce according to preceding
recipe. Butter white or whole wheat bread, put on first a slice of meat,
then just a thin layer of the mashed baked banana, then a teaspoonful of
horseradish sauce, and another slice of bread. Press together, trim the
crusts, cut into triangles and serve. These sandwiches should be served
soon after they are made.


English Salt-Beef Sandwiches

Whip a half cupful of cream until it is very stiff. Put four
tablespoonfuls of freshly grated horseradish or horseradish pressed free
from vinegar into a bowl, add the yolk of an egg and a saltspoonful of
salt; mix and fold in the whipped cream. Have ready very thin slices of
cold boiled salt beef. Butter thin slices of bread, put on a layer of
salt beef, then a thin layer of the horseradish sauce and another layer
of buttered bread. Press together, trim the crusts and cut into
triangles.


Sandwiches à la Bernhardt

Chop sufficient very rare cold roasted beef to make a half pint; mix
with it a dash of cayenne, a half teaspoonful of salt, a tablespoonful
of tomato catsup, a tablespoonful of mango chutney, two shallots, a half
clove of garlic and a tablespoonful of olive oil. Spread this on a thin
slice of buttered brown bread, cover it with leaves of cress, and then
put on another thin slice of buttered white bread. Press the two
together, cut into crescents or triangles.


East Indian Lentil Sandwiches

Take any left-over boiled or stewed lentils and press them through a
sieve. To each half cupful of this mixture add a half cupful of chopped
pecans, a level teaspoonful of curry and a saltspoonful of salt. Spread
thin slices of brown bread with butter, then put over a thick layer of
this mixture and cover with chopped parsley. Cover with another layer of
brown bread, press together, trim the crusts and cut into fingers.


Nut-Butter Sandwiches

Mix one glass of nut butter with two tablespoonfuls of olive oil and one
tablespoonful of chopped pimientos. Spread this on a slice of unbuttered
brown bread, cover with finely-chopped cress or shredded lettuce, place
on top a slice of buttered bread, press the two together, trim the
crusts and cut into fingers an inch wide.


Filipino Sandwiches

Add one grated pineapple to a tumbler of peanut butter, mix thoroughly,
add a tablespoonful of lemon juice, a dash of cayenne, a half
teaspoonful of paprika. Put this between thin slices of brown bread,
buttered; press together and cut into halves.




SWEET SANDWICHES


Under this heading we place all those dainty sandwiches that are made
from thin slices of bread and butter and a jam or fruit filling. They
are usually cut into circles; it is more economical to do this before
the bread is buttered, unless you can cut rounds from one side, and a
crescent above it. Almost any sweet may be used. Serve with chocolate or
coffee according to the fruit, either for an afternoon tea or an
"evening."


Cherry Sandwiches

Chop a quarter of a pound of candied cherries very fine, adding
occasionally as you chop them a few drops of orange juice, if you use
wine, a few drops of sherry. Mix thoroughly and spread over water thins,
making it a little deeper in the center than at the edges. These
sandwiches are better made from crackers than from bread. Arrange neatly
on a pretty glass dish, and they are ready to serve.


Fig Sandwiches

Split a dozen figs and scrape out the soft portion, rejecting the skins;
work this to a paste. Cut the slices of bread from the loaf, buttering
before you cut them; make them quite thin. Remove the crusts, and spread
this thick paste over the bread and roll carefully; press for a moment
until there is no danger of the roll opening; roll each in a piece of
tissue paper; twist the ends as you would an old-fashioned "secret," or
they may be tied with baby ribbon. These are exceedingly wholesome and
palatable.


Fruit and Nut Sandwiches

These are perhaps the most attractive of all the sweet sandwiches.

Put through the meat chopper a quarter of a pound of almonds with half
a pound of washed figs, the same quantity of dates, the same of raisins,
and a pound of pecan nuts; put them through alternately so that they
will be mixed in chopping. Pack the mixture into round baking powder
tins, pressing it down firmly, and stand it aside over night. When
wanted, dip the tin in hot water, loosen it with a knife and shake out
the mixture. With a sharp knife cut into very thin slices and put them
between two rounds of buttered bread. Serve with chocolate.

The combination may be varied; candied cherries, citron or any of the
candied fruits may be substituted for the dates and figs. Brazilian and
pine nuts may be substituted for a portion of the pecans.


Orange Marmalade Sandwiches

These sandwiches may be made precisely the same as fig sandwiches,
substituting the orange marmalade for the figs.


Sponge Cake Sandwiches

Bake a sponge cake in a square loaf; cut it into slices a quarter of an
inch thick; cut the slices into rounds with a small biscuit cutter. With
another small cutter take out the center leaving the ring; put this ring
on top of a solid round making sort of a patty as it were; fill the
spaces with a mixture of chopped candied fruit that has been soaked in
orange juice over night; cover the top with the meringue made from white
of egg and sugar; put them in the oven to brown, dish neatly and they
are ready to use. These cannot stand over an hour as the fruit will
soften the cake.


Fresh Fruit Sandwiches

These sandwiches are exceedingly nice to serve for afternoon teas. They
must be used soon after they are made. They will, however, if wrapped in
a damp napkin, keep for an hour, but as fruit is soft the bread is
liable to become moist, which spoils the sandwich.

Butter the bread and put between layers of sliced strawberries, dusted
with powdered sugar; or raspberries, or large blackberries cut into
halves; or peaches, finely chopped; or apple seasoned with a little
salt, pepper, olive oil and lemon juice; or sliced bananas with a dash
of lemon juice, are all nice.


Raisin Sandwiches

Put one-half pound of seeded raisins through the meat grinder, add a
quarter of a pound of almonds that have been blanched, dried and ground.
Add a half tumbler of quince jelly, mix thoroughly and put between thin
slices of buttered white bread. These sandwiches are very nice in place
of cake for afternoon teas or evening companies.


Afternoon Teas

Stone a quarter of a pound of dates, put them through a meat grinder,
add to them a half tumbler of nut butter, mix until smooth, add four
tablespoonfuls of sweet cream and a tablespoonful of orange juice. Put
this mixture between thin slices of white buttered bread, press
together, trim the crusts and cut into fingers or four small triangles.


Nut and Apple Sandwiches

Put a half cupful of _thick_ stewed apples into a bowl, add the grated
yellow rind of quarter of an orange and one cupful of finely chopped
mixed nuts. Spread this on saltines, Uneedas, or any crisp cracker. Put
on top another cracker and serve at once. These are very nice for
children's parties. Of course one may use buttered bread, either white
or brown.


Grape Fruit Sandwiches

Spread any crisp cracker with a thin layer of grape fruit marmalade, put
on top another cracker and serve at once.


Ginger Sandwiches

Put four or five pieces of ginger through your meat chopper. Stir this
paste into a half cupful of orange marmalade. Put between slices of
buttered bread, press them together, trim the crusts and cut into
fingers. These are nice for afternoon teas. Ginger and carrot marmalade
are also very nice.




CANAPÉS


These are slices of bread cut into fancy shapes, toasted or quickly
fried in hot oil, or they may be spread with butter and browned in a
quick oven. One slice only is used for each canapé. The mixture is
spread on top, the top garnished, and the canapé used at once.


Anchovy Canapés

Cover a round or square of toast with anchovies that have been mashed
and seasoned with a little tomato catsup. Put a little chopped celery
around the edge as a garnish and send at once to the table.


Caviar Canapés

Season the caviar with onion and a very little lemon juice; spread over
a round or square canapé, put chopped onion around the edge, garnish the
top with a hard-boiled egg; place on paper mats and send at once to the
table. These are used as first course at lunch or dinner.


Swedish Canapés

Cut thick slices of whole wheat or Graham bread, trim the crusts and
hollow out the centers, being careful not to make a hole all the way
through. Pound or mash the hard boiled yolks of three eggs with a
tablespoonful of anchovy paste or two anchovies, two tablespoonfuls of
butter and a dash of lemon juice. Cut a dill pickle lengthwise into
slices an eighth of an inch thick, then cut these slices into long
strips a half inch wide. Cut large pickled beets into strips of the same
width. Cut a dozen pimolas into halves. Butter the bread, fill with the
paste, put over the strips of dill pickle, leaving one inch between each
strip. Cross these with strips of pickled beets, put half of a pimola
into each square. Dish on paper mats. Serve as an appetizer before soup.


Chopped Tongue Canapés

Chop cold, cooked tongue very fine; season it with two tablespoonfuls
of olive oil and a dusting of pepper; spread it over the top of a round
of toasted bread; garnish the edge with the small leaves of cress, put a
little grated hard-boiled egg in the center and send at once to the
table.


Sardine Canapés

Remove the skin and pound the sardines to a paste; put a thick layer of
this paste over the top of a round of toasted bread. Cut one gherkin
into very thin slices, arrange them overlapping around the edge; put a
little finely chopped hard-boiled egg in the center, and they are ready
to serve.


Fish Canapés

Pound a quarter of a pound of cooked fish to a paste; season it with a
few drops of onion juice, a saltspoonful of salt, and a dash of black
pepper. Stir into it two tablespoonfuls of sauce tartare; spread this on
six or eight rounds of buttered bread browned in the oven; garnish the
tops with grated cucumber and send to the table.


Deviled Oyster Canapés

Cut slices of bread into squares, toast and remove the crusts. Remove
the hard part from a pint of pickled oysters, place oysters over bread,
close together and in rotation, dust thickly with red pepper; put over
as a thin covering a highly seasoned sauce mayonnaise, and serve. Do not
put over a second piece of bread.


Pâté de Foie Gras Canapés

For twenty-four sandwiches take one tureen of foie gras. Remove the
fat, and mash the foie gras to a perfectly smooth paste, adding
gradually four tablespoonfuls of soft, not melted, butter; add a dash of
cayenne and a half teaspoonful of salt and about ten drops of onion
juice, and press the whole through a sieve. Cut slices of bread into
fancy shapes and toast; crescents are very pretty. Cover each slice
thickly with this paste; garnish with hard-boiled white of egg, cut into
diamonds or tiny crescents, and olives cut into rings. Arrange neatly,
and they are ready to serve.


Hot Canapés

A canapé is the half of a sandwich, as it were. Minced meats of various
kinds are served on one slice of bread. In many books they are called
"uncovered sandwiches." The cold canapés are placed always among the
appetizers and served before the soup. They are made of such materials
as caviar, sardines, anchovies, pickled oysters, pickled lobster,
deviled shrimps, or a mixture of one or two of these materials.

A hot canapé, however, is served in the place of fish or as an entrée.
If they are dressed with either fish or shell-fish they will take the
place of that course. When made from chicken, sweetbreads or game,
should be served as an entrée, following the fish.


Fish Canapés

Pick apart sufficient cold cooked fish to make a half pint. Rub
together two level tablespoonfuls of butter and two of flour, add a half
pint of milk, stir until boiling, add a half teaspoonful of salt, a
teaspoonful of soy, a dash of red pepper and a half saltspoonful of
black pepper. When this is hot add the fish and four or five nice sliced
mushrooms; stand over hot water, without stirring, until the fish is
thoroughly heated. While this is heating, trim the crusts from six
slices of bread; toast the one side carefully. Have ready in your pastry
bag with a star tube a pint of light mashed potatoes; press in a
rope-like form, or in small rosettes, around the edge of the bread on
the untoasted side. Brush the bread with a little melted butter, put
them in the oven until the potatoes and bread are a golden brown. Dish
these on square paper mats on individual plates, fill the centers with
the creamed fish and send at once to the table.

Canned salmon may be used in the place of fresh boiled fish.


Lobster Canapés

  1 three-pound lobster
    The yolks of two eggs
  2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
  2 level tablespoonfuls of flour
  ½ pint of milk
  1 tablespoonful of chopped parsley
  1 level teaspoonful of salt
  1 saltspoonful of white pepper
  1 pint of mashed potatoes
  6 slices of bread

Toast the bread and arrange the potatoes according to the preceding
recipe. Rub the butter and flour together, add the milk; when boiling
add the seasoning and the lobster. When very hot stir in carefully the
well-beaten yolks of the eggs. Stir this until it is smoking hot, but be
careful not to boil, or it will curdle. Fill this on top of the toast
that has been garnished with potatoes, dust with chopped parsley and
send to the table.

Shrimps may be substituted for lobster.


Sweetbread Canapés

  1 pair calf's sweetbreads
  ½ can of mushrooms
  2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
  2 level tablespoonfuls of flour
  ½ pint of milk
  ½ teaspoonful of salt
  1 saltspoonful of pepper

Boil the sweetbreads carefully for three-quarters of an hour; throw
them into cold water; pick them apart, rejecting the membrane. Chop the
mushrooms very fine, add them to the sweetbreads. Rub the butter and
flour together, add the milk; when boiling add the salt, pepper,
sweetbreads and mushrooms; cover and stand over hot water ten to fifteen
minutes. Serve them on slices of bread, garnished with mashed potatoes
pressed through a star tube.


Canapés à la Trinidad

    Half the white meat from one boiled chicken
  1 pair of sweetbreads
  6 large fresh mushrooms
  2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
  2 level tablespoonfuls of flour
  ½ pint of milk
  2 yolks of hard-boiled eggs
  1 level teaspoonful of salt
  1 saltspoonful of pepper

Cut twelve slices of bread; trim the crusts so the slices will be of
even size. Cut out the centers from one-half the slices, leaving a wall
of one inch. Toast the solid slices. Brush the untoasted edge of the
bread with a little white of egg, lay on the rims and put them in the
oven to toast on the upper side. Pick the sweetbreads apart, after they
are carefully cooked, rejecting the membrane. Slice the mushrooms. Cut
the chicken into dice. Put the butter into a saucepan, add the
mushrooms, toss for a minute until the mushrooms are slightly softened,
then add the flour, mix, and add the milk, salt and pepper. Cover this
on the back part of the stove for ten or fifteen minutes until the
mushrooms are cooked; then add the meat. Stand this over hot water ten
or fifteen minutes. The toast should now be done and crisp. Arrange each
canapé on a square of lace paper on an individual heated dish, put the
mixture in the center, garnish with the yolk of the eggs pressed through
a sieve. Garnish the very top with a little chopped truffle or a little
chopped parsley. These are the handsomest of all hot canapés, and while
they are usually served following the soup at dinner, they may be used
for the main course at a ladies' luncheon, or at a supper.


Game Canapés

Cut any pieces of left-over game into dice. Put two tablespoonfuls of
butter and two of flour in a saucepan, add a half pint of stock. When
boiling add a half can of very fine mushrooms, a tablespoonful of
chopped ham, a tablespoonful of chopped parsley, a level teaspoonful of
salt and a saltspoonful of pepper. Bring this to a boil, add the game;
stand over hot water for fifteen or twenty minutes until the game has
absorbed part of the sauce, then add two tablespoonfuls of sherry or
Madeira, and fill into the square canapés made the same as in preceding
recipe.


Lamb Canapés

  2 cans, or one quart of cooked peas
  1 blade of mace
  2 level tablespoonfuls of butter
  2 level tablespoonfuls of flour
  ½ pint of stock
  1 teaspoonful of kitchen bouquet
  ½ teaspoonful of salt
  1 tablespoonful of chopped onion
  2 tablespoonfuls of claret
  1 saltspoonful of pepper

Put the butter and onion in a saucepan, shake it over the fire, then
add the cold boiled lamb, cut into blocks; you should have one pint.
When this is boiling add all the seasoning and stand the mixture over
hot water on the back of the stove while you make the canapés. Press the
peas through a sieve; the pulp must be quite dry; add to it a palatable
seasoning of salt and pepper and one or two tablespoonfuls of melted
butter. Put these in a pastry bag. Toast the bread on one side, put the
peas around in rope-like form, or roses, on the untoasted side, making a
border sufficiently high to hold the lamb. Stand in the oven until the
bread is carefully toasted. Arrange them on lace papers on heated
plates, fill the center with the lamb mixture and send to the table.


Club-House Sandwiches

Club-house sandwiches may be made in a number of different ways, but are
served warm as a rule on bread carefully toasted at the last moment. Put
on top of a square of toasted bread a thin layer of broiled ham or
bacon; on top of this a thin slice of Holland pickle, on top of that a
thin slice of cold roasted chicken or turkey, then a leaf of lettuce in
the center of which you put a teaspoonful of mayonnaise dressing; cover
this with another slice of buttered toast. Press the two together, and
cut from one corner to another making two large triangles, and send at
once to the table.

People not using ham may make a palatable sandwich by putting down
first a layer of cold boiled tongue, then a layer of Holland cucumber, a
layer of turkey or chicken, another layer of cucumber and the slice of
toast. Garnish with little pieces of water cress before putting on the
last slice.




SCENTED SANDWICHES


There is a group of rather æsthetic sandwiches made from thin slices of
bread and butter flavored or scented with flowers. Among those in common
use are clover, rose and the nasturtium.

The crust is trimmed off from the outside of the loaf; the loaf placed
down in a clean stone jar in a nest of clover blossoms; the butter is
put in a piece of cheese cloth and also covered with clover, and the jar
covered over night. The next morning the bread and butter will have the
flavor of clover.


Rose Sandwiches

In making rose sandwiches cover the bread and butter with rose leaves
over night. Put a few rose petals between the slices when making the
sandwiches.


Nasturtium Sandwiches

Cover the bread and butter with nasturtium flowers over night. In making
the sandwiches place at each corner of the slice a flower, so that in
cutting from corner to corner you have a little triangular sandwich
holding a nasturtium flower uncut.


Violet Sandwiches

These are made the same, covering the slice of bread and butter with
the petals of the violet.
PREFACE.
The interest in scientific cookery, particularly in cookery as related
to health, has manifestly increased in this country within the last
decade as is evidenced by the success which has attended every
intelligent effort for the establishment of schools for instruction in
cookery in various parts of the United States. While those in charge of
these schools have presented to their pupils excellent opportunities for
the acquirement of dexterity in the preparation of toothsome and
tempting viands, but little attention has been paid to the science of
dietetics, or what might be termed the hygiene of cookery.

A little less than ten years ago the Sanitarium at Battle Creek Mich.,
established an experimental kitchen and a school of cookery under the
supervision of Mrs. Dr. Kellogg, since which time, researches in the
various lines of cookery and dietetics have been in constant progress in
the experimental kitchen, and regular sessions of the school of cookery
have been held. The school has gradually gained in popularity, and the
demand for instruction has become so great that classes are in session
during almost the entire year.

During this time, Mrs. Kellogg has had constant oversight of the cuisine
of both the Sanitarium and the Sanitarium Hospital, preparing bills of
fare for the general and diet tables, and supplying constantly new
methods and original recipes to meet the changing and growing demands of
an institution numbering always from 500 to 700 inmates.

These large opportunities for observation, research, and experience,
have gradually developed a system of cookery, the leading features of
which are so entirely novel and so much in advance of the methods
heretofore in use, that it may be justly styled, _A New System of
Cookery_. It is a singular and lamentable fact, the evil consequences of
which are wide-spread, that the preparation of food, although involving
both chemical and physical processes, has been less advanced by the
results of modern researches and discoveries in chemistry and physics,
than any other department of human industry. Iron mining, glass-making,
even the homely art of brick-making, and many of the operations of the
farm and the dairy, have been advantageously modified by the results of
the fruitful labors of modern scientific investigators. But the art of
cookery is at least a century behind in the march of scientific
progress. The mistress of the kitchen is still groping her way amid the
uncertainties of mediæval methods, and daily bemoaning the sad results
of the "rule of thumb." The chemistry of cookery is as little known to
the average housewife as were the results of modern chemistry to the old
alchemists; and the attempt to make wholesome, palatable, and
nourishing food by the methods commonly employed, is rarely more
successful than that of those misguided alchemists in transmuting lead
and copper into silver and gold.

The new cookery brings order from out the confusion of mixtures and
messes, often incongruence and incompatible, which surrounds the average
cook, by the elucidation of the principles which govern the operations
of the kitchen, with the same certainty with which the law of gravity
rules the planets.

Those who have made themselves familiar with Mrs. Kellogg's system of
cookery, invariably express themselves as trebly astonished: first, at
the simplicity of the methods employed; secondly, at the marvelous
results both as regards palatableness, wholesomeness, and
attractiveness; thirdly, that it had never occurred to them "to do this
way before."

This system does not consist simply of a rehash of what is found in
every cook book, but of new methods, which are the result of the
application of the scientific principles of chemistry and physics to the
preparation of food in such a manner as to make it the most nourishing,
the most digestible, and the most inviting to the eye and to the palate.

Those who have tested the results of Mrs. Kellogg's system of cookery at
the Sanitarium tables, or in their own homes through the instruction of
her pupils, have been most enthusiastic in their expressions of
satisfaction and commendation. Hundreds of original recipes which have
appeared in her department in _Good Health_, "Science in the Household",
have been copied into other journals, and are also quite largely
represented in the pages of several cook books which have appeared
within the last few years.

The great success which attended the cooking school in connection with
the Bay View Assembly (the Michigan Chautauqua), as well as the uniform
success which has met the efforts of many of the graduates of the
Sanitarium school of cookery who have undertaken to introduce the new
system through the means of cooking classes in various parts of the
United States, has created a demand for a fuller knowledge of the
system.

This volume is the outgrowth of the practical and experimental work, and
the popular demand above referred to. Its preparation has occupied the
entire leisure time of the author during the last five or six years. No
pains or expense has been spared to render the work authoritative on all
questions upon which it treats, and in presenting it to the public, the
publishers feel the utmost confidence that the work will meet the
highest expectations of those who have waited impatiently for its
appearance during the months which have elapsed since its preparation
was first announced. PUBLISHERS.



TABLE OF CONTENTS.


    FOODS
      Properties of food
      Food elements
      Uses of food elements
      Proper combinations of food
      Proper proportion of food elements
      Condiments
      Relation of condiments to intemperance
      Variety in food
      Table topics.


    THE DIGESTION OF FOODS
      The digestive organs
      The digestion of a mouthful of bread
      Salivary digestion
      Stomach digestion
      Intestinal digestion
      Other uses of the digestive fluids
      Absorption
      Liver digestion
      Time required for digestion
      Dr. Beaumont's table made from experiments on Alexis St. Martin
      Hygiene of digestion
      Hasty eating
      Drinking freely at meals
      Eating between meals
      Simplicity in diet
      Eating when tired
      Eating too much
      How much food is enough
      Excess of certain food elements
      Deficiency of certain food elements
      Food combinations
      Table topics.

    COOKERY
      Evils of bad cookery
      The principles of scientific cookery
      Fuels
      Making fires
      Care of fires
      Methods of cooking
      Roasting
      Broiling or grilling
      Baking
      The oven thermometer
      Boiling
      The boiling point of water
      How to raise the boiling point of water
      Action of hot and cold water upon foods
      Steaming
      Stewing
      Frying
      Evaporation
      Adding foods to boiling liquids
      Measuring
      Comparative table of weights and measures
      Mixing the material
      Stirring
      Beating
      Kneading
      Temperature
      Cooking utensils
      Porcelain ware
      Granite ware
      Galvanized iron ware
      Tests for lead
      Adulterated tin
      Table topics.

    THE HOUSEHOLD WORKSHOP
      Description of a convenient kitchen
      The kitchen furniture
      Cupboards
      A convenient kitchen table
      The kitchen sink
      Drainpipes
      Stoves and ranges
      Oil and gas stoves
      The "Aladdin Cooker"
      Kitchen utensils
      The tin closet
      The dish closet
      The pantry
      The storeroom
      The refrigerator
      The water supply
      Test for pure water
      Filters
      Cellars
      Kitchen conveniences
      The steam cooker
      The vegetable press-The lemon drill
      The handy waiter
      The wall cabinet
      The percolater holder
      Kneading table
      Dish-towel rack
      Kitchen brushes
      Vegetable brush
      Table topics.

    THE GRAINS, OR CEREALS, AND THEIR PREPARATION
      General properties of grains
      Cooking of grains
      The double boiler
      Table showing amount of liquid, and time required for cooking
        different grains
      Grains for breakfast-Grains an economical food
      Wheat
      Description of a grain of wheat
      Preparation and cooking
      _Recipes_:
        Pearl wheat
        Cracked wheat
        Rolled wheat
        Boiled wheat
        Wheat with raisins
        Wheat with fresh fruit
        Molded wheat
      Finer mill products of wheat
      _Recipes_:
        Farina
        Farina with fig sauce
        Farina with fresh fruit
        Molded farina
        Graham grits
        Graham mush
        Graham mush No. 2
        Graham mush No. 3
        Graham mush with dates
        Plum porridge
        Graham apple mush
        Granola mush
        Granola fruit mush
        Granola peach mush
        Bran jelly
      The oat, description of
      Oatmeal
      Brose
      Budrum
      Flummery
      Preparation and cooking of oats
      _Recipes_:
        Oatmeal mush
        Oatmeal fruit mush
        Oatmeal blancmange
        Oatmeal Blancmange No. 2
        Jellied oatmeal
        Mixed mush
        Rolled oats
        Oatmeal with apple
        Oatmeal porridge
      Barley, description of
      Gofio
      Scotch milled or pot barley
      Pearl barley
      Suggestions for cooking barley
      _Recipes_:
        Baked barley
        Pearl barley with raisins
        Pearl barley with lemon sauce
      Rice, description of
      Rice paddy
      Preparation and cooking of rice
      _Recipes_:
        Steamed rice
        Boiled rice
        Rice with fig sauce
        Orange rice
        Rice with raisins
        Rice with peaches
        Browned rice
      Rye, description of
      Rye meal
      Rye flour
      _Recipes_:
        Rolled rye
        Rye mush
      Maize, or Indian corn, description of
      Suggestions for cooking corn
      _Recipes_:
        Corn meal mush
        Corn meal mush with fruit
        Corn meal cubes
        Browned mush
        Samp
        Cerealine flakes
        Hulled corn
        Coarse hominy
        Fine hominy or grits
        Popped corn
      Macaroni, description of
      Semolina
      Spaghetti
      Vermicelli
      To select macaroni
      To prepare and cook macaroni
      _Recipes_:
        Homemade macaroni
        Boiled macaroni
        Macaroni with cream sauce
        Macaroni with tomato sauce
        Macaroni baked with granola
        Eggs and macaroni
      Table topics.

    BREADSTUFFS AND BREAD-MAKING
      The origin of bread
      Chestnut bread
      Peanut bread
      Breadstuffs
      Qualities necessary for good bread
      Superiority of bread over meat
      Graham flour
      Wheat meal
      Whole-wheat or entire wheat flour
      How to select flour
      To keep flour
      Deleterious adulterations of flour
      Tests for adulterated flour
      Chemistry of bread-making
      Bread made light by fermentation
      The process of fermentation
      Fermentative agents
      Yeast
      Homemade yeasts
      How to keep yeast
      Bitter yeast
      Tests for yeast
      Starting the bread
      Proportion of materials needed
      Utensils
      When to set the sponge
      Temperature for bread-making
      How to set the sponge
      Lightness of the bread
      Kneading the dough
      How to manipulate the dough in kneading
      How many times shall bread be kneaded
      Dryness of the surface
      Size of loaves
      Proper temperature of the oven
      How to test the heat of an oven
      Care of bread after baking
      Best method of keeping bread
      Test of good fermented bread
      Whole-wheat and Graham breads
      Toast
      Steamed bread
      Liquid yeast
      _Recipes_:
        Raw potato yeast
        Raw potato yeast No. 2
        Hop yeast
        Boiled potato yeast
        Boiled potato yeast No. 2
      Fermented breads
      _Recipes_:
        Milk bread with white flour
        Vienna bread
        Water bread
        Fruit roll
        Fruit loaf
        Potato bread
        Pulled bread
        Whole-wheat bread
        Whole-wheat bread No. 2
        Miss B's one-rising bread
        Potato bread with whole-wheat flour
        Rye bread
        Graham bread
        Graham bread No. 2
        Graham bread No. 3
        Raised biscuit
        Rolls
        Imperial rolls
        French rolls
        Crescents
        Parker House rolls
        Braids
        Brown bread
        Date bread
        Fruit loaf with Graham and whole-wheat flour
        Raised corn bread
        Corn cake
        Oatmeal bread
        Milk yeast bread
        Graham salt rising bread
      Unfermented breads
      Passover cakes
      Tortillas
      Evils of chemical bread raising
      Rochelle salts in baking powders
      General directions
      Gem irons
      Perforated sheet-iron pan for rolls
      Unfermented batter breads
      Unfermented dough breads
      _Recipes_:
        Whole-wheat puffs
        Whole-wheat puffs No. 2
        Whole-wheat puffs No. 3
        Graham puffs
        Graham puffs No. 2
        Currant puffs
        Graham gems
        Crusts
        Rye puffs
        Rye puffs No. 2
        Rye gems
        Blueberry gems
        Hominy gems
        Sally Lunn gems
        Corn puffs
        Corn puffs No. 2
        Corn puffs No 3
        Corn puffs No. 4
        Corn dodgers
        Corn dodgers No. 2
        Cream corn cakes
        Hoe cakes
        Oatmeal gems
        Snow gems
        Pop overs
        Granola gems
        Bean gems
        Breakfast rolls
        Sticks
        Cream Graham rolls
        Corn mush rolls
        Fruit rolls
        Cream mush rolls
        Beaten biscuit
        Cream crisps
        Cream crisps No. 2
        Graham crisps
        Oatmeal crisps
        Graham crackers
        Fruit crackers
      Table topics.

    FRUITS:
      Chemical constituents of
      Value as nutrients
      Structure of fruits
      The jelly-producing principle
      Digestibility of fruits
      Unripe fruits
      Table of fruit analysis
      Ripe fruit and digestive disorders
      Over-ripe and decayed fruits
      Dangerous bacteria on unwashed fruit
      Free use of fruit lessens desire for alcoholic stimulants
      Beneficial use of fruits in disease
      Apples
      The pear
      The quince
      The peach
      The plum
      The prune
      The apricot
      The cherry
      The olive; its cultivation and preservation
      The date, description and uses of
      The orange
      The lemon
      The sweet lemon or bergamot
      The citron
      The lime
      The grape-fruit
      The pomegranate, its antiquity
      The grape
      Zante currants
      The gooseberry
      The currant
      The whortleberry
      The blueberry
      The cranberry
      The strawberry
      The raspberry
      The blackberry
      The mulberry
      The melon
      The fig, its antiquity and cultivation
      The banana
      Banana meal
      The pineapple
      Fresh fruit for the table
      Selection of fruit for the table
      Directions for serving fruits
      Apples
      Bananas
      Cherries
      Currants
      Goosberries
      Grapes
      Melons
      Oranges
      Peaches and pears
      Peaches and cream
      Pineapples
      Plums
      Pressed Figs
      Raspberries, Blackberries, Dewberries, Blueberries and Whortlberries
      Frosted fruit
      Keeping fresh fruit
      Directions for packing, handling, and keeping fruits
      _Recipes_:
        To keep grapes
        To keep lemons and oranges
        To keep cranberries
      Cooked fruit
      General suggestions for cooking fruit
      _Recipes_:
        Baked apples
        Citron apples
        Lemon apples
        Baked pears
        Baked quince
        Pippins and quince
        Baked apple sauce
        Baked apple sauce No. 2
        Apples stewed whole
        Steamed apples
        Compote of apples
        Apple compote No. 2
        Stewed pears
        Stewed apple sauce
        Boiled apples with syrup
        Stewed apples
        Stewed crab apples
        Sweet apple sauce with condensed apple juice
        Apples with raisins
        Apples with apricots
        Peaches, pears, cherries, berries, and other small fruits
        Baked apples
        Baked pears
        Baked peaches
        Cranberries
        Cranberries with raisins
        Cranberries with sweet apples
        Oranges and apples
        Stewed raisins
        Dried apples
        Dried apples with other dried fruit
        Dried apricots and peaches
        Evaporated peach sauce
        Dried pears
        Small fruits
        Prunes
        Prune marmalade
      Canning fruit
      Selection of cans
      How to test and sterilize cans
      Selection of fruit
      Directions for preparing fruit
      Cooking fruit for canning
      Storing of canned fruit
      Mold on canned fruit
      Opening of canned fruit
      Rules for selecting canned fruit
      _Recipes_:
      To can strawberries
      To can raspberries, blackberries and other small fruit
      To can gooseberries
      To can peaches
      To can pears
      To can plums
      To can cherries
      To can mixed fruit
      Quinces and apples
      Plums with sweet apples
      To can grapes
      To can crab apples
      To can apples
      To can pineapples
      Fruit jellies
      _Recipes_:
      Apple jelly
      Apple jelly without sugar
      Berry and currant jellies
      Cherry jelly
      Crab apple jelly
      Cranberry jelly
      Grape jelly
      Orange jelly
      Peach Jelly
      Quince jelly
      Plum jelly
      Fruit in jelly
      Fruit juices, value of
      How to prepare fruit juices
      _Recipes:_
        Grape juice or unfermented wine
        Grape juice No. 2
        Another method
        Fruit syrup
        Currant syrup
        Orange syrup
        Lemon syrup
        Lemon syrup No 2
        Blackberry syrup
        Fruit ices
      Nuts
      Composition and nutritive value of
      The almond
      Almond bread
      The Brazil nut
      The cocoanut, its uses in tropical countries
      The chestnut
      Chestnut flour
      The acorn
      The hazel nut
      The filbert
      The cobnut
      The walnut
      The butternut
      The hickory nut
      The pecan
      The peanut or ground nut
      _Recipes:_
        To blanch almonds
        Boiled chestnuts
        Mashed chestnuts
        Baked chestnuts
        To keep nuts fresh
      Table topics.

    THE LEGUMES
      Composition and nutritive value
      Legumes as a substitute for animal food
      Legumin, or vegetable casein
      Chinese cheese
      Legumes the "pulse" of Scripture
      Diet of the pyramid builders
      Digestibility of legumes
      A fourteenth century recipe
      The green legumes
      Suggestions for cooking
      Slow cooking preferable
      Soaking the dry seeds
      Effects of hard water upon the legumes
      Temperature of water for cooking
      Amount of water required
      Addition of salt to legumes
      Peas, description of
      Buying votes with peas
      A commemorative dinner
      Peas bainocks
      Peas sausages
      Peas pudding
      Time required for cooking
      _Recipes:_
        Stewed split peas
        Peas puree
        Mashed peas
        Peas cakes
        Dried green peas
      Beans, description of
      Mention of beans in Scripture
      Beans in mythology
      Time required for digestion
      Method of cooking
      Experiment of an English cook
      Parboiling beans
      Time required to cook
      _Recipes:_
        Baked beans
        Boiled beans
        Beans boiled in a bag
        Scalloped beans
        Stewed beans
        Mashed beans
        Stewed Lima beans
        Succotash
        Pulp succotash
      Lentils, description of
      Use of lentils by the ancients
      Lentil meal
      Preparation for cooking
      _Recipes:_
        Lentil puree
        Lentils mashed with beans
        Lentil gravy with rice
      Table topics.

    VEGETABLES
      Composition and nutritive value of vegetables
      Exclusive diet of vegetables not desirable
      To select vegetables
      Poison in potato sprouts
      Stale vegetables a cause of illness
      Keeping vegetables
      To freshen withered vegetables
      Storing winter vegetables
      Preparation and cooking
      To clean vegetables for cooking
      Methods of cooking
      Time required for cooking various vegetables
      Irish potato, description of
      The chemistry of cooking
      Digestibility of the potato
      New potatoes
      Preparation and cooking
      _Recipes_:
        Potatoes boiled in "jackets"
        Boiled potatoes without skins
        Steamed potatoes
        Roasted potatoes
        Baked potatoes
        Stuffed potatoes
        Stuffed potatoes No. 2
        Mashed potatoes
        New potatoes
        Cracked potatoes
        Creamed potatoes
        Scalloped potatoes
        Stewed potatoes
        Potatoes stewed with celery
        Potato snow balls
        Potato cakes
        Potato cakes with egg
        Potato puffs
        Browned potatoes
        Ornamental potatoes
        Broiled potatoes
        Warmed-over potatoes
        Vegetable hash
      The sweet potato, description of
      Preparation and cooking
      _Recipes_:
        Baked sweet potatoes
        Baked sweet potatoes No 2
        Boiled sweet potatoes
        Steamed sweet potatoes
        Browned sweet potatoes
        Mashed sweet potatoes
        Potato hash
        Roasted sweet potatoes
      Turnips, description of
      Preparation and cooking
      _Recipes_:
        Boiled turnips
        Baked turnips
        Creamed turnips
        Chopped turnips
        Mashed turnips
        Scalloped turnips
        Steamed turnips
        Stewed turnips
        Turnips in juice
        Turnips with cream sauce
      Parsnips, description of
      Preparation and cooking
      _Recipes_:
        Baked parsnips
        Baked parsnips No. 2
        Boiled parsnips
        Browned parsnips
        Creamed parsnips
        Mashed parsnips
        Parsnips with cream sauce
        Parsnips with egg sauce
        Parsnips with potatoes
        Stewed parsnips
        Stewed parsnips with celery
      Carrots, description of
      Preparation and cooking
      _Recipes_:
        Boiled carrots
        Carrots with egg sauce
        Stewed carrots
      Beets, description of
      Preparation and cooking
      _Recipes_:
        Baked beets
        Baked beets No. 2
        Beets and potatoes
        Beet hash
        Beet greens
        Beet salad or chopped beets
        Beet salad No 2
        Boiled beets
        Stewed beets
      Cabbage, description of
      Preparation and cooking
      _Recipes_:
        Baked cabbage
        Boiled cabbage
        Cabbage and tomatoes
        Cabbage and celery
        Cabbage hash
        Chopped cabbage or cabbage salad
        Mashed cabbage
        Stewed cabbage
      Cauliflower and Broccoli, description of
      Preparation and cooking
      _Recipes_:
        Boiled cauliflower
        Browned cauliflower
        Cauliflower with egg sauce
        With tomato sauce
        Stewed cauliflower
        Scalloped cauliflower
      Spinach, description of
      Preparation and cooking
      Celery
      To keep celery fresh
      _Recipes_:
        Celery salad
        Stewed celery
        Stewed celery No. 2
        Celery with tomato sauce
        Celery and potato hash
      Asparagus, description of
      Preparation and cooking
      _Recipes_:
        Asparagus and peas
        Asparagus Points
        Asparagus on toast
        Asparagus with cream sauce
        Asparagus with egg sauce
        Stewed asparagus
      Sea-kale, description of
      Lettuce and radish, description of
     _Recipes:_
        Lettuce
        Radishes
    Cymling
    Description
    Preparation and cooking
    _Recipes:_
      Mashed squash
      Squash with egg sauce
      Stewed squash
      Winter squash
      Preparation and cooking
      Time required for cooking
      _Recipes_:
        Baked squash
        Steamed squash
      The pumpkin, description of
      _Recipes_:
        Baked pumpkin
        Stewed pumpkin
        Dried pumpkin
      Tomato, description of
      Preparation and cooking
      _Recipes_:
        Baked tomatoes
        Baked tomatoes No. 2
        Scalloped tomatoes
        Stewed corn and tomatoes
        Tomato gravy
        Tomato salad
        Tomato salad No. 2
        Broiled tomatoes
        Tomato pudding
        Stewed tomatoes
        Tomato with okra
      Egg plant, description of
      Nutritive value
      _Recipes_:
        Scalloped egg plant
        Baked egg plant
      Cucumber, description of
      Digestibility
      Preparation and cooking
      Salsify or vegetable oyster, description of
      Preparation and cooking
      _Recipes_:
        Scalloped vegetable oysters
        Stewed vegetable oysters
      Green corn, peas, and beans, description of
      General suggestions for selecting and cooking
      _Recipes for corn_:
        Baked corn
        Baked corn No. 2
        Boiled green corn
        Stewed corn pulp
        Corn cakes
        Corn pudding
        Roasted green corn
        Stewed green corn
        Summer succotash
        Dried corn
      _Recipe for peas_:
        Stewed peas
      _Recipes for beans_:
        Lima beans
        Shelled beans
        String beans
      Canning vegetables
      _Recipes_:
        Canned corn
        Canned corn and tomatoes
        Canned peas
        Canned tomatoes
        Canned tomatoes No. 2
        String beans
        Canned pumpkin and squash
      Table topics.

    SOUPS
      Value of soup as an article of diet
      Superiority of soups made from grain and legumes
      Economical value of such soups
      Digestibility of soups
      Cooking of material for soups
      Use of a colander in preparing soups
      Quantity of salt required
      Flavoring soups
      Seasoning of soup
      Chinese soup strainer
      Whole grains, macaroni, shredded vegetables, etc., for soups
      Milk in the preparation of soups
      Consistency of soups
      Preparation of soups from left-over fragments
      Croutons
      _Recipes_:
        Asparagus soup
        Baked bean soup
        Bean and corn soup
        Bean and hominy soup
        Bean and potato soup
        Bean and tomato soup
        Black bean soup
        Black bean soup No. 2
        Bran stock
        Brown soup
        Canned green pea soup
        Canned corn soup
        Carrot soup
        Celery soup
        Chestnut soup
        Combination soup
        Combination soup No. 2
        Another
        Another
        Cream pea soup
        Cream barley soup
        Green corn soup
        Green pea soup
        Green bean soup
        Kornlet soup
        Kornlet and tomato soup
        Lentil soup
        Lentil and parsnip soup
        Lima bean soup
        Macaroni soup
        Oatmeal soup
        Parsnip soup
        Parsnip soup No. 2
        Pea and tomato soup
        Plain rice soup
        Potato and rice soup
        Potato soup
        Potato and vermicelli soup
        Sago and potato soup
        Scotch broth
        Split pea soup
        Sweet potato soup
        Swiss potato soup
        Swiss lentil soup
        Tomato and macaroni soup
        Tomato cream soup
        Tomato and okra soup
        Tomato soup with vermicelli
        Vegetable oyster soup
        Vegetable soup
        Vegetable soup No. 2
        Vegetable soup No. 3
        Vegetable soup No. 4
        Velvet Soup
        Vermicelli soup No. 2
        White celery soup
      Table topics.

    BREAKFAST DISHES
      Importance of a good breakfast
      Requirements for a good breakfast
      Pernicious custom of using fried and indigestible foods for breakfast
      Use of salted foods an auxiliary to the drink habit
      The ideal breakfast
      Use of fruit for breakfast
      Grains for breakfast
      An appetizing dish
      Preparation of zwieback
      Preparation of toast
      _Recipes_:
        Apple toast
        Apricot toast
        Asparagus toast
        Banana toast
        Berry toast
        Berry toast No. 2
        Celery toast
        Cream toast
        Cream toast with poached egg
        Cherry toast
        Gravy toast
        Dry toast with hot cream
        Grape toast
        Lentil toast
        Prune toast
        Peach toast
        Snowflake toast
        Tomato toast
        Vegetable oyster toast
      _Miscellaneous breakfast dishes:_
        Brewis
        Blackberry mush
        Dry granola
        Frumenty
        Macaroni with raisins
        Macaroni with kornlet
        Peach mush
        Rice with lemon
      Table topics.

    DESSERTS

      Appropriate and healthful desserts
      Objections to the use of desserts
      The simplest dessert
      General suggestions
      Importance of good material
      Preparation of dried fruit for dessert
      Molded desserts
      _Suggestions for flavoring:_
        To prepare almond paste
        Cocoanut flavor
        Orange and lemon flavor
      To color sugar
      Fruit desserts
      _Recipes:_
        Apple dessert
        Apple meringue dessert. Apple rose cream
        Apple snow
        Baked apples with cream
        Baked sweet apple dessert
        Bananas in syrup
        Baked bananas
        Fresh fruit compote
        Grape apples
        Peach cream
        Prune dessert
      Desserts made of fruit with grains, bread, etc.
      _Recipes:_
        Apple sandwich
        Apple sandwich No. 2
        Baked apple pudding
        Barley fruit pudding
        Barley fig pudding
        Blackberry cornstarch pudding
        Cocoanut and cornstarch blancmange
        Cornstarch blancmange
        cornstarch with raisins
        Cornstarch with apples
        Cornstarch fruit mold
        Cornstarch fruit mold No. 2
        Cracked wheat pudding
        Cracked wheat pudding No. 2
        Farina blancmange
        Farina fruit mold
        Fruit pudding
        Jam pudding
        Plain fruit pudding or Brown Betty
        Prune pudding
        Rice meringue
        Rice snowball
        Rice fruit dessert
        Rice dumpling
        Rice cream pudding
        Rice pudding with raisins
        Red rice mold
        Rice and fruit dessert
        Rice and tapioca pudding
        Rice flour mold
        Rice and stewed apple dessert
        Rice and strawberry dessert
        Stewed fruit pudding
        Strawberry minute pudding
        Sweet apple pudding
        Whortleberry pudding
      Desserts with tapioca, sago, manioca, and sea moss
      _Recipes_:
        Apple tapioca
        Apple tapioca No. 2
        Banana dessert
        Blackberry tapioca
        Cherry pudding
        Fruit tapioca
        Molded tapioca with fruit
        Pineapple tapioca
        Prune and tapioca pudding
        Tapioca and fig pudding
        Peach tapioca
        Tapioca jelly
        Apple sago pudding
        Red sago mold
        Sago fruit pudding
        Sago pudding
        Manioca with fruit
        Raspberry manioca mold
        Sea moss blancmange
      Desserts made with gelatin
      Gelatine an excellent culture medium
      Dangers in the use of gelatine
      Quantity to be used
      _Recipes_:
        Apples in jelly
        Apple shape
        Banana dessert
        Clear dessert
        Fruit foam dessert
        Fruit shape
        Gelatine custard
        Layer-pudding
        Lemon jelly
        Jelly with fruit
        Orange dessert; Oranges in jelly
        Orange jelly
        Snow pudding
      Desserts with crusts
      _Recipes_:
        Apple tart
        Gooseberry tart
        Cherry tart
        Strawberry and other fruit shortcakes
        Banana shortcake
        Lemon shortcake
        Berry shortcake with prepared cream
        Cream
        Raised pie
        Baked apple loaf
      Custard puddings
      Importance of slow cooking
      Best utensils for cooking
      Custard desserts in cups
      To stir beaten eggs into heated milk
      To flavor custards and custard puddings
      _Recipes_:
        Apple custard
        Apple custard No. 2
        Apple custard No. 3
        Apple cornstarch custard
        Apple and bread custard
        Almond cornstarch pudding
        Almond cream
        Apple charlotte
        Banana custard
        Boiled custard
        Boiled custard bread pudding
        Bread and fruit custard
        Bread custard pudding
        Bread and fig pudding
        Bread and apricot pudding
        Caramel custard
        Carrot pudding
        Cocoanut cornstarch pudding
        Cocoanut custard
        Cocoanut rice custard
        Corn meal pudding
        Corn meal pudding No. 2
        Corn meal and fig pudding
        Cornstarch meringue
        Cracked wheat pudding
        Cup custard
        Farina custard
        Farina pudding
        Floating island
        Fruit custard
        Graham grits pudding
        Ground rice pudding
        Lemon pudding
        Lemon cornstarch pudding
        Lemon cornstarch pudding No. 2
        Macaroni pudding
        Molded rice or snowballs
        Orange float
        Orange custard
        Orange pudding
        Peach meringue
        Picnic pudding
        Plain cornstarch pudding
        Plain custard
        Prune pudding
        Prune whip
        Rice apple custard pudding
        Rice custard pudding
        Rice snow
        Rice snow with jelly
        Rice with eggs
        Snow pudding
        Steamed custard
        Strawberry charlotte
        Pop corn pudding
        Sago custard pudding
        Sago and fruit custard pudding
        Snowball custard
        Tapioca custard
        Tapioca pudding
        Vermicelli pudding
        White custard
        White custard No. 2
      Steamed pudding
      Precautions to be observed in steaming puddings
      _Recipes:_
        Batter pudding
        Bread and fruit custard
        Date pudding
        Rice balls
        Steamed bread custard
        Steamed fig pudding
      Pastry and cake
      Deleterious effects from the use of
      Reasons for indigestibility
      General directions for making pies
      _Recipes_
        Paste for pies
        Corn meal crust
        Granola crust
        Paste for tart shells
        Cream filling
        Grape tart
        Lemon filling
        Tapioca filling
        Apple custard pie
        Banana pie
        Bread pie
        Carrot pie
        Cocoanut pie
        Cocoanut pie No. 2
        Cream pie
        Cranberry pie
        Dried apple pie
        Dried apple pie with raisins
        Dried apricot pie
        Farina pie
        Fruit pie
        Grape jelly pie
        Jelly custard pie
        Lemon pie
        Lemon meringue custard
        One crust peach pie
        Orange pie
        Peach custard pie
        Prune pie
        Pumpkin pie
        Pumpkin pie No. 2
        Pumpkin pie without eggs
        Simple custard pie
        Squash pie
        Squash pie without eggs
        Sweet apple custard pie
        Sweet potato pie
        Cake
        General suggestions for preparation of
        Cake made light with yeast
        Cake made light with air
      _Recipes:_
        Apple cake
        Cocoanut custard cake
        Cream cake
        Delicate cup cake
        Fig layer cake
        Fruit jelly cake
        Gold and silver cake
        Icing for cakes
        Orange cake
        Fruit cake
        Loaf cake
        Pineapple cake
        Plain buns
        Sponge cake
        Sugar crisps
        Variety cake
      Table topics.

    GRAVIES AND SAUCES
      Importance of proper preparation
      Accuracy of measurement
      Proportion of material necessary
      The double boiler for cooking gravies
      Flavoring of gravies for vegetables
      Gravies and sauces for vegetables
      _Recipes:_
        Brown sauce
        Cream and white sauce
        Celery sauce
        Egg sauce
        Pease gravy
        Tomato gravy
        Tomato cream gravy
      Sauces for desserts and puddings
      _Recipes:_
        Almond sauce
        Caramel sauce
        Cocoanut sauce
        Cream sauce
        Cranberry pudding sauce
        Custard sauce
        Egg sauce
        Egg sauce No. 2
        Foamy sauce
        Fruit cream
        Fruit sauce
        Fruit sauce No. 2
        Lemon pudding sauce
        Mock cream
        Molasses sauce
        Orange sauce
        Peach sauce
        Plain pudding sauce
        Red Sauce
        Rose cream Sago sauce
        Whipped cream sauce
      Table topics.

    BEVERAGES
      Large quantities of fluid prejudicial to digestion
      Wholesome beverages
      The cup that cheers but not inebriates
      Harmful substances contained in tea
      Theine
      Tannin
      Use of tea a cause of sleeplessness and nervous disorders
      Tea a stimulant
      Tea not a food
      Coffee, cocoa, and chocolate
      Caffein
      Adulteration of tea and coffee
      Substitutes for tea and coffee
      _Recipes:_
        Beet coffee
        Caramel coffee
        Caramel coffee No. 2
        Caramel coffee No. 3
        Caramel coffee No. 4
        Mrs. T's caramel coffee
        Parched grain coffee
        Wheat, oats, and barley coffee
      _Recipes for cold beverages:_
        Blackberry beverage
        Fruit beverage
        Fruit beverage No. 2
        Fruit cordial
        Grape beverage
        Lemonade
        Mixed lemonade
        Oatmeal drink
        Orangeade
        Pineapple beverage
        Pineapple lemonade
        Pink lemonade
        Sherbet
        Tisane
      Table topics.

    MILK, CREAM, AND BUTTER
      Milk, chemical composition of
      Proportion of food elements
      Microscopic examination of milk
      Casein
      Casein coagulated by the introduction of acid
      Spontaneous coagulation or souring of milk
      Adulteration of milk
      Quality of milk influenced by the food of the animal
      Diseased milk
      Kinds of milk to be avoided
      Distribution of germs by milk
      Proper utensils for keeping milk
      Where to keep milk
      Dr. Dougall's experiments on the absorbent properties of milk
      Washing of milk dishes
      Treatment of milk for cream rising
      Temperature at which cream rises best
      Importance of sterilizing milk
      To sterilize milk for immediate use
      To sterilize milk to keep
      Condensed milk
      Cream, composition of
      Changes produced by churning
      Skimmed milk, composition of
      Buttermilk, composition of
      Digestibility of cream
      Sterilized cream
      Care of milk for producing cream
      Homemade creamery
      Butter, the composition of
      Rancid butter
      Tests of good butter
      Flavor and color of butter
      Artificial butter
      Test for oleomargarine
      Butter in ancient times
      Butter making
      Best conditions for the rising of cream
      Upon what the keeping qualities of butter depend
      Cheese
      Tyrotoxicon
      _Recipes_:
        Hot milk
        Devonshire or clotted cream
        Cottage cheese
        Cottage cheese from buttermilk
        Cottage cheese from sour milk
        French butter
        Shaken milk
        Emulsified butter
      Table topics.

    EGGS
      Eggs a concentrated food
      Composition of the egg
      How to choose eggs
      Quality of eggs varied by the food of the fowl
      Stale eggs
      Test for eggs
      How to keep eggs
      To beat eggs
      Albumen susceptible to temperature
      Left-over eggs
      _Recipes_:
        Eggs in shell
        Eggs in sunshine
        Eggs poached in tomatoes
        Eggs in cream
        Poached or dropped eggs
        Poached eggs with cream sauce
        Quickly prepared eggs
        Scrambled eggs
        Steamed eggs
        Whirled eggs
      Omelets
      _Recipes_:
        Plain omelets
        Foam omelets
        Fancy omelets
        soft omelets
      Table topics.

    MEATS
      Character of meat
      Nutritive value
      Excrementitious elements
      Flesh food a stimulant
      Diseased meats
      Jewish customs in regard to meat
      Trichina
      Tapeworm and other parasites
      Meat unnecessary for health
      The excessive use of meat tending to develop the animal propensities
      Objections to its use
      Pork
      Calves' brains and other viscera
      Meat pies
      Scallops
      Pates
      Comparative nutritious value
      Variation and flavor
      Composition and digestibility
      Selection of meats
      Preservation of meats
      Jerked beef
      Pemmican
      Preparation and cooking of meat
      Frozen beef
      Best methods of cooking
      Boiling
      Stewing
      Steaming
      Roasting
      Broiling
      Beef, economy and adaptability in selection of
      _Recipes_:
        Broiled beef
        Cold meat stew
        Pan-broiled steak
        Pan-broiled steak No. 2
        Roast beef
        Smothered beef
        Vegetables with stewed beef
        Stewed beef
      Mutton
      Cause of Strong flavor of
      _Recipes_:
        Boiled leg of mutton
        Broiled chops
        Pot roast lamb
        Roast mutton
        Stewed mutton
        Stewed mutton chop
        Stewed mutton chop No. 2
        Veal and lamb
      Poultry and game
      To dress poultry and birds
      To truss a fowl or bird
      To stuff a fowl or bird
      _Recipes_:
        Birds baked in sweet potatoes
        Boiled fowl
        Broiled birds
        Broiled fowl
        Corn and chicken
        Pigeons
        quails
        and partridges
        Roast chicken
        Roast turkey
        Smothered chicken
        Steamed chicken
        Stewed chicken
      Fish, two classes of
      Difference in nutritive value
      Flavor and wholesomeness
      Poison fish
      Parasites in fish
      Fish as a brain food
      Salted fish
      Shellfish (Oysters, Clams, Lobsters, Crabs)
      Not possessed of high nutritive value
      Natural scavengers
      Poisonous mussels
      How to select and prepare fish
      Frozen fish
      Methods of cooking
      _Recipes_:
        Baked fish
        Broiled fish
      Meat soup
      Preparation of stock
      Selection of material for stock
      Quantity of materials needed
      Uses of scraps
      Extracting the juice
      Temperature of the water to be used
      Correct proportion of water
      Time required for cooking
      Straining the stock
      To remove the fat
      Simple Stock or broth
      Compound stock or double broth
      To clarify soup stock
      _Recipes_:
        Asparagus soup
        Barley
        rice
        sago
        or tapioca soup
        Caramel for coloring soup brown
        Julienne soup
        Tomato soup
        White soup
        Vermicelli or macaroni soup
        Puree with chicken
        Tapioca cream soup
      Table Topics.

    FOOD FOR THE SICK
      Need of care in the preparation of food for the sick
      What constitutes proper food for the sick
      Knowledge of dietetics an important factor in the education of
        every woman
      No special dishes for all cases
      Hot buttered toast and rich jellies objectionable
      The simplest food the best
      Scrupulous neatness in serving important
      To coax a capricious appetite
      A "purple" dinner
      A "yellow" dinner
      To facilitate the serving of hot foods
      Cooking utensils
      Gruel
      Long-continued cooking needed
      Use of the double boiler in the cooking of gruels
      Gruel strainer
      _Recipes_:
        Arrowroot gruel
        Barley gruel
        Egg gruel
        Egg gruel No. 2
        Farina gruel
        Flour gruel
        Gluten gruel
        Gluten gruel No. 2
        Gluten cream
        Gluten meal gruel
        Graham gruel
        Graham grits gruel
        Gruel of prepared flour
        Indian meal gruel
        Lemon oatmeal gruel
        Milk oatmeal gruel
        Milk porridge
        Oatmeal gruel
        Oatmeal gruel No. 2
        Oatmeal gruel No. 3
        Peptonized' gluten gruel
        Raisin gruel
        Rice water
      Preparations of milk
      Milk diet
      Advantages of
      Quantity of milk needed
      Digestibility of milk
      _Recipes_:
        Albumenized milk
        Hot milk
        Junket, or curded milk
        Koumiss
        Milk and lime water
        Peptonized milk for infants
      Beef tea, broths, etc.
      Nutritive value
      Testimony of Dr. Austin Flint
      _Recipes_:
        Beef extract
        Beef juice
        Beef tea
        Beef tea and eggs
        Beef broth and oatmeal
        Bottled beef tea
        Chicken broth
        Mutton broth
        Vegetable broth
        Vegetable broth No. 2
        Mixed vegetable broth
      _Recipes for Panada_:
        Broth panada
        Chicken panada
        Egg panada
        Milk panada
        Raisin panada
      Grains for the sick
      _Recipes_:
        Gluten mush
        Tomato gluten
        Tomato gluten No. 2
      Meats for the sick
      Importance of simple preparation
      _Recipes_:
        Broiled steak
        Chicken
        Chicken jelly
        Minced chicken
        Mutton chop
        Minced steak
        Scraped steak
      Eggs for the sick
      _Recipes_:
        Floated egg
        Gluten meal custard
        Gluten custard
        Steamed eggs
        Soft custard
        Raw egg
        White of egg
        White of egg and milk
      Refreshing drinks and delicacies for the sick
      Nature's delicacies
      How to serve
      Fruit juices
      _Recipes_:
        Acorn coffee
        Almond milk
        Apple beverage
        Apple beverage No. 2
        Apple toast water
        Baked milk
        Barley lemonade
        Barley and fruit drinks
        Barley milk
        Cranberry drink
        Currantade
        Crust coffee
        Egg cream
        Egg cream No. 2
        Egg cream No. 3
        Egg lemonade
        Flaxseed coffee
        Gum Arabic water
        Hot water
        Hot lemonade
        Irish moss lemonade
        Orangeade
        Plain lemonade
        Slippery elm tea
        Toast water
        Tamarind water
      Bread
      _Recipes_;
        Diabetic biscuit
        Diabetic biscuit No. 2
        Gluten meal gems
      Jellies and other desserts for the side
      _Recipes_:
        Arrowroot jelly
        Arrowroot blancmange
        Currant jelly
        Iceland moss jelly
        Iceland moss blancmange
        Orange whey
        White custard
      Table topics.

    FOOD FOR THE AGED AND THE VERY YOUNG
      Requisites of food for the aged
      Stimulating diet not necessary
      Flesh food unsuitable
      Bill of fare
      Quantity of food for the aged
      Heavy meals a tax upon digestion
      Cornaro's testimony
      Diet for the young
      Causes of mortality among young children
      Best artificial food
      Use of sterilized milk.
      Difference between cows' milk and human milk
      Common method of preparing cows' milk
      Artificial human milk
      Artificial human milk No. 2
      Artificial human milk No. 3
      Peptonized milk
      Mucilaginous food excellent in gastro-enteritis
      Preparation of food for infants
      Time required for digestion of artificial food
      Quantity of food for infants
      Rules for finding the amount of food needed
      Table for the feeding of infants
      Interval between feeding
      Intervals for feeding at different ages
      Manner of feeding artificial foods
      Danger from unclean utensils
      Diet of older children
      An abundance of nitrogenous material important
      Flesh food unnecessary
      Experiments of Dr. Camman
      Testimony of Dr. Clouston
      Candy and similar sweets
      Eating between meals
      Education of the appetite
      Inherited appetites and tendencies
      Table topics.

    FRAGMENTS AND LEFT-OVER FOODS
      Preserving and utilizing the left-over fragments
      Precautions to be observed
      Uses of stale bread
      To insure perfect preservation of fragments
      Preparation of zwieback and croutons
      Left-over grains
      Left-over vegetables
      Left-over meats
      Left-over milk
      Table topics.

    THE ART OF DINING
      Pleasant accessories essential
      The dining room
      Neatness an essential
      Care of the dining room
      Furnishings of the dining room
      Table talk
      A pleasant custom
      Table manners
      Suggestions for table etiquette
      The table
      Its appearance and appointments
      The table an educator in the household
      A well ordered table an incentive to good manners
      Ostentation not necessary
      Setting the table
      The sub-cover
      Napkins
      The center piece
      Arrangement of dishes
      "Dishing up"
      Setting the table over night
      Warming the dishes
      The service of meals
      A capital idea
      Fruit as the first course at breakfast
      To keep the food hot
      A employed
      General suggestions for waiters
      Suggestions concerning dinner parties
      Proper form of invitation
      Arrangement and adornment of table
      A pleasing custom
      The _menu_ card
      Service for a company dinner
      Etiquette of dinner parties
      Table topics.

    AFTER MEALTIME
      Clearing the table
      Washing the dishes
      _papier-maché_ tubs
      Ammonia, uses of
      Clean dishes not evolved from dirty dishwater
      Washing all dishes of one kind together
      Washing milk dishes
      Uses of the dish mop
      Cleaning of grain boilers and mush kettles
      Washing of tin dishes
      To clean iron ware
      To wash wooden ware
      Care of steel knives and forks
      Draining the dishes
      Dishcloths and towels
      To make a dish mop
      The care of glass and silver
      To keep table cutlery from rusting
      To wash trays and Japanned ware
      Care of the table linen
      To remove stains
      To dry table linen
      To iron table linen
      Washing colored table linen
      The garbage
      Table topics.

    A YEAR'S BREAKFASTS AND DINNERS
      A perplexing problem
      Requisites for a well arranged _menu_
      Suggestions for preparing bills of fare
      Table of food analyses
      Fifty-two weeks' breakfasts and dinners
      Average cost
      Analysis of various bills of fare
      Table topics.

    A BATCH OF DINNERS
      Holiday dinners
      Holiday feasting
      Holiday dinners opposed to temperance
      Thanksgiving _menus_
      Holiday _menus_
      Picnic dinners
      The lunch basket, provision for
      Fruit sandwiches
      Egg sandwiches
      Picnic biscuit
      Fig wafers
      Suitable beverages
      School lunches
      Deficiency of food material in the ordinary school lunch
      Why the after dinner session of school drags wearily
      Simple lunches desirable
      Suggestions for putting up the lunch
      Creamy rice
      Neatness and daintiness essential
      The lunch basket
      Sabbath dinners
      A needed reform
      Feasting on the Sabbath, deleterious results of
      Simple meals for the Sabbath
      A Sabbath bill of fare
      Table topics.



    LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

    THE ALIMENTARY CANAL
    AN OVEN THERMOMETER
    CONVENIENT KITCHEN TABLE
    A DOUBLE BOILER
    COMPARTMENT SINK FOR DISH-WASHING OPEN
    COMPARTMENT SINK FOR DISH-WASHING CLOSED
    THE STEAM COOKER
    VEGETABLE PRESS
    LEMON DRILL
    THE HANDY WAITER
    WALL CABINET
    PERCOLATER HOLDER
    KNEADING TABLE
    DISH TOWEL RACK
    VEGETABLE BRUSH
    A DOUBLE BOILER
    SECTIONAL VIEW OF WHEAT KERNEL
    MEASURING CUPS
    BREAD PAN
    MEXICAN WOMEN MAKING TORTILLAS
    STONE METATE
    GEM IRONS
    PERFORATED SHEET IRON PAN FOR ROLLS
    MAKING UNFERMENTED BREAD
    CANNING UTENSILS
    BAIN MARIE
    CHINESE SOUP STRAINER
    CREAMERY
    ORIENTAL BUTTER MAKING
    ARRANGEMENTS FOR STRAINING STOCK
    GRUEL STRAINER
    EXTENSION STRAINER
    WIRE DISHCLOTH
    A PICNIC DINNER




INTRODUCTION.


No one thing over which we have control exerts so marked an influence
upon our physical prosperity as the food we eat; and it is no
exaggeration to say that well-selected and scientifically prepared food
renders the partaker whose digestion permits of its being well
assimilated, superior to his fellow-mortals in those qualities which
will enable him to cope most successfully with life's difficulties, and
to fulfill the purpose of existence in the best and truest manner. The
brain and other organs of the body are affected by the quality of the
blood which nourishes them, and since the blood is made of the food
eaten, it follows that the use of poor food will result in poor blood,
poor muscles, poor brains, and poor bodies, incapable of first-class
work in any capacity. Very few persons, however, ever stop to inquire
what particular foods are best adapted to the manufacture of good blood
and the maintenance of perfect health; but whatever gratifies the palate
or is most conveniently obtained, is cooked and eaten without regard to
its dietetic value. Far too many meals partake of the characteristics of
the one described in the story told of a clergyman who, when requested
to ask a blessing upon a dinner consisting of bread, hot and tinged with
saleratus, meat fried to a crisp, potatoes swimming in grease, mince
pie, preserves, and pickles, demurred on the ground that the dinner was
"not worth a blessing." He might with equal propriety have added, "and
not worth eating."

The subject of diet and its relation to human welfare, is one deserving
of the most careful consideration. It should be studied as a science, to
enable us to choose such materials as are best adapted to our needs
under the varying circumstances of climate growth, occupation, and the
numerous changing conditions of the human system; as an art, that we may
become so skilled in the preparation of the articles selected as to make
them both appetizing and healthful. It is an unfortunate fact that even
among experienced housekeepers the scientific principles which govern
the proper preparation of food, are but little understood, and much
unwholesome cookery is the result. The mechanical mixing of ingredients
is not sufficient to secure good results; and many of the failures
attributed to "poor material," "bad luck," and various other subterfuges
to which cooks ignorance of scientific principles. The common method of
blindly following recipes, with no knowledge of "the reason why," can
hardly fail to be often productive of unsatisfactory results, which to
the uninformed seem quite inexplicable.

Cookery, when based upon scientific principles, ceases to be the
difficult problem it so often appears. Cause and effect follow each
other as certainly in the preparation of food as in other things; and
with a knowledge of the underlying principles, and faithfulness in
carrying out the necessary details, failure becomes almost an
impossibility. There is no department of human activity where applied
science offers greater advantages than in that of cookery, and in our
presentation of the subjects treated in the following pages, we have
endeavored, so far as consistent with the scope of this work, to give
special prominence to the scientific principles involved in the
successful production of wholesome articles of food. We trust our
readers will find these principles so plainly elucidated and the subject
so interesting, that they will be stimulated to undertake for
themselves further study and research in this most important branch of
household science. We have aimed also to give special precedence of
space to those most important foods, the legumes, and grains and their
products, which in the majority of cook books are given but little
consideration or are even left out altogether, believing that our
readers will be more interested in learning the many palatable ways in
which these especially nutritious and inexpensive foods may be prepared,
than in a reiteration of such dishes as usually make up the bulk of the
average cook book.

For reasons stated elsewhere (in the chapter on Milk, Cream, and
Butter), we have in the preparation of all recipes made use of cream in
place of other fats; but lest there be some who may suppose because
cream occupies so frequent a place in the recipes, and because of their
inability to obtain that article, the recipes are therefore not adapted
to their use, we wish to state that a large proportion of the recipes in
which it is mentioned as seasoning, or for dressing, will be found to be
very palatable with the cream omitted, or by the use of its place of
some one of the many substitutes recommended. We ought also to mention
in this connection, that wherever cream is recommended, unless otherwise
designated, the quality used in the preparation of the recipes is that
of single or twelve hour cream sufficiently diluted with milk, so that
one fourth of each quart of milk is reckoned as cream. If a richer
quality than this be used, the quantity should be diminished in
proportion; otherwise, by the excess of fat, a wholesome food may become
a rich, unhealthful dish.

In conclusion, the author desires to state that no recipe has been
admitted to this work which has not been thoroughly tested by repeated
trials, by far the larger share of such being original, either in the
combination of the materials used, the method employed, or both
materials and method. Care has been taken not to cumber the work with
useless and indifferent recipes. It is believed that every recipe will
be found valuable, and that the variety offered is sufficiently ample,
so that under the most differing circumstances, all may be well served.

We trust therefore that those who undertake to use the work as a guide
in their culinary practice, will not consider any given recipe a failure
because success does not attend their first efforts. Perseverance and a
careful study of the directions given, will assuredly bring success to
all who possess the natural or acquired qualities essential for the
practice of that most useful of the arts,--"Healthful Cookery."

ELLA E. KELLOGG.

_Battle Creek, April 20, 1892._




Foods

The purposes of food are to promote growth, to supply force and heat,
and to furnish material to repair the waste which is constantly taking
place in the body. Every breath, every thought, every motion, wears out
some portion of the delicate and wonderful house in which we live.
Various vital processes remove these worn and useless particles; and to
keep the body in health, their loss must be made good by constantly
renewed supplies of material properly adapted to replenish the worn and
impaired tissues. This renovating material must be supplied through the
medium of food and drink, and the best food is that by which the desired
end may be most readily and perfectly attained. The great diversity in
character of the several tissues of the body, makes it necessary that
food should contain a variety of elements, in order that each part may
be properly nourished and replenished.

THE FOOD ELEMENTS.--The various elements found in food are the
following: Starch, sugar, fats, albumen, mineral substances,
indigestible substances.

The digestible food elements are often grouped, according to their
chemical composition, into three classes; _vis._, carbonaceous,
nitrogenous, and inorganic. The carbonaceous class includes starch,
sugar, and fats; the nitrogenous, all albuminous elements; and the
inorganic comprises the mineral elements.

_Starch_ is only found in vegetable foods; all grains, most vegetables,
and some fruits, contain starch in abundance. Several kinds of _sugar_
are made in nature's laboratory; _cane_, _grape_, _fruit_, and _milk_
sugar. The first is obtained from the sugar-cane, the sap of maple
trees, and from the beet root. Grape and fruit sugars are found in most
fruits and in honey. Milk sugar is one of the constituents of milk.
Glucose, an artificial sugar resembling grape sugar, is now largely
manufactured by subjecting the starch of corn or potatoes to a chemical
process; but it lacks the sweetness of natural sugars, and is by no
means a proper substitute for them. _Albumen_ is found in its purest,
uncombined state in the white of an egg, which is almost wholly composed
of albumen. It exists, combined with other food elements, in many other
foods, both animal and vegetable. It is found abundant in oatmeal, and
to some extent in the other grains, and in the juices of vegetables. All
natural foods contain elements which in many respects resemble
_albumen_, and are so closely allied to it that for convenience they are
usually classified under the general name of "albumen." The chief of
these is _gluten_, which is found in wheat, rye, and barley. _Casein_,
found in peas, beans, and milk, and the _fibrin_ of flesh, are elements
of this class.

_Fats_ are found in both animal and vegetable foods. Of animal fats,
butter and suet are common examples. In vegetable form, fat is abundant
in nuts, peas, beans, in various of the grains, and in a few fruits, as
the olive. As furnished by nature in nuts, legumes, grains, fruits, and
milk, this element is always found in a state of fine subdivision, which
condition is the one best adapted to its digestion. As most commonly
used, in the form of free fats, as butter, lard, etc., it is not only
difficult of digestion itself, but often interferes with the digestion
of the other food elements which are mixed with it. It was doubtless
never intended that fats should be so modified from their natural
condition and separated from other food elements as to be used as a
separate article of food. The same may be said of the other carbonaceous
elements, sugar and starch, neither of which, when used alone, is
capable of sustaining life, although when combined in a proper and
natural manner with other food elements, they perform a most important
part in the nutrition of the body. Most foods contain a percentage of
the _mineral_ elements. Grains and milk furnish these elements in
abundance. The cellulose, or woody tissue, of vegetables, and the bran
of wheat, are examples of _indigestible_ elements, which although they
cannot be converted into blood in tissue, serve an important purpose by
giving bulk to the food.

With the exception of gluten, none of the food elements, when used
alone, are capable of supporting life. A true food substance contains
some of all the food elements, the amount of each varying in different
foods.

USES OF THE FOOD ELEMENTS.--Concerning the purpose which these
different elements serve, it has been demonstrated by the experiments of
eminent physiologists that the carbonaceous elements, which in general
comprise the greater bulk of the food, serve three purposes in the body;

1. They furnish material for the production of heat;

2. They are a source of force when taken in connection with other food
elements;

3. They replenish the fatty tissues of the body. Of the carbonaceous
elements,--starch, sugar, and fats,--fats produce the greatest amount of
heat in proportion to quantity; that is, more heat is developed from a
pound of fat than from an equal weight of sugar or starch; but this
apparent advantage is more than counterbalanced by the fact that fats
are much more difficult of digestion than are the other carbonaceous
elements, and if relied upon to furnish adequate material for bodily
heat, would be productive of much mischief in overtaxing and producing
disease of the digestive organs. The fact that nature has made a much
more ample provision of starch and sugars than of fats in man's natural
diet, would seem to indicate that they were intended to be the chief
source of carbonaceous food; nevertheless, fats, when taken in such
proportion as nature supplies them, are necessary and important food
elements.

The nitrogenous food elements especially nourish the brain, nerves,
muscles, and all the more highly vitalized and active tissues of the
body, and also serve as a stimulus to tissue change. Hence it may be
said that a food deficient in these elements is a particularly poor
food.

The inorganic elements, chief of which are the phosphates, in the
carbonates of potash, soda, and lime, aid in furnishing the requisite
building material for bones and nerves.

PROPER COMBINATIONS OF FOODS.--While it is important that our food
should contain some of all the various food elements, experiments upon
both animals and human beings show it is necessary that these elements,
especially the nitrogenous and carbonaceous, be used in certain definite
proportions, as the system is only able to appropriate a certain amount
of each; and all excess, especially of nitrogenous elements, is not only
useless, but even injurious, since to rid the system of the surplus
imposes an additional task upon the digestive and excretory organs. The
relative proportion of these elements necessary to constitute a food
which perfectly meets the requirements of the system, is six of
carbonaceous to one of nitrogenous. Scientists have devoted much careful
study and experimentation to the determination of the quantities of each
of the food elements required for the daily nourishment of individuals
under the varying conditions of life, and it has come to be commonly
accepted that of the nitrogenous material which should constitute one
sixth of the nutrients taken, about _three ounces_ is all that can be
made use of in twenty-four hours, by a healthy adult of average weight,
doing a moderate amount of work. Many articles of food are, however,
deficient in one or the other of these elements, and need to be
supplemented by other articles containing the deficient element in
superabundance, since to employ a dietary in which any one of the
nutritive elements is lacking, although in bulk it may be all the
digestive organs can manage, is really starvation, and will in time
occasion serious results.

It is thus apparent that much care should be exercised in the selection
and combination of food materials. The table on page 484, showing the
nutritive values of various foods, should be carefully studied. Such
knowledge is of first importance in the education of cooks and
housekeepers, since to them falls the selection of the food for the
daily needs of the household; and they should not only understand what
foods are best suited to supply these needs, but how to combine them in
accordance with physiological laws.

CONDIMENTS.--By condiments are commonly meant such substances as
are added to season food, to give it "a relish" or to stimulate
appetite, but which in themselves possess no real food value. To this
category belong mustard, ginger, pepper, pepper sauce, Worcestershire
sauce, cloves, spices, and other similar substances. That anything is
needed to disguise or improve the natural flavor of food, would seem to
imply either that the article used was not a proper alimentary
substance, or that it did not answer the purpose for which the Creator
designed it. True condiments, such as pepper, pepper sauce, ginger,
spice, mustard, cinnamon, cloves, etc., are all strong irritants. This
may be readily demonstrated by their application to a raw surface. The
intense smarting and burning occasioned are ample evidence of the
irritating character. Pepper and mustard are capable of producing
powerfully irritating effects, even when applied to the healthy skin
where wholly intact. It is surprising that it does not occur to the
mother who applies a mustard plaster to the feet of her child, to
relieve congestion of the brain, that an article which is capable of
producing a blister upon the external covering of the body, is quite as
capable of producing similar effects when applied to the more sensitive
tissues within the body. The irritating effects of these substances upon
the stomach are not readily recognized, simply because the stomach is
supplied with very few nerves of sensation. That condiments induce an
intense degree of irritation of the mucous membrane of the stomach, was
abundantly demonstrated by the experiments of Dr. Beaumont upon the
unfortunate Alexis St. Martin. Dr. Beaumont records that when St. Martin
took mustard, pepper, and similar condiments with his food, the mucous
membrane of his stomach became intensely red and congested, appearing
very much like an inflamed eye. It is this irritating effect of
condiments which gives occasion for their extended use. They create an
artificial appetite, similar to the incessant craving of the chronic
dyspeptic, whose irritable stomach is seldom satisfied. This fact with
regard to condiments is a sufficient argument against their use, being
one of the greatest causes of gluttony, since they remove the sense of
satiety by which Nature says, "Enough."

To a thoroughly normal and unperverted taste, irritating condiments of
all sorts are very obnoxious. It is true that Nature accommodates
herself to their use with food to such a degree that they may be
employed for years without apparently producing very grave results; but
this very condition is a source of injury, since it is nothing more nor
less than the going to sleep of the sentinels which nature has posted at
the portal of the body, for the purpose of giving warning of danger. The
nerves of sensibility have become benumbed to such a degree that they no
longer offer remonstrance against irritating substances, and allow the
enemy to enter into the citadel of life. The mischievous work is thus
insidiously carried on year after year until by and by the individual
breaks down with some chronic disorder of the liver, kidneys, or some
other important internal organ. Physicians have long observed that in
tropical countries where curry powder and other condiments are very
extensively used, diseases of the liver, especially acute congestion and
inflammation, are exceedingly common, much more so that in countries and
among nations where condiments are less freely used. A traveler in
Mexico, some time ago, described a favorite Mexican dish as composed of
layers of the following ingredients: "Pepper, mustard, ginger, pepper,
potato, ginger; mustard, pepper, potato, mustard, ginger, pepper." The
common use of such a dish is sufficient cause for the great frequency of
diseases of the liver among the Mexicans, noted by physicians traveling
in that country. That the use of condiments is wholly a matter of habit
is evident from the fact that different nations employ as condiments
articles which would be in the highest degree obnoxious to people of
other countries. For example, the garlic so freely used in Russian
cookery, would be considered by Americans no addition to the natural
flavors of food; and still more distasteful would be the asafetida
frequently used as a seasoning in the cuisine of Persia and other
Asiatic countries.

The use of condiments is unquestionably a strong auxiliary to the
formation of a habit of using intoxicating drinks. Persons addicted to
the use of intoxicating liquors are, as a rule, fond of stimulating and
highly seasoned foods; and although the converse is not always true, yet
it is apparent to every thoughtful person, that the use of a diet
composed of highly seasoned and irritating food, institutes the
conditions necessary for the acquirement of a taste for intoxicating
liquors. The false appetite aroused by the use of food that "burns and
stings," craves something less insipid than pure cold water to keep up
the fever the food has excited. Again, condiments, like all other
stimulants, must be continually increased in quantity, or their effect
becomes diminished; and this leads directly to a demand for stronger
stimulants, both in eating and drinking, until the probable tendency is
toward the dram-shop.

A more serious reason why high seasonings leads to intemperance, is in
the perversion of the use of the sense of taste. Certain senses are
given us to add to our pleasure as well as for the practical, almost
indispensable, use they are to us. For instance, the sense of sight is
not only useful, but enables us to drink in beauty, if among beautiful
surroundings, without doing us any harm. The same of music and other
harmonics which may come to us through the sense of hearing. But the
sense of taste and was given us to distinguish between wholesome and
unwholesome foods, and cannot be used for merely sensuous gratification,
without debasing and making of it a gross thing. An education which
demands special enjoyment or pleasure through the sense of taste, is
wholly artificial; it is coming down to the animal plane, or below it
rather; for the instinct of the brute creation teaches it merely to eat
to live.

Yet how wide-spread is this habit of sensuous gratification through the
sense of taste! If one calls upon a neighbor, he is at once offered
refreshments of some kind, as though the greatest blessing of life came
from indulging the appetite. This evil is largely due to wrong
education, which begins with childhood. When Johnnie sits down to the
table, the mother says, "Johnnie, what would you like?" instead of
putting plain, wholesome food before the child, and taking it as a
matter of course that he will eat it and be satisfied. The child grows
to think that he must have what he likes, whether it is good for him or
not. It is not strange that an appetite thus pampered in childhood
becomes uncontrollable at maturity; for the step from gormandizing to
intoxication is much shorter than most people imagine. The natural,
unperverted taste of a child will lead him to eat that which is good for
him. But how can we expect the children to reform when the parents
continually set them bad examples in the matter of eating and drinking?

The cultivation of a taste for spices is a degradation of the sense of
taste. Nature never designed that pleasure should be divorced from use.
The effects of gratifying the sense of taste differ materially from
those of gratifying the higher senses of sight and hearing. What we see
is gone; nothing remains but the memory, and the same is true of the
sweetest sounds which may reach us through the ears. But what we taste
is taken into the stomach and what has thus given us brief pleasure
through the gratification of the palate, must make work in the
alimentary canal for fourteen hours before it is disposed of.

VARIETY IN FOOD.--Simplicity of diet should be a point of first
consideration with all persons upon whom falls the responsibility of
providing the family bills of fare, since the simplest foods are, as a
rule, the most healthful. Variety is needed; that is, a judicious
mingling of fruits, grains, and vegetables; but the general tendency is
to supply our tables with too many kinds and to prepare each dish in the
most elaborate manner, until, in many households, the cooking of food
has come to be almost the chief end of life. While the preparation of
food should be looked upon as of so much importance as to demand the
most careful consideration and thought as to its suitability,
wholesomeness, nutritive qualities, and digestibility, it should by no
means be made to usurp the larger share of one's time, when simpler
foods and less labor would afford the partakers equal nourishment and
strength.

A great variety of foods at one meal exerts a potent influence in
creating a love of eating, and is likewise a constant temptation to
overeat. Let us have well-cooked, nutritious, and palatable food, and
plenty of it; variety from day to day, but not too great a variety at
each meal.

The prevalent custom of loading the table with a great number of viands,
upon occasions when guests are to be entertained in our homes, is one to
be deplored, since it is neither conducive to good health nor necessary
to good cheer, but on the contrary is still laborious and expensive a
practice that many are debarred from social intercourse because they
cannot afford to entertain after the fashion of their neighbors. Upon
this subject a well-known writer has aptly said: "Simplify cookery, thus
reducing the cost of living, and how many longing individuals would
thereby be enabled to afford themselves the pleasure of culture and
social intercourse! When the barbarous practice of stuffing one's guests
shall have been abolished, a social gathering will not then imply, as it
does now, hard labor, expensive outlay, and dyspepsia. Perhaps when that
time arise, we shall be sufficiently civilized to demand pleasures of a
higher sort. True, the entertainments will then, in one sense, be more
costly, as culture is harder to come by than cake. The profusion of
viands now heaped upon the table, betrays poverty of the worst sort.
Having nothing better to offer, we offer victuals; and this we do with
something of that complacent, satisfied air with which some more
northern tribes present their tidbits of whale and walrus."




TABLE TOPICS.


    "Let appetite wear reason's golden chain,
    and find in due restrain its luxury."

    A man's food, when he has the means and opportunity of selecting it,
    suggests his moral nature. Many a Christian is trying to do by
    prayer that which cannot be done except through corrected
    diet.--_Talmage._

    Our pious ancestors enacted a law that suicides should be buried
    where four roads meet, and that a cart-load of stones should be
    thrown upon the body. Yet, when gentlemen or ladies commit suicide,
    not by cord or steel, but by turtle soup or lobster salad, they may
    be buried on consecrated ground, and the public are not ashamed to
    read an epitaph upon their tombstones false enough to make the
    marble blush.--_Horace Mann._

    It is related by a gentleman who had an appointment to breakfast
    with the late A.T. Stewart, that the butler placed before them both
    an elaborate bill of fare; the visitor selected a list of rare
    dishes, and was quite abashed when Mr. Stewart said, "Bring me my
    usual breakfast,--oatmeal and boiled eggs." He then explained to his
    friend that he found simple food a necessity to him, otherwise he
    could not think clearly. That unobscured brain applied to nobler
    ends would have won higher results, but the principle remains the
    same.--_Sel._

    Study simplicity in the number of dishes, and a variety in the
    character of the meals.--_Sel._

    I have come to the conclusion that more than half the disease which
    embitters life is due to avoidable errors in diet, ... and that more
    mischief, in the form of actual disease, of impaired vigor, and of
    shortened life, accrues to civilized man from erroneous habits of
    eating than from the habitual use of alcoholic drink, considerable
    as I know that evil to be.--_Sir Henry Thompson._

    The ancient Gauls, who were a very brave, strong, and hearty race,
    lived very abstemiously. Their food was milk, berries, and herbs.
    They made bread of nuts. They had a very peculiar fashion of wearing
    a metal ring around the body, the size of which was regulated by act
    of Parliament. Any man who outgrew in circumference his metal ring
    was looked upon as a lazy glutton, and consequently was disgraced.

     To keep in health this rule is wise:
       Eat only when you need, and relish food,
       chew thoroughly that it may do you good,
     have it well cooked, unspiced, and undisguised.

    --_Leonardo da Vinci_




THE DIGESTION OF FOODS.

It is important that the housekeeper not only understand the nature and
composition of foods, but she should also know something of their
digestive properties, since food, to be serviceable, must be not only
nutritious, but easily digested. Digestion is the process by which food
rendered soluble, and capable of being absorbed for use in carrying on
the various vital processes.

The digestive apparatus consists of a long and tortuous tube called the
alimentary canal, varying in length from twenty-five to thirty feet,
along which are arranged the various digestive organs,--the mouth, the
stomach, the liver, and the pancreas,--each of which, together with the
intestines, has an important function to perform. In these various
organs nature manufactures five wonderful fluids for changing and
dissolving the several food elements. The mouth supplies the saliva; in
the walls of the stomach are little glands which produce the gastric
juice; the pancreatic juice is made by the pancreas; the liver secretes
bile; while scattered along the small intestines are minute glands
which make the intestinal juice. Each of these fluids has a particular
work to do in transforming some part of the food into suitable material
for use in the body. The saliva acts upon the starch of the food,
changing it into sugar; the gastric juice digests albumin and other
nitrogenous elements; the bile digests fat, and aids in the absorption
of other food elements after they are digested; the pancreatic juice is
not confined in its action to a single element, but digests starch,
fats, and the albuminous elements after they have been acted upon by the
gastric juice; the intestinal juice is capable of acting upon all
digestible food elements.

[Illustration: The Alimentary Canal, _a._ Esophagus; _b._ Stomach; _c._
Cardiac Orifice; _d._ Pylorus; _e._ Small Intestine; _f._ Bile Duct;
_g._ Pancreatic Duct; _h._ Ascending Colon; _i._ Transverse Colon; _j._
Descending Colon; _k._ Rectum.]

THE DIGESTION OF A MOUTHFUL OF BREAD.--A mouthful of bread
represents all, or nearly all, the elements of nutrition. Taking a
mouthful of bread as a representative of food in general, it may be said
that its digestion begins the moment that it enters the mouth, and
continues the entire length of the alimentary canal, or until the
digestible portion of the food has been completely digested and
absorbed. We quote the following brief description of the digestive
process from Dr. J.H. Kellogg's Second Book in Physiology[A]:--

[Footnote A: Good Health Pub. Co., Battle Creek, Mich.]

"_Mastication._--The first act of the digestive process is mastication,
or chewing the food, the purpose of which is to crush the food and
divide it into small particles, so that the various digestive fluids may
easily and promptly come into contact with every part of it.

"_Salivary Digestion._--During the mastication of the food, the salivary
glands are actively pouring out the saliva, which mingles with the food,
and by softening it, aids in its division and prepares it for the action
of the other digestive fluids. It also acts upon the starch, converting
a portion of it into grape-sugar.

"_Stomach Digestion._--After receiving the food, the stomach soon begins
to pour out the gastric juices, which first makes its appearance in
little drops, like beads of sweat upon the face when the perspiration
starts. As the quantity increases, the drops run together, trickle down
the side of the stomach, and mingle with the food. The muscular walls of
the stomach contract upon the food, moving it about with a sort of
crushing action, thoroughly mixing the gastric juice with the food.
During this process both the openings of the stomach are closed tightly.
The gastric juice softens the food, digests albumen, and coagulates
milk. The saliva continues its action upon starch for sometime after the
food reaches the stomach.

"After the food has remained in the stomach from one to three hours, or
even longer, if the digestion is slow, or indigestible foods have been
eaten, the contractions of the stomach become so vigorous that the more
fluid portions of the food are squeezed out through the pylorus, the
lower orifice of the stomach, thus escaping into the intestine. The
pylorus does not exercise any sort of intelligence in the selection of
food, as was once supposed. The increasing acidity of the contents of
the stomach causes its muscular walls to contract with increasing
vigor, until finally those portions of the food which may be less
perfectly broken up, but which the stomach has been unable to digest,
are forced through the pylorus.

"_Intestinal Digestion._--As it leaves the stomach, the partially
digested mass of food is intensely acid, from the large quantity of
gastric juices which it contains. Intestinal digestion cannot begin
until the food becomes alkaline. The alkaline bile neutralizes the
gastric juice, and renders the digesting mass slightly alkaline. The
bile also acts upon the fatty elements of the food, converting them into
an emulsion. The pancreatic juice converts the starch into grape-sugar,
even acting upon raw starch. It also digest fats and albumem. The
intestinal juice continues the work begun by the other digestive fluids,
and, in addition, digests cane-sugar, converting it into grape-sugar.

"_Other Uses of the Digestive Fluids._--In addition to the uses which we
have already stated, several of the digestive fluids possess other
interesting properties. The saliva aids the stomach by stimulating its
glands to make gastric juice. The gastric juice and the bile are
excellent antiseptics, by which the food is preserved from fermentation
while undergoing digestion. The bile also stimulates the movements of
the intestines by which the food is moved along, and aids absorption. It
is remarkable and interesting that a fluid so useful as the bile should
be at the same time composed of waste matters which are being removed
from the body. This is an illustration of the wonderful economy shown by
nature in her operations.

"The food is moved along the alimentary canal, from the stomach
downward, by successive contractions of the muscular walls of the
intestines, known as peristaltic movements, which occur with great
regularity during digestion.

"_Absorption_.--The absorption of the food begins as soon as any portion
has been digested. Even in the mouth and the esophagus a small amount is
absorbed. The entire mucous membrane lining the digestive canal is
furnished with a rich supply of blood-vessels, by which the greater part
of the digestive food is absorbed.

"_Liver Digestion._--The liver as well as the stomach is a digestive
organ, and in a double sense. It not only secretes a digestive fluid,
the bile, but it acts upon the food brought to it by the portal vein,
and regulates the supply of digested food to the general system. It
converts a large share of the grape-sugar and partially digested starch
brought to it into a kind of liver starch, termed glycogen, which it
stores up in its tissues. During the interval between the meals, the
liver gradually redigests the glycogen, reconverting it into sugar, and
thus supplying it to the blood in small quantities, instead of allowing
the entire amount formed in digestion to enter the circulation at once.
If too large an amount of sugar entered the system at once, it would be
unable to use it all, and would be compelled to get rid of a
considerable portion through the kidneys. The liver also completes the
digestion of albumen and other food elements."

TIME REQUIRED FOR DIGESTION.--The length of time required for
stomach digestion varies with different food substances. The following
table shows the time necessary for the stomach digestion of some of the
more commonly used foods:--

                               min
    Rice                       1  00
    Sago                       1  45
    Tapioca                    2  00
    Barley                     2  00
    Beans, pod, boiled         2  30
    Bread, wheaten             3  30
    Bread, corn                3  15
    Apples, sour and raw       2  00
    Apples, sweet and raw      1  30
    Parsnips, boiled           2  30
    Beets, boiled              3  45
    Potatoes, Irish, boiled    3  30
    Potatoes, Irish, baked     2  30
    Cabbage, raw               2  30
    Cabbage, boiled            4  30
    Milk, boiled               2  00
    Milk, raw                  2  15
    Eggs, hard boiled          3  30
    Eggs, soft boiled          3  00
    Eggs, fried                3  30
    Eggs, raw                  2  00
    Eggs, whipped              1  30
    Salmon, salted, boiled     4  00
    Oysters, raw               2  55
    Oysters, stewed            3  30
    Beef, lean, rare roasted   3  00
    Beefsteak, boiled          3  00
    Beef, lean, fried          4  00
    Beef, salted, boiled       4  15
    Pork, roasted              5  15
    Pork, salted, fried        4  15
    Mutton, roasted            3  15
    Mutton, broiled            3  00
    Veal, broiled              4  00
    Veal, fried                4  30
    Fowls, boiled              4  00
    Duck, roasted              4  30
    Butter, melted             3  30
    Cheese                     3  30
    Soup, marrowbone           4  15
    Soup, bean                 3  00
    Soup, mutton               3  30
    Chicken, boiled            3  00

The time required for the digestion of food also depends upon the
condition under which the food is eaten. Healthy stomach digestion
requires at least five hours for its completion, and the stomach should
have an hour for rest before another meal. If fresh food is taken before
that which preceded it is digested, the portion of food remaining in the
stomach is likely to undergo fermentation, thus rendering the whole mass
of food unfit for the nutrition of the body, besides fostering various
disturbances of digestion. It has been shown by recent observations that
the length of time required for food to pass through the entire
digestive process to which it is subjected in the mouth, stomach, and
small intestines, is from twelve to fourteen hours.

HYGIENE OF DIGESTION.--With the stomach and other digestive organs
in a state of perfect health, one is entirely unconscious of their
existence, save when of feeling of hunger calls attention to the fact
that food is required, or satiety warns us that a sufficient amount or
too much has been eaten. Perfect digestion can only be maintained by
careful observance of the rules of health in regard to habits of eating.

On the subject of Hygiene of Digestion, we again quote a few paragraphs
from Dr. Kellogg's work on Physiology, in which is given a concise
summary of the more important points relating to this:--

"The hygiene of digestion has to do with the quality and quantity of
food eaten, in the manner of eating it.

"_Hasty Eating._--If the food is eaten too rapidly, it will not be
properly divided, and when swallowed in coarse lumps, the digestive
fluids cannot readily act upon it. On account of the insufficient
mastication, the saliva will be deficient in quantity, and, as a
consequence, the starch will not be well digested, and the stomach will
not secrete a sufficient amount of gastric juice. It is not well to eat
only soft or liquid food, as we are likely to swallow it without proper
chewing. A considerable proportion of hard food, which requires thorough
mastication, should be eaten at every meal.

"_Drinking Freely at Meals_ is harmful, as it not only encourages hasty
eating, but dilutes the gastric juice, and thus lessens its activity.
The food should be chewed until sufficiently moistened by saliva to
allow it to be swallowed. When large quantities of fluid are taken into
the stomach, digestion does not begin until a considerable portion of
the fluid has been absorbed. If cold foods or drinks are taken with the
meal, such as ice-cream, ice-water, iced milk or tea, the stomach is
chilled, and a long delay in the digestive process is occasioned.

"The Indians of Brazil carefully abstain from drinking when eating, and
the same custom prevails among many other savage tribes.

"_Eating between Meals._--The habit of eating apples, nuts, fruits,
confectionery, etc., between meals is exceedingly harmful, and certain
to produce loss of appetite and indigestion. The stomach as well as the
muscles and other organs of the body requires rest. The frequency with
which meals should be taken depends somewhat upon the age and occupation
of an individual. Infants take their food at short intervals, and owing
to its simple character, are able to digest it very quickly. Adults
should not take food oftener than three times a day; and persons whose
employment is sedentary say, in many cases at least, adopt with
advantage the plan of the ancient Greeks, who ate but twice a day. The
latter custom is quite general among the higher classes in France and
Spain, and in several South American countries.

"_Simplicity in Diet._--Taking too many kinds of food at a meal is a
common fault which is often a cause of disease of the digestive-organs.
Those nations are the most hardy and enduring whose dietary is most
simple. The Scotch peasantry live chiefly upon oatmeal, the Irish upon
potatoes, milk, and oatmeal, the Italian upon peas, beans, macaroni, and
chestnuts; yet all these are noted for remarkable health and endurance.
The natives of the Canary Islands, an exceedingly well-developed and
vigorous race, subsist almost chiefly upon a food which they call
gofio, consisting of parched grain, coarsely ground in a mortar and
mixed with water.

"_Eating when Tired._--It is not well to eat when exhausted by violent
exercise, as the system is not prepared to do the work of digestion
well. Sleeping immediately after eating is also a harmful practice. The
process of digestion cannot well be performed during sleep, and sleep is
disturbed by the ineffective efforts of the digestive organs. Hence the
well-known evil effects of late suppers.

"_Eating too Much._--Hasty eating is the greatest cause of over-eating.
When one eats too rapidly, the food is crowded into the stomach so fast
that nature has no time to cry, 'Enough,' by taking away the appetite
before too much has been eaten. When an excess of food is taken, it is
likely to ferment or sour before it can be digested. One who eats too
much usually feels dull after eating.

"_How Much Food is Enough?_--The proper quantity for each person to take
is what he is able to digest and utilize. This amount of various with
each individual, at different times. The amount needed will vary with
the amount of work done, mental or muscular; with the weather or the
season of the year, more food being required in cold than in warm
weather: with the age of an individual, very old and very young persons
requiring less food than those of middle age. An unperverted appetite,
not artificially stimulated, is a safe guide. Drowsiness, dullness, and
heaviness at the stomach are indications of an excess of eating, and
naturally suggest a lessening of the quantity of food, unless the
symptoms are known to arise from some other cause.

"_Excess of Certain Food Elements._--When sugar is too freely used,
either with food or in the form of sweetmeats or candies, indigestion,
and even more serious disease, is likely to result. Fats, when freely
used, give rise to indigestion and 'biliousness.' An excess of albumen
from the too free use of meat is harmful. Only a limited amount of this
element can be used; an excess is treated as waste matter, and must be
removed from the system by the liver and the kidneys. The majority of
persons would enjoy better health by using meat more moderately than is
customary in this country.

"_Deficiency of Certain Food Elements._--A diet deficient in any
important food element is even more detrimental to health than a diet in
which certain elements are in excess.

"The popular notion that beef-tea and meat extracts contain the
nourishing elements of meat in a concentrated form, is a dangerous
error. Undoubtedly many sick persons have been starved by being fed
exclusively upon these articles, which are almost wholly composed of
waste substances. Prof. Paule Bernard, of Paris, found that dogs fed
upon meat extracts died sooner than those which received only water."

FOOD COMBINATIONS.--Some persons, especially those of weak
digestive powers, often experience inconvenience in the use of certain
foods, owing to their improper combinations with other articles. Many
foods which are digested easily when partaken of alone or in harmonious
combinations, create much disturbance when eaten at the same meal with
several different articles of food, or with some particular article with
which they are especially incompatible. The following food combinations
are among the best, the relative excellence of each being indicated by
the order in which they are named: Milk and grains; grains and eggs;
grains and vegetables or meats; grains and fruits.

Persons with sound stomachs and vigorous digestion will seldom
experience inconvenience in making use of other and more varied
combinations, but dyspeptics and persons troubled with slow digestion
will find it to their advantage to select from the bill of fare such
articles as best accord with each other, and to avoid such combinations
as fruits and vegetables, milk and vegetables, milk and meats, sugar and
milk, meat or vegetables, fats with fruits, meats, or vegetables, or
cooked with grains.




TABLE TOPICS.

    Now good digestion waits on appetite, and health on
    both--_Shakespeare._

    We live not upon what we eat, but upon what we digest.--_Abernethy._

    If we consider the amount of ill temper, despondency, and general
    unhappiness which arises from want of proper digestion and
    assimilation of our food, it seems obviously well worth while to put
    forth every effort, and undergo any sacrifice, for the purpose of
    avoiding indigestion, with its resulting bodily ills; and yet year
    after year, from the cradle to the grave, we go on violating the
    plainest and simplest laws of health at the temptation of Cooks,
    caterers, and confectioners, whose share in shortening the average
    term of human life is probably nearly equal to that of the combined
    armies and navies of the world.--_Richardson._

    Almost every human malady is connected, either by highway or byway,
    with the stomach.--_Sir Francis Head._

    It is a well-established fact that a leg of mutton caused a
    revolution in the affairs of Europe. Just before the battle of
    Leipsic, Napoleon the Great insisted on dining on boiled mutton,
    although his physicians warned him that it would disagree with him.
    The emperor's brain resented the liberty taken with its colleague,
    the stomach; the monarch's equilibrium was overturned, the battle
    lost, and a new page opened in history.--_Sel._

    Galloping consumption at the dinner table is one of the national
    disorders.--_Sel._

    The kitchen (that is, your stomach) being out of order, the garret
    (the head) cannot be right, and every room in the house becomes
    affected. Remedy the evil in the kitchen, and all will be right in
    parlor and chamber. If you put improper food into the stomach, you
    play the mischief with it, and with the whole machine
    besides.--_Abernethy._

    Cattle know when to go home from grazing, but a foolish man never
    knows his stomachs measures.--_Scandinavian proverb._

    Enough is as good as a feast.

    Simplicity of diet is the characteristic of the dwellers in the
    Orient. According to Niebuhr, the sheik of the desert wants only a
    dish of pillau, or boiled rice, which he eats without fork or spoon.
    Notwithstanding their frugal fare, these sons of the desert are
    among the most hearty and enduring of all members of the human
    family. A traveler tells of seeing one of them run up to the top of
    the tallest pyramid and back in six minutes.

    One fourth of what we eat keeps us, and the other three fourths we
    keep at the peril of our lives.--_Abernethy._




COOKERY.

It is not enough that good and proper food material be provided; it must
have such preparation as will increase and not diminish its alimentary
value. The unwholesomeness of food is quite as often due to bad cookery
as to improper selection of material. Proper cookery renders good food
material more digestible. When scientifically done, cooking changes each
of the food elements, with the exception of fats, in much the same
manner as do the digestive juices, and at the same time it breaks up the
food by dissolving the soluble portions, so that its elements are more
readily acted upon by the digestive fluids. Cookery, however, often
fails to attain the desired end; and the best material is rendered
useless and unwholesome by a improper preparation.

It is rare to find a table, some portion of the food upon which is not
rendered unwholesome either by improper preparatory treatment, or by the
addition of some deleterious substance. This is doubtless due to the
fact that the preparation of food being such a commonplace matter, its
important relations to health, mind, and body have been overlooked, and
it has been regarded as a menial service which might be undertaken with
little or no preparation, and without attention to matters other than
those which relate to the pleasure of the eye and the palate. With taste
only as a criterion, it is so easy to disguise the results of careless
and improper cookery of food by the use of flavors and condiments, as
well as to palm off upon the digestive organs all sorts of inferior
material, that poor cookery has come to be the rule rather than the
exception.

Another reason for this prevalence of bad cookery, is to be found in the
fact that in so many homes the cooking is intrusted to an ignorant class
of persons having no knowledge whatever of the scientific principles
involved in this most important and practical of arts. An ethical
problem which we have been unable to solve is the fact that women who
would never think of trusting the care of their fine china and
bric-a-brac to unskilled hands, unhesitatingly intrust to persons who
are almost wholly untrained, the preparation of their daily food. There
is no department of life where superior intelligence is more needed than
in the selection and preparation of food, upon which so largely depend
the health and physical welfare of the family circle.

The evils of bad cookery and ill-selected food are manifold, so many, in
fact, that it has been calculated that they far exceed the mischief
arising from the use of strong drink; indeed, one of the evils of
unwholesome food is its decided tendency to create a craving for
intoxicants. Bad cookery causes indigestion, indigestion causes thirst,
and thirst perpetuates drunkenness. Any one who has suffered from a fit
of indigestion, and can recollect the accompanying headache and the
lowness of spirits, varying in degree from dejection or ill-humor to the
most extreme melancholy, until the intellectual faculties seemed dazed,
and the moral feelings blunted, will hardly wonder that when such a
condition becomes chronic, as is often the case from the use of
improperly prepared food, the victim is easily led to resort to
stimulants to drown depression and enliven the spirits.

A thorough practical knowledge of simple, wholesome cookery ought to
form a part of the education of every young woman, whatever her station
in life. No position in life is more responsible than that of the person
who arranges the bills of fare and selects the food for the household;
and what higher mission can one conceive than to intelligently prepare
the wherewithal to make shoulders strong to bear life's burdens and
heads clear to solve its intricate problems? what worthier work than to
help in the building up of bodies into pure temples fit for guests of
noble thoughts and high purposes? Surely, no one should undertake such
important work without a knowledge of the principles involved.


THE PRINCIPLES OF SCIENTIFIC COOKERY.

Cookery is the art of preparing food for the table by dressing, or by
the application of heat in some manner.

FUELS.--Artificial heat is commonly produced by combustion, caused
by the chemical action of the oxygen of the air upon the hydrogen and
carbon found in fuel. The different fuels in common use for cooking
purposes are hard wood, soft wood, charcoal, anthracite coal, bituminous
coal, coke, lignite, kerosene oil, gasoline, and gas. As to their
respective values, much depends upon the purpose for which they are to
be used. Wood charcoal produces a greater amount of heat than an equal
weight of any other fuel. Soft wood burns quicker and gives a more
intense heat than hard wood, and hence is best for a quick fire. Hard
wood burns slowly, produces a larger mass of coals, and is best where
long-continued heat is desired. Anthracite coal kindles slowly, and
burns with little flame or smoke, but its vapor is sulphurous, and on
that account it should never be burned in an open stove, nor in one with
an imperfect draft. Its heat is steady and intense. Bituminous coal
ignites readily, burns with considerable flame and smoke, and gives a
much less intense heat than anthracite, Lignite, or brown coal, is much
less valuable as fuel. Coke is useful when a short, quick fire is
needed. Kerosene and gas are convenient and economical fuels.

MAKING FIRES.--If coal is the fuel to be used, first clean out the
stove by shaking the grate and removing all ashes and cinders. Remove
the stove covers, and brush the soot and ashes out of all the flues and
draft holes into the fire-box. Place a large handful of shavings or
loosely twisted or crumpled papers upon the grate, over which lay some
fine pieces of dry kindling-wood, arranged crosswise to permit a free
draft, then a few sticks of hard wood, so placed as to allow plenty of
air spaces. Be sure that the wood extends out to both ends of the
fire-box. Replace the covers, and if the stove needs blacking, mix the
polish, and apply it, rubbing with a dry brush until nearly dry, then
light the fuel, as a little heat will facilitate the polishing. When the
wood is burning briskly, place a shovelful or two of rather small pieces
of coal upon the wood, and, as they ignite, gradually add more, until
there is a clear, bright body of fire, remembering, however, never to
fill the stove above the fire bricks; then partly close the direct
draft. When wood or soft coal is used, the fuel may be added at the same
time with the kindling.

CARE OF FIRES.--Much fuel is wasted through the loss of heat from
too much draft. Only just enough air should be supplied to promote
combustion. A coal fire, when well kindled, needs only air enough to
keep it burning. When the coal becomes red all through, it has parted
with the most of its heat, and the fire will soon die unless
replenished. To keep a steady fire, add but a small amount of fuel at a
time, and repeat often enough to prevent any sensible decrease of the
degree of heat. Rake the fire from the bottom, and keep it clear of
ashes and cinders. If a very hot fire is needed, open the drafts; at
other times, keep them closed, or partially so, and not waste fuel.
There is no economy in allowing a fire to get low before fuel is added;
for the fresh fuel cools the fire to a temperature so low that it is not
useful, and thus occasions a direct waste of all fuel necessary to again
raise the heat to the proper degree, to say nothing of the waste of time
and patience. The addition of small quantities of fuel at short
intervals so long as continuous heat is needed, is far better than to
let the fuel burn nearly out, and then add a larger quantity. The
improper management of the drafts and dampers has also much to do with
waste of fuel. As stoves are generally constructed, it is necessary for
the heat to pass over the top, down the back, and under the bottom of
the oven before escaping into the flue, in order to properly heat the
oven for baking. In order to force the heat to make this circuit, the
direct draft of the stove needs to be closed. With this precaution
observed, a quick fire from a small amount of fuel, used before its
force is spent, will produce better results than a fire-box full under
other circumstances.

An item of economy for those who are large users of coal, is the careful
sifting of the cinders from the ashes. They can be used to good
advantage to put first upon the kindlings, when building the fire, as
they ignite more readily than fresh coal, and give a greater, quicker
heat, although much less enduring.

METHODS OF COOKING.--A proper source of heat having been secured,
the next step is to apply it to the food in some manner. The principal
methods commonly employed are roasting, broiling, baking, boiling,
stewing, simmering, steaming, and frying.

_Roasting_ is cooking food in its own juices before an open fire. A
clear fire with intense heat is necessary.

_Broiling_, or _grilling_, is cooking by radiant heat over glowing
coals. This method is only adapted to thin pieces of food with a
considerable amount of surface. Larger and more compact foods should be
roasted or baked. Roasting and broiling are allied in principle. In
both, the work is chiefly done by the radiation of heat directly upon
the surface of the food, although some heat is communicated by the hot
air surrounding the food. The intense heat applied to the food soon
sears its outer surfaces, and thus prevents the escape of its juices. If
care be taken frequently to turn the food so that its entire surface
will be thus acted upon, the interior of the mass is cooked by its own
juices.

_Baking_ is the cooking of food by dry heat in a closed oven. Only foods
containing a considerable degree of moisture are adapted for cooking by
this method. The hot, dry air which fills the oven is always thirsting
for moisture, and will take from every moist substance to which it has
access a quantity of water proportionate to its degree of heat. Foods
containing but a small amount of moisture, unless protected in some
manner from the action of the heated air, or in some way supplied with
moisture during the cooking process, come from the oven dry, hard, and
unpalatable.

Proper cooking by this method depends greatly upon the facility with
which the heat of the oven can be regulated. When oil or gas is the fuel
used, it is an easy matter to secure and maintain almost any degree of
heat desirable, but with a wood or coal stove, especial care and
painstaking are necessary.

It is of the first importance that the mechanism of the oven to be used,
be thoroughly understood by the cook, and she should test its heating
capacity under various conditions, with a light, quick fire and with a
more steady one; she should carefully note the kind and amount of fuel
requisite to produce a certain degree of heat; in short, she should
thoroughly know her "machine" and its capabilities before attempting to
use it for the cooking of food. An oven thermometer is of the utmost
value for testing the heat, but unfortunately, such thermometers are not
common. They are obtainable in England, although quite expensive. It is
also possible at the present time to obtain ranges with a very reliable
thermometer attachment to the oven door.

[Illustration: An Oven Thermometer]

A cook of good judgment by careful observation and comparison of
results, can soon learn to form quite a correct idea of the heat of her
oven by the length of time she can hold her hand inside it without
discomfort, but since much depends upon the construction of stoves and
the kind of fuel used, and since the degree of heat bearable will vary
with every hand that tries it, each person who depends upon this test
must make her own standard. When the heat of the oven is found to be too
great, it may be lessened by placing in it a dish of cold water.

_Boiling_ is the cooking of food in a boiling liquid. Water is the usual
medium employed for this purpose. When water is heated, as its
temperature is increased, minute bubbles of air which have been
dissolved by it are given off. As the temperature rises, bubbles of
steam will begin to form at the bottom of the vessel. At first these
will be condensed as they rise into the cooler water above, causing a
simmering sound; but as the heat increases, the bubbles will rise higher
and higher before collapsing, and in a short time will pass entirely
through the water, escaping from its surface, causing more or less
agitation, according to the rapidity with which they are formed. Water
boils when the bubbles thus rise to the surface, and steam is thrown
off. If the temperature is now tested, it will be found to be about 212°
F. When water begins to boil, it is impossible to increase its
temperature, as the steam carries off the heat as rapidly as it is
communicated to the water. The only way in which the temperature can be
raised, is by the confinement of the steam; but owing to its enormous
expansive force, this is not practicable with ordinary cooking utensils.
The mechanical action of the water is increased by rapid bubbling, but
not the heat; and to boil anything violently does not expedite the
cooking process, save that by the mechanical action of the water the
food is broken into smaller pieces, which are for this reason more
readily softened. But violent boiling occasions an enormous waste of
fuel, and by driving away in the steam the volatile and savory elements
of the food, renders it much less palatable, if not altogether
tasteless. The solvent properties of water are so increased by heat that
it permeates the food, rendering its hard and tough constituents soft
and easy of digestion.

The liquids mostly employed in the cooking of foods are water and milk.
Water is best suited for the cooking of most foods, but for such
farinaceous foods as rice, macaroni, and farina, milk, or at least part
milk, is preferable, as it adds to their nutritive value. In using milk
for cooking purposes, it should be remembered that being more dense than
water, when heated, less steam escapes, and consequently it boils sooner
than does water. Then, too, milk being more dense, when it is used alone
for cooking, a little larger quantity of fluid will be required than
when water is used.

The boiling point for water at the sea level is 212°. At all points
above the sea level, water boils at a temperature below 212°, the exact
temperature depending upon the altitude. At the top of Mt. Blanc, an
altitude of 15,000 feet, water boils at 185°. The boiling point is
lowered one degree for every 600 feet increase in altitude. The boiling
point may be increased by adding soluble substances to the water. A
saturated solution of common baking soda boils at 220°. A saturated
solution of chloride of sodium boils at 227°. A similar solution of
sal-ammoniac boils at 238°. Of course such solutions cannot be used
advantageously, except as a means of cooking articles placed in
hermetically sealed vessels and immersed in the liquid.

Different effects upon food are produced by the use of hard and soft
water. Peas and beans boiled in hard water containing lime or gypsum,
will not become tender, because these chemical substances harden
vegetable casein, of which element peas and beans are largely composed.
For extracting the juices of meat and the soluble parts of other foods,
soft water is best, as it more readily penetrates the tissue; but when
it is desired to preserve the articles whole, and retain their juices
and flavors, hard water is preferable.

Foods should be put to cook in cold or boiling water, in accordance with
the object to be attained in their cooking. Foods from which it is
desirable to extract the nutrient properties, as for broths, extracts,
etc., should be put to cook in cold water. Foods to be kept intact as
nearly as may be, should be put to cook in boiling water.

Hot and cold water act differently upon the different food elements.
Starch is but slightly acted upon by cold water. When starch is added
to several times its bulk of hot water, all the starch granules burst on
approaching the boiling point, and swell to such a degree as to occupy
nearly the whole volume of the water, forming a pasty mess. Sugar is
dissolved readily in the either hot or cold water. Cold water extracts
albumen. Hot water coagulates it.

_Steaming_, as its name implies, is the cooking of food by the use of
steam. There are several ways of steaming, the most common of which is
by placing the food in a perforated dish over a vessel of boiling water.
For foods not needing the solvent powers of water, or which already
contain a large amount of moisture, this method is preferable to
boiling. Another form of cooking, which is usually termed steaming, is
that of placing the food, with or without water, as needed, in a closed
vessel which is placed inside another vessel containing boiling water.
Such an apparatus is termed a double boiler. Food cooked in its own
juices in a covered dish in a hot oven, is sometimes spoken of as being
_steamed_ or _smothered_.

_Stewing_ is the prolonged cooking of food in a small quantity of
liquid, the temperature of which is just below the boiling point.
Stewing should not be confounded with simmering, which is slow, steady
boiling. The proper temperature for stewing is most easily secured by
the use of the double boiler. The water in the outer vessel boils, while
that in the inner vessel does not, being kept a little below the
temperature of the water from which its heat is obtained, by the
constant evaporation at a temperature a little below the boiling point.

_Frying_, which is the cooking of food in hot fat, is a method not to be
recommended--Unlike all the other food elements, fat is rendered less
digestible by cooking. Doubtless it is for this reason that nature has
provided those foods which require the most prolonged cooking to fit
them for use with only a small proportion of fat, and it would seem to
indicate that any food to be subjected to a high degree of heat should
not be mixed and compounded largely of fats. The ordinary way of frying,
which the French call _sauteing_, is by the use of only a little fat in
a shallow pan, into which the food is put and cooked first on one side
and then the other. Scarcely anything could be more unwholesome than
food prepared in this manner. A morsel of food encrusted with fat
remains undigested in the stomach because fat is not acted upon by the
gastric juice, and its combination with the other food elements of which
the morsel is composed interferes with their digestion also. If such
foods are habitually used, digestion soon becomes slow and the gastric
juice so deficient in quantity that fermentation and putrefactive
changes are occasioned, resulting in serious disturbance of health. In
the process of frying, the action of the heat partially decomposes the
fat; in consequence, various poisonous substances are formed, highly
detrimental to the digestion of the partaker of the food.

ADDING FOODS TO BOILING LIQUIDS.--Much of the soddenness of
improperly cooked foods might be avoided, if the following facts were
kept in mind:--

When vegetables, or other foods of ordinary temperature, are put into
boiling water, the temperature of the water is lowered in proportion to
the quantity and the temperature of the food thus introduced, and will
not again boil until the mass of food shall have absorbed more heat from
the fire. The result of this is that the food is apt to become more or
less water-soaked before the process of cooking begins. This difficulty
may be avoided by introducing but small quantities of the food at one
time, so as not to greatly lower the temperature of the liquid, and then
allowing the latter to boil between the introduction of each fresh
supply, or by heating the food before adding it to the liquid.

EVAPORATION is another principle often overlooked in the cooking of
food, and many a sauce or gravy is spoiled because the liquid, heated in
a shallow pan, from which evaporation is rapid, loses so much in bulk
that the amount of thickening requisite for the given quantity of fluid,
and which, had less evaporation occurred, would have made it of the
proper consistency, makes the sauce thick and unpalatable. Evaporation
is much less, in slow boiling, than in more rapid cooking.

MEASURING.--One of the most important principles to be observed in
the preparation of food for cooking, is accuracy in measuring. Many an
excellent recipe proves a failure simply from lack of care in this
respect. Measures are generally more convenient than weights, and are
more commonly used. The common kitchen cup, which holds a half pint, is
the one usually taken as the standard; if any other size is used, the
ingredients for the entire recipe should be measured by the same. The
following points should be observed in measuring:--

1. The teaspoons and tablespoons to be used in measuring, are the silver
spoons in general use.

2. Any material like flour, sugar, salt, that has been packed, should
either be sifted or stirred up lightly before measuring.

3. A cupful of dry material is measured level with the top of the cup,
without being packed down.

4. A cupful of liquid is all the cup will contain without running over.
Hold the cup in a saucer while measuring, to prevent spilling the liquid
upon the floor or table.

COMPARATIVE TABLE OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.--The following
comparative table of weights and measurements will aid in estimating
different materials:--

One heaping tablespoonful of sugar weighs one ounce.

Two round tablespoonfuls of flour weigh one ounce.

Two cupfuls of granulated sugar weigh one pound.

Two cupfuls of meal weigh one pound.

Four cupfuls of sifted flour weigh one pound.

One pint of oatmeal, cracked wheat, or other coarse grains, weighs about
one pound.

One pint of liquid weighs one pound.

One pint of meat chopped and packed solid weighs one pound.

Seven heaping tablespoonfuls of sugar = one cupful.

Five heaping tablespoonfuls of flour = one cupful.

Two cupfuls of liquid or dry material = one pint

Four cupfuls of liquid or dry material = one quart.

MIXING MATERIALS.--In the compounding of recipes, various modes are
employed for mingling together the different ingredients, chief of which
are _stirring_, _beating_, and _kneading_.

By _stirring_ is meant a continuous motion round and round with a spoon,
without lifting it from the mixture, except to scrape occasionally from
the sides of the dish any portion of the material that may cling to it.
It is not necessary that the stirring should be all in one direction, as
many cooks suppose. The object of the stirring is to thoroughly blend
the ingredients, and this may be accomplished as well by stirring--in
one direction as in another.

_Beating_ is for the purpose of incorporating as much air in the mixture
as possible. It should be done by dipping the spoon in and out, cutting
clear through and lifting from the bottom with each stroke. The process
must be continuous, and must never be interspersed with any stirring if
it is desired to retain the air within the mixture.

_Kneading_ is the mode by which materials already in the form of dough
are more thoroughly blended together; it also serves to incorporate air.
The process is more fully described in the chapter on "Bread,"

TEMPERATURE.--Many a cook fails and knows not why, because she does
not understand the influence of temperature upon materials and food.
Flour and liquids for unfermented breads cannot be too cold, while for
bread prepared with yeast, success is largely dependent upon a warm and
equable temperature throughout the entire process.

COOKING UTENSILS.--The earliest cookery was probably accomplished
without the aid of any utensils, the food being roasted by burying it in
hot ashes or cooked by the aid of heated stones; but modern cookery
necessitates the use of a greater or less variety of cooking utensils to
facilitate the preparation of food, most of which are so familiar to the
reader as to need no description. (A list of those needed for use will
be found on page 66.) Most of these utensils are manufactured from some
kind of metal, as iron, tin, copper, brass, etc. All metals are
dissolvable in certain substances, and some of those employed for making
household utensils are capable of forming most poisonous compounds when
used for cooking certain foods. This fact should lead to great care on
the part of the housewife, both in purchasing and in using utensils for
cooking purposes.

Iron utensils, although they are, when new, apt to discolor and impart
a disagreeable flavor to food cooked in them, are not objectionable from
a health standpoint, if kept clean and free from rust. Iron rust is the
result of the combination of the iron with oxygen, for which it has so
great an affinity that it will decompose water to get oxygen to unite
with; hence it is that iron utensils rust so quickly when not carefully
dried after using, or if left where they can collect moisture. This is
the reason why a coating of tallow, which serves to exclude the air and
moisture, will preserve ironware not in daily use from rusting.

"Porcelain ware" is iron lined with a hard, smooth enamel, and makes
safe and very desirable cooking utensils. German porcelain ware is
unexcelled for culinary purposes.

"Granite ware" is a material quite recently come into use, the
composition of which is a secret, although pronounced by eminent
chemists to be free from all injurious qualities. Utensils made from it
are light in weight, easily kept clean, and for most cooking purposes,
are far superior to those made from any other material.

What is termed "galvanized iron" is unsuitable for cooking utensils, it
being simply sheet iron coated with zinc, an exceedingly unsafe metal to
be used for cooking purposes.

Tin, which is simply thin sheet iron coated with tin by dipping several
times into vats of the melted metal, is largely employed in the
manufacture of cooking utensils. Tinware is acted upon by acids, and
when used for holding or cooking any acid foods, like sour milk, sour
fruits, tomatoes, etc., harmful substances are liable to be formed,
varying in quantity and harmfulness with the nature of the acid
contained in the food.

In these days of fraud and adulteration, nearly all the cheaper grades
of tinware contain a greater or less amount of lead in their
composition, which owing to its greater abundance and less price, is
used as an adulterant of tin. Lead is also used in the solder with which
the parts of tinware are united. The action of acids upon lead form very
poisonous compounds, and all lead-adulterated utensils should be wholly
discarded for cooking purposes.

_Test for Lead-Adulterated Tin._--Place upon the metal a small drop of
nitric acid, spreading it to the size of a dime, dry with gentle heat,
apply a drop of water, then add a small crystal of iodide of potash. If
lead is present, a yellowish color will be seen very soon after the
addition of the iodide. Lead glazing, which is frequently employed on
crockery and ironware in the manufacture of cooking utensils, may also
be detected in the same manner.

Cooking utensils made of copper are not to be recommended from the point
of healthfulness, although many cooks esteem them because copper is a
better conductor of heat than iron or tin. The acids of many fruits
combine with copper to form extremely poisonous substances. Fatty
substances, as well as salt and sugar, act upon copper to a greater or
less degree, also vegetables containing sulfur in their composition and
produce harmful compounds.

Utensils made of brass, which is a compound of copper and zinc, are not
safe to use for cooking purposes.




TABLE TOPICS.

    Bad cooking diminishes happiness and shortens life.--_Wisdom of
    Ages._

    Says Mrs. Partington: "Many a fair home has been desiccated by poor
    cooking, and a man's table has been the rock on which his happiness
    has split."

    SIGNIFICANT FACT.--_Lady_--"Have you had much experience as a cook?"
    _Applicant_--"Oh, indeed I have. I was the cook of Mr. and Mrs.
    Peterby for three years."

    _L._--"Why did you leave them?"

    _A._--"I didn't leave them. They left me. They both died."

    _L._--"What of?"

    _A._--"Dyspepsia."

    Cooking is generally bad because people falling to routine; habit
    dulls their appreciation, and they do not think about what they are
    eating.--_Didsbury._

    _Lilly_ (Secretary of the cooking class)--"Now girls, we've learned
    nine cakes, two kinds of angel food, and seven pies. What next?"

    _Susie_ (engaged)--"Dick's father says I must learn to bake bread."

    _Indignant chorus_--"Bread? How absurd! What are bakers for?"

    It is told of Philip Hecgnet, a French, physician who lived in the
    17th, century, that when calling upon his wealthy patients, he used
    often to go to the kitchen and pantry, embrace the cooks and
    butlers, and exhort them to do their duty well. "I owe you so much
    gratitude, my dear friends," he would say; "you are so useful to us
    doctors; for if you did not keep on poisoning the people, we should
    all have to go to the poorhouse."

    There are innumerable books of recipes for cooking, but unless the
    cook is master of the principles of his art, and unless he knows the
    why and the wherefore of its processes, he cannot choose a recipe
    intelligently and execute it successfully.--_Richard Estcourt._

    They who provide the food for the world, decide the health of the
    world. You have only to go on some errands amid the taverns and
    hotels of the United States and Great Britain, to appreciate the
    fact that a vast multitude of the human race are slaughtered by
    incompetent cookery. Though a young woman may have taken lessons in
    music, and may have taken lessons in painting, and lessons in
    astronomy, she is not well educated unless she has taken lessons in
    dough!--_Talmage._




HOUSEHOLD WORKSHOP

It is a mistake to suppose that any room, however small and unpleasantly
situated, is "good enough" for a kitchen. This is the room where
housekeepers pass a great portion of their time, and it should be one of
the brightest and most convenient rooms in the house; for upon the
results of no other department of woman's domain depend so greatly the
health and comfort of the family as upon those involved in this
"household workshop." The character of a person's work is more or less
dependent upon his surroundings, hence is it to be greatly wondered at
that a woman immured in a small, close, dimly-lighted room, whose only
outlook may be the back alley or the woodshed, supplies her household
with products far below the standard of health and housewifely skill?

Every kitchen should have windows on two sides of the room, and the sun
should have free entrance through them; the windows should open from the
top to allow a complete change of air, for light and fresh air are among
the chief essentials to success in all departments of the household.
Good drainage should also be provided, and the ventilation of the
kitchen ought to be even more carefully attended to than that of a
sleeping room. The ventilation of the kitchen should be so ample as to
thoroughly remove all gases and odors, which, together with steam from
boiling and other cooking processes, generally invade and render to some
degree unhealthful every other portion of the house. It is the steam
from the kitchen which gives a fusty odor to the parlor air and provides
a wet-sheet pack for the occupant of the "spare bed." The only way of
wholly eradicating this evil, is the adoption of the suggestion of the
sanitary philosopher who places the kitchen at the top of the house.

To lessen to discomforts from heat, a ventilator may be placed above the
range, that shall carry out of the room all superfluous heat, and aid in
removing the steam and odors from cooking food. The simplest form of
such a ventilator this inverted hopper of sheet iron fitted above the
range, the upper and smaller end opening into a large flue adjacent to
the smoke flue for the range. Care must be taken, however, to provide an
ample ventilating shaft for this purpose, since a strong draft is
required to secure the desired results.

There should be ample space for tables, chairs, range, sink, and
cupboards, yet the room should not be so large as to necessitate too
many steps. A very good size for the ordinary dwelling is 16 x 18 feet.

Undoubtedly much of the distaste for, and neglect of, "housework," so
often deplored in these days, arises from unpleasant surroundings. If
the kitchen be light, airy, and tidy, and the utensils bright and clean,
the work of compounding those articles of food which grace the table and
satisfy the appetite will be a pleasant task, and one entirely worthy of
the most intelligent and cultivated woman.

It is desirable, from a sanitary standpoint, that the kitchen floor be
made impervious to moisture; hence, concrete or tile floors are better
than wooden floors. If wooden floors are used, they should be
constructed of narrow boards of hard wood, carefully joined and
thoroughly saturated with hot linseed oil, well rubbed in to give polish
to the surface.

Cleanliness is the great _desideratum_, and this can be best attained
by having all woodwork in and about the kitchen coated with varnish;
substances which cause stain and grease spots, do not penetrate the wood
when varnished, and can be easily removed with a damp cloth. Paint is
preferable to whitewash or calcimine for the walls, since it is less
affected by steam, and can be more readily cleaned. A carpet on a
kitchen floor is as out of place as a kitchen sink would be in a parlor.

The elements of beauty should not be lacking in the kitchen. Pictures
and fancy articles are inappropriate; but a few pots of easily
cultivated flowers on the window ledge or arranged upon brackets about
the window in winter, and a window box arranged as a jardiniere, with
vines and blooming plants in summer, will greatly brighten the room, and
thus serve to lighten the task of those whose daily labor confines them
to the precincts of the kitchen.

THE KITCHEN FURNITURE.--The furniture for a kitchen should not be
cumbersome, and should be so made and dressed as to be easily cleaned.
There should be plenty of cupboards, and each for the sake of order,
should be devoted to a special purpose. Cupboards with sliding doors are
much superior to closets. They should be placed upon casters so as to be
easily moved, as they, are thus not only more convenient, but admit of
more thorough cleanliness.

Cupboards used for the storage of food should be well ventilated;
otherwise, they furnish choice conditions for the development of mold
and germs. Movable cupboards may be ventilated by means of openings in
the top, and doors covered with very fine wire gauze which will admit
the air but keep out flies and dust. All stationary cupboards and
closets should have a ventilating flue connected with the main shaft by
which the house is ventilated, or directly communicating with the outer
air.

No kitchen can be regarded as well furnished without a good timepiece as
an aid to punctuality and economy of time. An eight-day clock with large
dial and plain case is the most suitable.

Every kitchen should also be provided with a slate, with sponge and
pencil attached, on one side of which the market orders and other
memoranda may be jotted down, and on the other the bills of fare for the
day or week. In households where servants are kept, the slate will save
many a vexatious blunder and unnecessary call to the kitchen, while if
one is herself mistress, cook, and housekeeper, it may prove an
invaluable aid and time-saver if thus used.

[Illustration: A Convenient Kitchen Table.]

Lack of sufficient table room is often a great source of inconvenience
to the housekeeper. To avoid this, arrange swinging tables or shelves at
convenient points upon the wall, which may be put up or let down as
occasion demands. For ordinary kitchen uses, small tables of suitable
height on easy-rolling casters, and with zinc tops, are the most
convenient and most easily kept clean. It is quite as well that they be
made without drawers, which are too apt to become receptacles for a
heterogeneous mass of rubbish. If desirable to have some handy place for
keeping articles which are frequently required for use, an arrangement
similar to that represented in the accompanying cut may be made at very
small expense. It may be also an advantage to arrange small shelves
about and above the range, on which may be kept various articles
necessary for cooking purposes.

One of the most indispensable articles of furnishing for a
well-appointed kitchen, is a sink; however, a sink must be properly
constructed and well cared for, or it is likely to become a source of
great danger to the health of the inmates of the household. Earthen-ware
is the best material for kitchen sinks. Iron is very serviceable, but
corrodes, and if painted or enameled, this soon wears off. Wood is
objectionable from a sanitary standpoint. A sink made of wood lined with
copper answers well for a long time if properly cared for.

The sink should if possible stand out from the wall, so as to allow free
access to all sides of it for the sake of cleanliness, and under no
circumstances should there be any inclosure of woodwork or cupboards
underneath to serve as a storage place for pots and kettles and all
kinds of rubbish, dust, and germs. It should be supported on legs, and
the space below should be open for inspection at all times. The pipes
and fixtures should be selected and placed by a competent plumber.

Great pains should be taken to keep the pipes clean and well
disinfected. Refuse of all kinds should be kept out. Thoughtless
housekeepers and careless domestics often allow greasy water and bits of
table waste to find their way into the pipes. Drain pipes usually have a
bend, or trap, through which water containing no sediment flows freely;
but the melted grease which often passes into the pipes mixed with hot
water, becomes cooled and solid as it descends, adhering to the pipes,
and gradually accumulating until the drain is blocked, or the water
passes through very slowly. A grease-lined pipe is a hotbed for disease
germs.

Water containing much grease should be cooled and the grease removed
before being turned into the kitchen sink, while bits of refuse should
be disposed of elsewhere, since prevention of mischief is in this case,
as in most others, far easier than cure. It is customary for
housekeepers to pour a hot solution of soda or potash down the sink
pipes occasionally, to dissolve any grease which may tend to obstruct
the passage; but this is only a partial safeguard, as there is no
certainty that all the grease will be dissolved, and any particles
adhering to the pipes very soon undergo putrefaction.

A frequent flushing with hot water is important; besides which the pipes
should be disinfected two or three times a week by pouring down a gallon
of water holding in solution a pound of good chloride of lime.

STOVES AND RANGES.--The furnishing of a modern kitchen would be
quite incomplete without some form of stove or range. The multiplicity
of these articles, manufactured each with some especial merit of its
own, renders it a somewhat difficult task to make a choice among them.
Much must, however, depend upon the kind of fuel to be used, the size of
the household, and various other circumstances which make it necessary
for each individual housekeeper to decide for herself what is best
adapted to her wants. It may be said, in brief, that economy of fuel,
simplicity of construction, and efficiency in use are the chief points
to be considered in the selection of stoves and ranges.

A stove or range of plain finish is to be preferred, because it is much
easier to keep clean, and will be likely to present a better appearance
after a few months' wear than one of more elaborate pattern. But
whatever stove or range is selected, its mechanism should be thoroughly
understood in every particular, and it should be tested with dampers
open, with dampers closed, and in every possible way, until one is
perfectly sure she understands its action under all conditions.

OIL AND GAS STOVES.--In many households, oil, gas, and gasoline
stoves have largely taken the place of the kitchen range, especially
during the hot weather of summer. They can be used for nearly every
purpose for which a wood or a coal range is used; they require much less
labor and litter, and can be instantly started into full force and as
quickly turned out when no longer required, while the fact that the heat
can be regulated with exactness, makes them superior for certain
processes of cooking to any other stove. But while these stoves are
convenient and economical, especially in small families, they should be
used with much care. Aside from the danger from explosion, which is by
no means inconsiderable in the use of gasoline and oil stoves, they are
not, unless well cared for altogether healthful. Unless the precaution
is taken to use them in well-ventilated rooms or to connect them with a
chimney, they vitiate the atmosphere to a considerable extent with the
products of combustion. Oil stoves, unless the wicks are kept well
trimmed, are apt to smoke, and this smoke is not only disagreeable, but
extremely irritating to the mucous membrane of the nose and throat. Oil
stoves are constructed on the same principle as ordinary oil lamps, and
require the same care and attention.

Quite recently there has been invented by Prof. Edward Atkinson a very
unique apparatus for cooking by means of the heat of an ordinary
kerosene lamp, called the "Aladdin Cooker." The food to be cooked is
placed in a chamber around which hot water, heated by the flame of the
lamp, circulates. The uniform heat thus obtained performs the process of
cooking, slowly, but most satisfactorily and economically, the result
being far superior to that obtained by the ordinary method of cooking by
quick heat. The cooker is only used for stewing and steaming; but Mr.
Atkinson has also invented an oven in which the heat is conveyed to the
place where it is needed by a column of hot air instead of hot water.
With this oven, which consists of an outer oven made of non-conducting
material, and an inner oven made of sheet iron, with an intervening
space between, through which the hot air circulates, no smoke or odor
from the lamp can reach the interior.

KITCHEN. UTENSILS.--The list of necessary kitchen utensils must of
course be governed somewhat by individual circumstances, but it should
not be curtailed for the sake of display in some other department, where
less depends upon the results. A good kitchen outfit is one of the
foundation-stones of good housekeeping. The following are some of the
most essential:--

Two dish pans; two or more _papier-maché_ tubs for washing glassware;
one kneading board; one bread board; one pair scales, with weights;
scrubbing and stove brushes; brooms; dustpans; roller for towel;
washbowl; soap dish; vegetable brushes.

[Illustration: A Double Boiler.]

FOR THE TIN CLOSET.-One dipper; one egg-beater; one two-quart pail;
one four-quart pail; six brick-loaf bread pans; three shallow tins;
three granite-ware pie tins; two perforated sheet iron pans for rolls,
etc.; one set of measures, pint, quart, and two quart; two colanders;
two fine wire strainers; one flour sifter; one apple corer; one set
patty pans; two dripping pans; two sets gem irons; one set muffin rings;
one toaster; one broiler; the six saucepans, different sizes; two
steamers; six milk-pans; one dozen basins, different sizes; one chopping
bowl and knife; six double boilers; two funnels, large and small; one
can opener; griddle; kettles, iron and granite ware; two water baths.

FOR THE DISH CLOSET.--One half dozen iron-stone china cups; three
quart bowls; three pint bowls; two large mixing bowls; two quart bowls
with lip; six deep plates; three kitchen pitchers; one glass rolling
pin; six wooden and six iron spoons, assorted sizes; six kitchen
teaspoons; one stone baking pot; glass jars for stores; crocks and jars.

THE PANTRY.--The pantry and china closet should have direct light
and good ventilation. The dark, dingy places sometimes used for this
purpose are germ breeders. There should be plenty of shelf room and
cupboards for the fine glass and china-ware, with a well-arranged sink
for washing the dishes. The sink for this purpose is preferably one
lined with tinned or planished copper; for dishes will be less liable to
become injured and broken then when washed in an iron or earthen-ware
sink. Extension or folding shelves are a great convenience, and can be
arranged for the sink if desired. The accompanying cuts illustrate a
sink of four compartments for dish-washing, devised by the writer for
use in the Sanitarium Domestic Economy kitchen, which can be closed and
used as a table. Two zinc trays fit the top, upon which to place the
dish drainers. If preferred, the top might be arranged as a drainer, by
making it of well-seasoned hard wood, with a number of inclined grooves
to allow the water to run into the sink. If the house be heated by
steam, a plate-warmer is an important part of the pantry furnishing.

[Illustration: Compartment Sink for Dish-Washing. Open.]

THE STOREROOM.--If possible to do so, locate the room for the
keeping of the kitchen supplies on the cool side of the house. Plenty of
light, good ventilation, and absolute cleanliness are essential, as the
slightest contamination of air is likely to render the food supply unfit
for use.

The refrigerator should not be connected with the kitchen drain pipe,
and the greatest care should be taken to keep it clean and sweet. It
should be thoroughly scrubbed with borax or sal-soda and water, and well
aired, at least once a week. Strongly flavored foods and milk should not
be kept in the same refrigerator. The ice to be used should always be
carefully washed before putting in the refrigerator. Care should also be
taken to replenish it before the previous supply is entirely melted, as
the temperature rises when the ice becomes low, and double the quantity
will be required to cool the refrigerator that would be necessary to
keep it of uniform temperature if added before the ice was entirely out.

THE WATER SUPPLY.--The water used for drinking and cooking purposes
should receive equal consideration with the food supply, and from
whatever source obtained, it should be frequently tested for impurities,
since that which looks the most refreshing may be contaminated with
organic poison of the most treacherous character.

[Illustration: Compartment Sink for Dish-Washing. Closed.]

A good and simple test solution, which any housewife can use, may be
prepared by dissolving twelve grains of caustic potash and three of
permanganate of potash in an ounce of distilled water, or filtered soft
water. Add a drop of this solution to a glass of the water to be tested.
If the pink color imparted by the solution disappears at once, add
another drop of the solution, and continue adding drop by drop until the
pink color will remain for half an hour or more. The amount of the
solution necessary to security permanent color is very fair index to the
quality of the water. If the color imparted by the first one or two
drops disappears within a half hour, the water should be rejected as
probably dangerous. Water which is suspected of being impure may be
rendered safe by boiling. Filters are only of service in removing
suspended particles and the unpleasant taste of rain water; a really
dangerous water is not rendered safe by filtering in the ordinary
manner.

CELLARS.--Sanitarians tell us that cellars should never be built
under dwelling houses. Because of improper construction and neglect,
they are undoubtedly the cause of much disease and many deaths. A
basement beneath the house is advantageous, but the greatest of care
should be given to construct it in accord with sanitary laws. It should
be thoroughly drained that there may be no source of dampness, but
should not be connected with a sewer or a cesspool. It should have walls
so made as to be impervious to air and water. An ordinary brick or stone
wall is inefficient unless well covered with good Portland cement
polished smooth. The floors should likewise be covered with cement,
otherwise the cellar is likely to be filled with impure air derived from
the soil, commonly spoken of as "ground air," and which offers a
constant menace to the health of those who live over cellars with
uncemented walls and floors.

Light and ventilation are quite as essential to the healthfulness of a
cellar as to other rooms of the dwelling. Constantly during warm
weather, and at least once a day during the winter season, windows
should be opened wide, thus effecting a free interchange of air. All
mold and mustiness should be kept out by thorough ventilation and
frequent coats of whitewash to the walls. Vegetables and other
decomposable articles, if stored in the basement, should be frequently
sorted, and all decaying substances promptly removed. This is of the
utmost importance, since the germs and foul gases arising from
decomposing food stuffs form a deadly source of contamination through
every crack and crevice.


KITCHEN CONVENIENCES.

In these days of invention and progress, much thought and ingenuity have
been expended in making and perfecting labor-saving articles and
utensils, which serve to make housework less of a burden and more of a
delight.

THE STEAM-COOKER.--One of the most unique of these conveniences is
the steam-cooker, one kind of which is illustrated by the accompanying
cut. Steaming is, for many foods, a most economical and satisfactory
method of cooking. Especially is this true respecting fruits, grains,
and vegetables, the latter of which often have the larger proportion of
their best nutritive elements dissolved and thrown away in the water in
which they are boiled. In the majority of households it is, however, the
method least depended upon, because the ordinary steamer over a pot of
boiling water requires too much attention, takes up too much stove room,
and creates too much steam in the kitchen, to prove a general favorite.
The steam-cooker has an escape-steam tube through which all excess of
steam and odors passes into the fire, and thus its different
compartments may contain and cook an entire dinner, if need be, and over
one stove hole or one burner of an oil or gasoline stove.

[Illustration: The Steam-Cooker.]

THE VEGETABLE PRESS.--The accompanying cut represents this handy
utensil, which is equally useful as a potato and vegetable masher; as a
sauce, gruel, and gravy strainer; as a fruit press, and for many other
purposes for which a colander or strainer is needed, while it economizes
both time and labor.

[Illustration: Vegetable Press.]

LEMON DRILL.--This little article for extracting the juice of the
lemon, and which can be purchased of most hardware dealers, is quite
superior to the more commonly used lemon squeezer. Being made of glass,
its use is not open to the danger that the use of metal squeezer is are
from poisonous combinations of the acid and metal, while the juice
extracted is free from pulp, seeds, and the oil of the skin.

[Illustration: Lemon Drill.]

A HANDY WAITER.--In many households where no help is employed, a
labor-saving device like the one represented in the accompanying
illustration, will be found of great service. It is a light double table
on easy-rolling casters, and can be readily constructed by anyone handy
in the use of tools. If preferred, the top may be covered with zinc. In
setting or clearing the table, the dishes may be placed on the lower
shelf, with the food on the top, and the table rolled from pantry to
dining room, and from dining room to kitchen; thus accomplishing, with
one trip, what is ordinarily done with hundreds of steps by the weary
housewife. If desirable to reset the table at once after a meal, the
waiter will be found most serviceable as a place whereon the glassware
and silverware may be washed. It is equally serviceable for holding the
utensils and material needed when cooking; being so easily moved, they
can be rolled to the stove and is always convenient.

[Illustration: The Handy Waiter.]

WALL CABINET.--where cupboard space is limited, or where for
convenience it is desirable to have some provision for supplies and
utensils near the range and baking table, a wall cabinet offers a most
convenient arrangement. It may be made of a size to fit in any
convenient niche, and constructed plainly or made as ornamental as one
pleases, with doors to exclude the dust, shelves on which to keep tin
cans filled with rice, oatmeal, cracked wheat, and other grains; glass
jars of raisins, sugar, citron, cornstarch, etc.; hooks on which may
hang the measures, egg-beater, potato masher, and such frequently needed
utensils; and with drawers for paring knives, spoons, and similar
articles, the wall cabinet becomes a _multum in parvo_ of convenience
which would greatly facilitate work in many households.

[Illustration: Wall Cabinet.]

PERCOLATE HOLDER.--The accompanying cut illustrates an
easily-constructed device for holding a jelly bag or percolate. It may
be so made as to be easily screwed to any ordinary table, and will save
the housekeeper far more than its cost in time and patience.

KNEADING TABLE.--Much of the tiresome labor of bread-making can be
avoided if one is supplied with some convenient table similar to the one
represented in the cut, wherein the needed material and utensils may be
kept in readiness at all times. The table illustrated has two large tin
drawers, each divided into two compartments, in which may be kept corn
meal, entire wheat, and Graham and white flours. Two drawers above
provide a place for rolling-pin, bread mallet, gem irons, spoons, etc.,
while a narrow compartment just beneath the hardwood top affords a place
for the kneading board. The table being on casters is easily moved to
any part of the kitchen for use.

[Illustration: Percolater Holder.]

[Illustration: Kneading Table.]

DISH-TOWEL RACK.--Nothing adds more to the ease and facility with
which the frequent dish-washings of the household may be accomplished
than clean, well-dried towels. For quick drying,--an item of great
importance if one would keep the towels fresh and sweet,--the towel rack
represented in the cut, and which can be made by any carpenter, is a
most handy device. When not in use, it can be turned up against the wall
as illustrated. It is light, affords sufficient drying space so that no
towel need be hung on top of another, and projecting out from the wall
as it does, the free circulation of air between the towels soon dries
them.

[Illustration: Dish-Towel Rack.]

KITCHEN BRUSHES.--These useful little articles can be put to such a
variety of uses that they are among the chiefest of household
conveniences. They are also so inexpensive, costing but five cents
apiece without handles and seven cents with handles, that no housewife
can afford to be without a supply of them. For the washing of dishes
with handles, the outside of iron kettles, and other cooking utensils
made of iron, they are especially serviceable. The smaller sizes are
likewise excellent for cleaning cut glass ware, Majolica ware,--in fact,
any kind of ware with raised figures or corrugated surfaces. For
cleaning a grater, nothing is superior to one of these little brushes.
Such a brush is also most serviceable for washing celery, as the
corrugated surface of the stalk makes a thorough cleaning with the hands
a difficult operation. Then if one uses a brush with handle, ice water,
which adds to the crispness of the celery, may be used for the cleaning,
as there will be no necessity for putting the hands in the water. A
small whisk broom is also valuable for the same purpose. Such vegetables
as potatoes, turnips, etc., are best cleaned with a brush. It makes the
work less disagreeable, as the hands need not be soiled by the process,
and in no other way can the cleaning be so well and thoroughly done.

[Illustration: Vegetable Brush.]

All brushes after being used should be carefully scalded and placed
brush downward in a wire sponge basket, or hung up on hooks. If left
around carelessly, they soon acquire the musty smell of a neglected
dishcloth.




TABLE TOPICS.

    The kitchen is a chemical laboratory, in which are conducted a
    number of chemical processes by which our food is converted from its
    crudest state to condition more suitable for digestion and
    nutrition, and made more agreeable to the palate.--_Prof. Matthew
    Williams._

    Half the trouble between mistresses and maids arises from the
    disagreeable surroundings to which servants are confined. There is
    no place more dismal than the ordinary kitchen in city dwellings. It
    is half underground, ill-lighted, and unwholesome. What wonder,
    then, in the absence of sunlight, there is a lack of sunny temper
    and cheerful service? An ill-lighted kitchen is almost sure to be a
    dirty one, where germs will thrive and multiply. Let sanitary
    kitchens be provided, and we shall have more patient mistresses and
    more willing servants.--_Sel._

    A sluggish housemaid exclaimed, when scolded for the uncleanliness
    of her kitchen, "I'm sure the room would be clean enough if it were
    not for the nasty sun, which is always showing the dirty
    corners."--_Sel._

    If we would look for ready hands and willing hearts in our kitchens,
    we should make them pleasant and inviting for those who literally
    bear the "burden and heat of the day" in this department of our
    homes, where, emphatically, "woman's work is never done." We should
    no longer be satisfied to locate our kitchens in the most
    undesirable corner of the house. We should demand ample
    light,--sunshine if possible,--and justly too; for the very light
    itself is inspiring to the worker. It will stir up cheer and breed
    content in the minds of those whose lot is cast in this work-a-day
    room.--_Sel._

    Any invention on the part of the housekeeper intended to be a
    substitute for watchfulness, will prove a delusion and a
    snare.--_Sel._

    "The first wealth is health," says Emerson.

    A knowledge of sanitary principles should be regarded as an
    essential part of every woman's education, and obedience to sanitary
    laws should be ranked, as it was in the Mosaic code, as a religious
    duty.--_Sel._

    Much of the air of the house comes from the cellar. A heated house
    acts like a chimney. A German experimenter states that one half of
    the cellar air makes its way into the first story, one third into
    the second, and one fifth into the third.




CEREALS AND THEIR PREPARATION FOR THE TABLE

Cereal is the name given to those seeds used as food (wheat, rye, oats,
barley, corn, rice, etc.), which are produced by plants belonging to the
vast order known as the grass family. They are used for food both in the
unground state and in various forms of mill products.

The grains are pre-eminently nutritious, and when well prepared, easily
digested foods. In composition they are all similar, but variations in
their constituent elements and the relative amounts of these various
elements, give them different degrees of alimentary value. They each
contain one or more of the nitrogenous elements,--gluten, albumen,
caseine, and fibrin,--together with starch, dextrine, sugar, and fatty
matter, and also mineral elements and woody matter, or cellulose. The
combined nutritive value of the grain foods is nearly three times that
of beef, mutton, or poultry. As regards the proportion of the food
elements necessary to meet the various requirements of the system,
grains approach more nearly the proper standard than most other foods;
indeed, wheat contains exactly the correct proportion of the food
elements.

Being thus in themselves so nearly perfect foods, and when properly
prepared, exceedingly palatable and easy of digestion, it is a matter of
surprise that they are not more generally used; yet scarcely one family
in fifty makes any use of the grains, save in the form of flour, or an
occasional dish of rice or oatmeal. This use of grains is far too meager
to adequately represent their value as an article of diet. Variety in
the use of grains is as necessary as in the use of other food material,
and the numerous grain preparations now to be found in market render it
quite possible to make this class of foods a staple article of diet, if
so desired, without their becoming at all monotonous.

In olden times the grains were largely depended upon as a staple food,
and it is a fact well authenticated by history that the highest
condition of man has always been associated with wheat-consuming
nations. The ancient Spartans, whose powers of endurance are proverbial,
were fed on a grain diet, and the Roman soldiers who under Caesar
conquered the world, carried each a bag of parched grain in his pocket
as his daily ration.

Other nationalities at the present time make extensive use of the
various grains. Rice used in connection with some of the leguminous
seeds, forms the staple article of diet for a large proportion of the
human race. Rice, unlike the other grain foods, is deficient in the
nitrogenous elements, and for this reason its use needs to be
supplemented by other articles containing an excess of the nitrogenous
material. It is for this reason, doubtless, that the Hindoos use
lentils, and the Chinese eat peas and beans in connection with rice.

We frequently meet people who say they cannot use the grains,--that they
do not agree with them. With all deference to the opinion of such
people, it may be stated that the difficulty often lies in the fact that
the grain was either not properly cooked, not properly eaten, or not
properly accompanied. A grain, simply because it is a grain, is by no
means warranted to faithfully fulfil its mission unless properly
treated. Like many another good thing excellent in itself, if found in
bad company, it is prone to create mischief, and in many cases the root
of the whole difficulty may be found in the excessive amount of sugar
used with the grain.

Sugar is not needed with grains to increase their alimentary value. The
starch which constitutes a large proportion of their food elements must
itself be converted into sugar by the digestive processes before
assimilation, hence the addition of cane sugar only increases the burden
of the digestive organs, for the pleasure of the palate. The Asiatics,
who subsist largely upon rice, use no sugar upon it, and why should it
be considered requisite for the enjoyment of wheat, rye, oatmeal,
barley, and other grains, any more than it is for our enjoyment of bread
or other articles made from these same grains? Undoubtedly the use of
grains would become more universal if they were served with less or no
sugar. The continued use of sugar upon grains has a tendency to cloy the
appetite, just as the constant use of cake or sweetened bread in the
place of ordinary bread would do. Plenty of nice, sweet cream or fruit
juice, is a sufficient dressing, and there are few persons who after a
short trial would not come to enjoy the grains without sugar, and would
then as soon think of dispensing with a meal altogether as to dispense
with the grains.

Even when served without sugar, the grains may not prove altogether
healthful unless they are properly eaten. Because they are made soft by
the process of cooking and on this account do not require masticating to
break them up, the first process of digestion or insalivation is usually
overlooked. But it must be remembered that grains are largely composed
of starch, and that starch must be mixed with the saliva, or it will
remain undigested in the stomach, since the gastric juice only digests
the nitrogenous elements. For this reason it is desirable to eat the
grains in connection with some hard food. Whole-wheat wafers, nicely
toasted to make them crisp and tender, toasted rolls, and unfermented
zwieback, are excellent for this purpose. Break two or three wafers into
rather small pieces over each individual dish before pouring on the
cream. In this way, a morsel of the hard food may be taken with each
spoonful of the grains. The combination of foods thus secured, is most
pleasing. This is a specially advantageous method of serving grains for
children, who are so liable to swallow their food without proper
mastication.

COOKING OF GRAINS.--All grains, with the exception of rice, and the
various grain meals, require prolonged cooking with gentle and
continuous heat, in order to so disintegrate their tissues and change
their starch into dextrine as to render them easy of digestion. Even the
so-called "steam-cooked" grains, advertised to be ready for use in five
or ten minutes, require a much longer cooking to properly fit them for
digestion. These so-called quickly prepared grains are simply steamed
before grinding, which has the effect to destroy any low organisms
contained in the grain. They are then crushed and shredded. Bicarbonate
of soda and lime is added to help dissolve the albuminoids, and
sometimes diastase to aid the conversion of the starch into sugar; but
there is nothing in this preparatory process that so alters the chemical
nature of the grain as to make it possible to cook it ready for easy
digestion in five or ten minutes. An insufficiently cooked grain,
although it may be palatable, is not in a condition to be readily acted
upon by the digestive fluids, and is in consequence left undigested to
act as a mechanical irritant.

[Illustration: A Double Boiler.]

For the proper cooking of grains the double boiler is the best and most
convenient utensil for ordinary purposes. If one does not possess a
double boiler, a very fair substitute may be improvised by using a
covered earthen crock placed within a kettle of boiling water, or by
using two pails, a smaller within a larger one containing boiling water.

A closed steamer or steam-cooker is also valuable for the cooking of
grains. Grains may be cooked in an ordinary kettle, but the difficulties
to be encountered, in order to prolong the cooking sufficiently and
prevent burning, make it the least desirable utensil for this purpose.

Water is the liquid usually employed for cooking grains, but many of
them are richer and finer flavored when milk is mixed with the
water,--one part to two of water. Especially is this true of rice,
hominy, and farina. When water is used, soft water is preferable to
hard. No salt is necessary, but if used at all, it is generally added to
the water before stirring in the grain or meal.

The quantity of liquid required varies with the different grains, the
manner in which they are milled, the method by which they are cooked,
and the consistency desired for the cooked grain, more liquid being
required for a porridge than for a mush. The following table gives the
time necessary for cooking and the quantity of liquid required for the
various grains, with the exception of rice, when cooked in a double
boiler or closed steamer, to produce a mush of ordinary consistency. If
an ordinary kettle is used for cooking the grains, a larger quantity of
water will be needed:--


TABLE SHOWING PROPORTION OF GRAIN AND LIQUID REQUIRED, WITH APPROXIMATE
TIME, WHEN A DOUBLE BOILER IS USED.

                         Quantity of       Water        Hours to
                           Grain.        Required.        Cook.
    Graham Grits          1 part           4 parts        3 to 5
    Rolled Wheat          1   "            3   "          3 to 4
    Cracked "             1   "          4-1/2 "          3 to 4
    Pearl   "             1   "            4   "          4 to 5
    Whole   "             1   "            5   "          6 to 8
    Rolled Oats           1   "            3   "          3 to 4
    Coarse Oatmeal        1   "            4   "          4 to 6
    Rolled Rye            1   "            3   "          3 to 4
    Pearl Barley          1   "            5   "          4 to 5
    Coarse Hominy         1   "            5   "          6 to 10
    Fine Hominy           1   "            4   "          4 to 6
    Cerealine             1   "            1 part          1/2

All grains should be carefully looked over before being put to cook.

In the cooking of grains, the following points should be observed:--

1. Measure both liquid and grain accurately with the same utensil, or
with two of equal size.

2. Have the water boiling when the grain is introduced, but do not
allow it to boil for a long time previous, until it is considerably
evaporated, as that will change the proportion of water and grain
sufficiently to alter the consistency of the mush when cooked. Introduce
the grain slowly, so as not to stop the sinking to the bottom, and the
whole becomes thickened. If the grain is cooked in a double boiler, this
first boiling should be done with the inner dish directly over the fire,
and when the grain has thickened or become "set," as it is termed, the
dish should at once be placed in the outer boiler, the water in which
should be boiling. It will then require no further care during the
entire cooking, safe to keep the outer boiler filled and the water
boiling. If the grain is to be cooked in a steam-cooker, as soon as set
it may be turned into a china or an earthen dish, suitable for use on
the table, and placed at once in the steamer to complete the cooking. If
an ordinary kettle is used, it is well to place it upon an iron ring or
brick on some part of the range were it will just simmer, for the
remainder of the cooking.

3. Stir the grain continuously until it has set, but not at all
afterward. Grains are much more appetizing if, while properly softened,
they can still be made to retain their original form. Stirring renders
the preparation pasty, and destroys its appearance. Grains cooked in a
double boiler will require no stirring, and there will be little danger
of their being lumpy, underdone on top, and scorched at the bottom, as
is so often the case when cooked in a single boiler.

4. Cook continuously. If it be necessary to replenish the water in the
outer boiler at anytime, let it be done with water of boiling
temperature. If it is desired to have the mush quite thick and dry, the
boiler should be left uncovered during the latter part of the cooking.
If preferred moist, keep the cover on.

In the preparation of all mushes with meal or flour, it is a good plan
to make the material into a batter with a portion of the liquid retained
from the quantity given, before introducing it into the boiling water.
This prevents the tendency to cook in lumps, so frequent when dry meal
is scattered into boiling liquid. Care must be taken, however, to add
the moistened portion very slowly, stirring vigorously meantime, so that
the boiling will not be checked. Use warm water for moistening. The
other directions given for the whole or broken grains are applicable to
the ground products.

GRAINS FOR BREAKFAST.--Since hasty preparation will not suffice for
the grains, they cannot be conveniently cooked in the morning in time
for breakfast. This difficulty may be obviated by cooking the day
previous, and reheating in the following way:--

Place the grain, when sufficiently cooked, in the refrigerator or in
some place where it will cool quickly (as slow cooling might cause
fermentation), to remain overnight. If cooked in a porcelain-lined or
granite-ware double boiler, it may be left undisturbed, if uncovered. If
cooked in tin or iron, turn the grain into a large earthen or china
dish. To heat in the morning, fill the outer boiler with boiling water,
place the inner dish containing the grain therein, and steam until
thoroughly heated. No stirring and no additional liquid will be
necessary, and if placed upon the stove when beginning the preparations
for breakfast, it will be ready for serving in good season. If the grain
has been kept in an earthen dish, it may best be reheated by placing
that inside the steam cooker or an ordinary steamer over a kettle of
boiling water.

Cracked wheat, pearl wheat, oatmeal, and other course grain preparations
to be reheated, require for cooking a half cup of water in addition to
the quantity given in the table. For rolled wheat, rolled oats, rolled
rye, and other crushed grains, no more is needed. Grains may be used for
breakfast without reheating, if served with hot milk or cream. If one
has an Aladdin oven, the problem of grains for breakfast may be easily
solved by cooking them all night, and if started late in the evening,
they may be thus cooked over a single burner oil stove with the flame
turned low.

GRAINS AN ECONOMICAL FOOD.--While grains are pre-eminently among
the most nutritious of foods, they are also among the most economical,
the average price being from five to seven cents a pound, and even less
when purchased in bulk. If it be objected that they require much fuel to
secure the prolonged cooking necessary, we would say that a few cents'
worth of oil a week and a small lamp stove will accomplish the cooking
in a most efficient manner. For a hot-weather food there are few
articles which give greater satisfaction and require less time and labor
on the part of the housewife than grains, cooked by the aid of a small
lamp stove.

WHEAT.

DESCRIPTION.--Wheat is the most important of the grain foods. It is
probably a native of Southwestern Asia, though like most grains
cultivated from the earliest periods, its history is extremely obscure.

Wheat is of two principal kinds, characterized as soft and hard wheat,
though there are hundreds of named varieties of the grain. The
distinction between many of these is due to variation in the relative
proportions of starch and nitrogenous matter. Some contain not more than
eight per cent of nitrogenous elements, while others contain eighteen or
twenty per cent, with a corresponding decrease in carbonaceous elements.
This difference depends upon the soil, cultivation, season, climate, and
other conditions under which the grain is produced.

The structure of the wheat grain consists of an external tegument of a
hard, woody nature, so coherent that it appears in the form of scales or
bran when the wheat is ground, and an inner portion, more soft and
friable, consisting of several cellular layers. The layer nearest the
outer husk contains vegetable fibrin and fatty matter. The second layer
is largely composed of gluten cells; while the center comprising the
bulk of the grain, is chiefly made up of starch granules with a small
proportion of gluten.

The structure of a wheat kernel is well illustrated in the 
accompanying cut. As will be seen, the different food elements are 
situated in different parts of the grain, and not uniformly distributed
throughout its structure. The outer husk of the berry is composed wholly
of innutritious and indigestible matter, but the thin layers which lie
next this outer covering contain the larger proportion of the
nitrogenous elements to be found in the entire kernel. The central
portion consists almost wholly of farinaceous matter.

[Illustration: Sectional View of Wheat Kernel.]

Phosphates and other mineral matter are present to some extent
throughout the entire grain, but preponderates in the external part.
Here is also found a peculiar, soluble, active principle called
diastase, which possesses the power of converting starch into sugar. The
dark color and marked flavor of Graham bread is undoubtedly due to the
influence of this element.

Until within a few years the unground grain was rarely used as an
article of food, but people are beginning to appreciate its
wholesomeness, and cracked, rolled, and pearled wheats are coming
rapidly into favor. Cracked wheat is the grain cleaned and then cut into
two or more pieces; in rolled wheat the grains are mashed between
rollers, by which process they are thoroughly softened in every part,
and are then easily cooked. Pearl wheat is the whole grain cleaned and
dressed. The whole grain is also cooked sometimes in its natural state.

PREPARATION AND COOKING.--Few articles of food show greater
difference between good and poor cooking than the various grains. Dry,
harsh, or underdone, they are as unwholesome as unpalatable. Like most
of the grains, wheat, with the exception of new wheat boiled whole,
should be put into boiling water and allowed to cook continuously but
slowly until done. Any of the unground preparations require prolonged
cooking. The average length of time and the approximate amount of water
needed in cooking _one cupful_ of the various wheat preparations in a
double boiler is stated on page 82.

_RECIPES._

PEARL WHEAT.--Heat a quart of water to boiling in the inner dish of
a double boiler, and stir into it one cup or one-half pint of pearl
wheat. Let it boil rapidly until thickened and the wheat has ceased
settling, then place in the outer boiler, in which the water should be
boiling, and cook continuously from three to four hours.

CRACKED WHEAT.--Cracked wheat may be cooked in the same manner as
pearl wheat, by using four and one-half parts of water to one of grain.
The length of time required to cook it thoroughly is about the same as
for pearl wheat.

ROLLED WHEAT.--This preparation of wheat requires only three parts
water to one of wheat. It should be cooked in the same way as pearled
wheat, but requires only three hours' cooking.

BOILED WHEAT (sometimes called frumenty).--Select newly-cut wheat,
well rubbed or threshed out. Look it over carefully, wash, and put to
cook in five times its measure of cold water. Let it come to a boil, and
cook gently until the grains burst open, and it can be readily mashed
between the thumb and finger. This will require from four to ten hours,
depending upon the age and variety of the wheat used. When done, it
should be even full of a rich, thick liquor. If necessary, add more
boiling water, but stir as little as possible. It may be served with
cream, the same as other wheat preparations. It is also excellent served
with lemon and other fruit sauces.

WHEAT WITH RAISINS.--Raisins or Zante currants may be added to any
of the foregoing recipes, if desired. The raisins or currants should be
well steamed previously, however, and stirred in lightly and evenly just
before dishing. If cooked with the grain, they become soft, broken, and
insipid. Figs, well steamed and chopped, may be added in the same way.

WHEAT WITH FRESH FRUIT.--Fresh whortleberries, blueberries, and
blackberries stirred into any of the well-cooked wheat preparations just
before serving, make a very desirable addition. A most delicious dish
may be prepared by stirring into well-cooked cracked wheat a few
spoonfuls of rather thick cream and some fresh wild blackberries. Serve
hot.

MOLDED WHEAT.--Cracked wheat, rolled wheat, or pearl wheat, cooked
according to the foregoing recipes, and turned into molds until cold,
makes a very palatable dessert, and may be served with sugar and cream
or with fruit juice. Bits of jelly placed on top of the molds in the
form of stars or crosses, add to the appearance. Molded grains are also
very nice served with fresh berries, either mashed or whole, arranged
around the mold.


FINER MILL PRODUCTS OF WHEAT.

The grain of wheat is inclosed in a woody envelope. The cellular layers
just beneath contain the largest proportion of nitrogenous matter, in
the form of gluten, and are hard of pulverization, while the starchy
heart of the grain is easily crumbled into fine dust. Thus it will be
readily understood that when the grain is subjected to an equal
pulverizing force, the several portions will be likely to be crushed
into particles of different sizes. The outer husk being toughest, will
be the least affected, the nitrogenous or glutenous portion will be much
finer, while the brittle starch will be reduced to powder. This first
simple product of grinding is termed wheat meal, unbolted, or Graham
flour, and of course contains all the elements of the grain. In ordinary
milling, however, this is subjected to various siftings, boltings, or
dressings, to separate the finer from the coarser particles, and then
subdivided into various grades of flour, which vary much in composition
and properties. The coarser product contains the largest proportion of
nutrients, while in the finer portions there is an exclusion of a large
part of the nitrogenous element of the grain. The outer portions of the
wheat kernel, which contain the greater part of the nitrogenous element,
are darker in color than the central, starchy portion. It will be
apparent, then, that the finer and whiter the flour, the less nutriment
it is likely to contain, and that in the use of superfine white flour
the eye is gratified at the expense of the body.

A preparation called farina, is made from the central portion of wheat,
freed from bran, and crushed into granules. Another preparation, called
Graham grits, is prepared by granulating the outer layers of the kernel
together with the germ of the wheat. This preparation, comparatively a
new one, includes the most nutritious properties of the grain, and its
granular form renders it excellent for mushes as well as for other
purposes. Farina is scarcely more nutritious than white flour, and
should not be used as a staple food. Graham grits contains the best
elements of the wheat grain in good proportion, and is one of the best
preparations of wheat. Other preparations of wheat somewhat similar in
character are farinose, germlet, etc.


_RECIPES._

FARINA.--Heat a pint of milk and one of water, or if preferred, a
quart of milk, in the inner cup of a double boiler; and when boiling,
stir in five tablespoonfuls of farina, moistened evenly with a little
milk. Let it boil rapidly until well set, which will be in about five or
eight minutes; then place in the outer boiler, and cook one hour. Serve
cold or hot with a dressing of cream or fruit juices. Farina may be
cooked in water alone, but on account of its lack of nutritive elements,
it is more valuable if prepared with milk.

FARINA WITH FIG SAUCE.--Cook the farina as in the foregoing recipe,
and serve hot with a fig sauce prepared as follows:--

Carefully look over, washed, and chop or cut quite finally, enough good
figs to make a cupful. Stew in a pint of water, to which has been added
a tablespoonful of sugar, until they are one homogeneous mass. If the
figs are not of the best quality and do not readily soften, it is well,
after stewing for a time, to rub them through a colander or vegetable
press to break up the tough portions and make a smooth sauce. Put a
spoonful of the hot fig sauce on each individual dish of farina, and
serve with cream or without dressing.

FARINA WITH FRESH FRUIT.--Cook the farina as previously directed.
Have some sliced yellow peaches, mellow sweet apples, or bananas in a
dish, turn the farina over them, stir up lightly with a fork, and serve
hot with cream.

MOLDED FARINA.--Farina to be used cold may be cooked in the same
manner as before described, with two or three tablespoonfuls of sugar
added at the same time with the farina, and when done, molded in cups
previously wet with a little cold water. Serve with a dressing of fruit
juice, whipped cream flavored with lemon, or mock cream flavored with
cocoanut.

GRAHAM GRITS.--To four parts of water boiling in the inner dish of
a double boiler add slowly, so as not to stop the boiling of the water,
one part of Graham grits. Stir until thickened, then place in the outer
boiler, and steam from three to five hours. Serve hot with cream, or
mold in cups previously dipped in cold water, and serve with a dressing
of fruit juice. The fig sauce prepared as previously directed, is also
excellent with Graham grits.

GRAHAM MUSH NO. 1.--Good flour is the first requisite for making
good Graham mush. Poor Graham flour cannot be made into first-class
mush. Flour made from the best white winter wheat is perhaps the best.
It may be used either sifted or unsifted, as preferred. The proportion
of flour and liquid to be used will necessarily vary somewhat with the
quality of the flour, but in general, three parts water to one of flour
will be needed. Too much flour not only makes the mush too thick, but
gives it an underdone taste. Stir the dried flour rapidly into boiling
water, (which should not cease to boil during the process), until a
thick porridge is obtained. It is well to have it a little thinner at
first than is desirable for serving, as it will thicken by cooking. Cook
slowly at least one hour. A longer time makes it more digestible.

Left-over Graham mush is nice spread on rather shallow tins, and simply
heated quickly in a hot oven.

GRAHAM MUSH NO. 2.--Moisten one pint of good Graham flour with a
pint of warm water, or enough to make a batter thin enough to pour. (The
quantity of water needed will vary a little with the fineness and
quality of the flour.) Pour this batter into a quart of water boiling in
the inner cup of a double boiler. Remember to add the batter
sufficiently slow, so as not to stop the boiling of the water. When
thickened, put into the outer boiler, and cook for one hour.

GRAHAM MUSH NO. 3.--Prepare in the same way as above, using milk or
part milk in the place of water. Left-over Graham mush at breakfast,
which has been prepared with water, is very nice if, while it is still
warm, a small quantity of hot milk is well stirred into it, and it is
then set by to be reheated in a double boiler for dinner.

GRAHAM MUSH WITH DATES.--Prepare a mush as for Graham mush No. 2.
When done, place in the dish in which the mush is to be served, some
nice, fresh dates from which the stones have been removed. Pour the mush
over them, and stir up lightly, taking care not to break the fruit, and
serve. Raisins previously steamed, or figs steamed and cut into pieces,
may be used instead of dates. Serve hot with cream, or mold, and serve
cold.

PLUM PORRIDGE.--Prepare a Graham mush as previously directed, and
when done, add to it a cup of well-steamed raisins and sufficient rich
milk to thin it to the consistency of porridge.

GRAHAM APPLE MUSH.--Prepare a smooth apple sauce of rather tart
apples. Sweeten it slightly, and thin with boiling water. Have this
mixture boiling, and add to it Graham flour, either sprinkled in dry or
moistened with water, sufficient to make a well-thickened mush. Cook,
and serve hot with cream.

GRANOLA MUSH.--Granola, a cooked preparation of wheat and oats,
manufactured by the Sanatarium Food Co., makes a most appetizing and
quickly prepared breakfast dish. Into a quart of boiling water sprinkle
a pint of granola. Cook for two or three minutes, and serve hot with
cream.

GRANOLA FRUIT MUSH.--Prepare the mush as directed, and stir into
it, when done, a large cupful of nicely-steamed, seedless raisins. Serve
hot with cream. Milk may be used instead of water, if preferred.

GRANOLA PEACH MUSH.--Instead of the raisins as directed in the
foregoing recipe, add to the mush, when done, a pint of sliced yellow
peaches. Finely-cut, mellow sweet apples, sliced bananas, and
blueberries may be used in a similar way.

BRAN JELLY.--Select some clean wheat bran, sprinkle it slowly into
boiling water as for Graham mush, stirring briskly meanwhile with a
wooden spoon, until the whole is about the consistency of thick gruel.
Cook slowly in a double boiler for two hours. Strain through a fine wire
sieve placed over the top of a basin. When strained, reheat to boiling.
Then stir into it a spoonful or so of sifted Graham flour, rubbed smooth
in a little cold water. Boil up once; turn into molds previously wet in
cold water, and when cool, serve with cream or fruit juice.


THE OAT, OR AVENA.

DESCRIPTION.--The native country of the plant from which our common
varieties of the oat are derived, is unknown. Oat grains have been found
among the remains of the lake-dwellers in Switzerland, and it is
probable that this plant was cultivated by the prehistoric inhabitants
of Central Europe.

The ancient Greeks and Romans used oats, ranking them next in value to
barley, which they esteemed above all other cereals. Although
principally grown as food for horses, the oat, when divested of its husk
and broken by a process of milling, is an exceedingly nutritious and
valuable article of diet for human beings; and there is no article of
food that has increased in general favor more rapidly in the last few
years than this grain.

The Scotch have long been famed for their large consumption of oatmeal.
It forms the staple article of diet for the peasantry, to which fact is
generally attributed the fine physique and uniform health for which
they, as a race, are particularly noted. It is related that Dr. Johnson,
of dictionary fame, who never lost an opportunity to disparage the
Scotch, on one occasion defined oats as, "In Scotland, food for men; in
England, food for horses." He was well answered by an indignant
Scotchman who replied, "Yes; and where can you find such fine men as in
Scotland, or such horses as in England?"

Oatmeal justly ranks high as an alimentary substance. It contains about
the same proportion of nitrogenous elements as wheat, and with the
exception of maize, is richer in fatty matter than any other of the
cultivated cereals. In general structure the oat resembles wheat.

To prepare oats for food, the husk, which is wholly indigestible in
character, must be thoroughly removed. To accomplish this, the grain is
first kiln-dried to loosen the husk, and afterward submitted to a
process of milling. Denuded of its integument, the nutritive part of the
grain is termed groats; broken into finer particles, it constitutes what
is known as oatmeal; rolled oats, or avena, is prepared by a process
which crushes the kernels. Oatmeal varies also in degrees of
trituration, some kinds being ground much finer than others. The more
finely-ground products are sometimes adulterated with barley meal, which
is cheaper than oatmeal and less nutritious. The black specks which are
sometimes found in oatmeal are particles of black oats which have been
ground in connection with the other.

Oatmeal lacks the tenacity of wheaten flour, and cannot, without the
addition of some other flour, be made into light bread. It is, however,
largely consumed by the inhabitants of Scotland and the north of
England, in the form of oatcakes. The oatmeal is mixed with water,
kneaded thoroughly, then rolled into very thin cakes, and baked on an
iron plate or griddle suspended over a fire. So much, however, depends
upon the kneading, that it is said that the common inquiry before the
engagement of a domestic servant in Scotland, is whether or not she is a
good kneader of oatcakes.

The most common use of oatmeal in this country is in the form of mush or
porridge. For this the coarser grades of meal are preferable. For people
in health, there is no more wholesome article of diet than oatmeal
cooked in this way and eaten with milk. For growing children, it is one
of the best of foods, containing, as it does, a large proportion of bone
and muscle-forming material, while to almost all persons who have become
accustomed to its use, it is extremely palatable. The time required for
its digestion is somewhat longer than that of wheaten meal prepared in
the same manner. It is apt to disagree with certain classes of
dyspeptics, having a tendency to produce acidity, though it is
serviceable as an article of diet in some forms of indigestion. The
manner of its preparation for the table has very much to do with its
wholesomeness. Indeed, many objectionable dishes are prepared from it.
One of these, called _brose_, much used in Scotland, is made by simply
stirring oatmeal into some hot liquid, as beef broth, or the water in
which a vegetable has been boiled. The result is a coarse, pasty mass of
almost raw oatmeal, an extremely indigestible compound, the use of which
causes water brash. A preparation called _sowens_, or flummery, made by
macerating the husks of the oats in water from twenty-four to thirty-six
hours, until the mixture ferments, then boiling down to the consistency
of gruel, is a popular article of food among the Scotch and Welsh
peasantry. When boiled down still more, so it will form a firm jelly
when cold, the preparation is called _budrum_.

PREPARATION AND COOKING.--Oatmeal requires much cooking in order to
break its starch cells; and the coarser the meal, the longer it should
be allowed to cook. A common fault in the use of oatmeal is that it is
served in an underdone state, which makes a coarse, indigestible dish of
what, with more lengthy preparation, would be an agreeable and
nutritious food. Like most of the grains, it is best put into boiling
soft water, and allowed to cook continuously and slowly. It is greatly
injured by stirring, and it is therefore preferably cooked in a double
boiler or closed steamer. If it is necessary to use an ordinary kettle,
place it on some part of the range where the contents will only simmer;
or a hot brick may be placed under it to keep it from cooking too fast.
It may be cooked the day previous, and warmed for use the same as other
grains.


RECIPES.

OATMEAL MUSH.--Heat a quart of water to boiling in the inner dish
of a double boiler, sift into it one cup of coarse oatmeal, and boil
rapidly, stirring continuously until it sets; then place in the outer
boiler, the water in which should be boiling, and cook three hours or
longer. Serve with cream.

OATMEAL FRUIT MUSH.--Prepare the oatmeal as directed above, and
stir in lightly, when dishing for the table, some sliced mellow and
juicy raw sweet apples. Strawberry apples and other slightly tart apples
are likewise excellent for the purpose. Well-ripened peaches and bananas
may also be used, if care is taken to preserve the slices whole, so as
to present an appetizing appearance. Both this and the plain oatmeal
mush are best eaten with toasted whole-wheat wafers or some other hard
food.

OATMEAL BLANCMANGE NO. 1.--Soak a cupful of coarse oatmeal over
night in a pint and a half of water. In the morning, beat the oatmeal
well with a spoon, and afterwards pass all the soluble portion through a
fine strainer. Place the liquid in the inner dish of a double boiler,
and cook for half an hour. Turn into cups, cool fifteen or twenty
minutes, and serve warm with cream and sugar, or a dressing of fruit
juice. A lemon sauce prepared as directed on page 354 likewise makes an
excellent dressing.

OATMEAL BLANCMANGE NO. 2.--Take a pint of well-cooked oatmeal, add
to it a pint of milk, part cream if obtainable. Beat well together, and
strain through a fine wire sieve. Turn the liquid into a saucepan, and
boil for a few moments, until it is thick enough to drop from the point
of a spoon; then turn into cups previously wet in cold water, and mold.
Serve with a dressing of fruit juice or whipped cream slightly sweetened
and flavored with lemon.

JELLIED OATMEAL.--Cook oatmeal or rolled oats with an additional
cup or cup and a half of water, and when done, turned into cups and
mold. Serve cold with hot cream.

MIXED MUSH.--A cup and a half of rolled wheat, mixed with one-half
cup of coarse oatmeal, and cooked the same as oatmeal, forms a mush
preferred by some to oatmeal alone.

ROLLED OATS.--This preparation of oats should be cooked the same
as oatmeal, but requires only three parts water to one of rolled oats,
when cooked in a double boiler.

OATMEAL WITH APPLE.--Cold oatmeal which has been left over may be
made into an appetising dish by molding in alternate layers with
nicely-steamed tart apple, sprinkled lightly with sugar. Serve with
cream. Other cooked fruit, such as cherries, evaporated peaches, and
apricots may be used in the same way. A very pleasing dish is made by
using between the layers ripe yellow peaches and plums sliced together,
and lightly sprinkled with sugar.

OATMEAL PORRIDGE.--Into a quart and a half of water, which should
be boiling in the inner dish of a double boiler, sprinkle one cup of
rather coarse oatmeal. Boil rapidly, stirring meanwhile until the grain
is set; then place in the outer boiler, and cook continuously for three
hours or longer. A half cup of cream added just before serving, is a
desirable addition.


BARLEY.

DESCRIPTION.--Barley is stated by historians to be the oldest of
all cultivated grains. It seems to have been the principal bread plant
among the ancient Hebrews, Greeks, and Romans. The Jews especially held
the grain in high esteem, and sacred history usually uses it
interchangeably with wheat, when speaking of the fruits of the Earth.

Among the early Greeks and Romans, barley was almost the only food of
the common people and the soldiers. The flour was made into gruel, after
the following recipe: "Dry, near the fire or in the oven, twenty pounds
of barley flour, then parch it. Add three pounds of linseed meal, half a
pound of coriander seeds, two ounces of salt, and the water necessary."
If an especially delectable dish was desired, a little millet was also
added to give the paste more "cohesion and delicacy." Barley was also
used whole as a food, in which case it was first parched, which is still
the manner of preparing it in some parts of Palestine and many districts
of India, also in the Canary Islands, where it is known as _gofio_. Of
this custom a lady from Palestine writes: "The reapers, during barley
harvest, take bunches of the half-ripe grain, and singe, or parch, it
over a fire of thorns. The milk being still in the grain, it is very
sweet, and is considered a delicacy."

In the time of Charles I, barley meal took the place of wheat almost
entirely as the food of the common people in England. In some parts of
Europe, India, and other Eastern countries, it is still largely consumed
as the ordinary farinaceous food of the peasantry and soldiers. The
early settlers of New England also largely used it for bread making. At
the present day only a very insignificant quantity of barley is used for
food purposes in this country, and most of this in the unground state.

Barley is less nutritious than wheat, and to many people is less
agreeable in flavor. It is likewise somewhat inferior in point of
digestibility. Its starch cells being less soluble, they offer more
resistance to the gastric juice.

There are several distinct species of barley, but that most commonly
cultivated is designated as two-rowed, or two-eared barley. In general
structure, the barley grain resembles wheat and oats.

Simply deprived of its outer husk, the grain is termed _Scotch milled_
or _pot barley_. Subjected still further to the process by which the
fibrous outer coat of the grain is removed, it constitutes what is known
as _pearl barley_. Pearl barley ground into flour is known as _patent
barley_. Barley flour, owing to the fact that it contains so small a
proportion of gluten, needs to be mixed with wheaten flour for
bread-making purposes. When added in small quantity to whole-wheat
bread, it has a tendency to keep the loaf moist, and is thought by some
to improve the flavor.

The most general use made of this cereal as a food, is in the form of
pearl, or Scotch, barley. When well boiled, barley requires about two
hours for digestion.

GENERAL SUGGESTIONS FOR COOKING BARLEY.--The conditions requisite
for cooking barley are essentially the same as for oatmeal. It is best
cooked slowly. Four parts of water to one of grain will be needed for
steaming or cooking in a double boiler, and from four to five hours'
time will be required, unless the grain has been previously soaked for
several hours, in which case three hours will do. If the strong flavor
of the grain is objected to, it may be soaked over night and cooked in
fresh water. This method will, however, be a sacrifice of some of the
nutriment contained in the grain. Barley thus soaked will require only
three parts water to one of barley for cooking.


_RECIPES._

BAKED BARLEY.--Soak six tablespoonfuls of barley in cold water over
night. In the morning, turn off the water, and put the barley in an
earthen pudding dish, and pour three and one half pints of boiling water
over it; add salt if desired, and bake in a moderately quick oven about
two and one half hours, or till perfectly soft, and all the water is
absorbed. When about half done, add four or five tablespoonfuls of sugar
mixed with grated lemon peel. It may be eaten warm, but is very nice
molded in cups and served cold with cream.

PEARL BARLEY WITH RAISINS.--Carefully look over and wash a cupful
of pearl barley. Cook in a double boiler in five cups of boiling water
for four hours. Just before serving, add a cupful of raisins which have
been prepared by pouring boiling water over them and allowing them to
stand until swollen. Serve hot, with cream.

PEARL BARLEY WITH LEMON SAUCE.--Pearl barley cooked in the same
manner, but without the addition of the raisins, is excellent served
with cream or with a lemon sauce prepared as directed on page 354.


RICE.

DESCRIPTION.--Rice is one of the most abundantly used and most
digestible of all the cereals. It grows wild in India, and it is
probable that this is its native home. It is, however, now cultivated in
most tropical and sub-tropical climates, and is said to supply the
principal food for nearly one third of the human race. It is mentioned
in history several hundred years before Christ. According to Soyer, an
old writer on foods, the Greeks and Romans held rice in high esteem,
believing it to be a panacea for chest and lung diseases.

The grain is so largely grown and used by the Chinese that "fan," their
word for rice, has come to enter into many compound words. A beggar is
called a "tou-fan-tee," that is, "the rice-seeking one." The ordinary
salutation, "Che-fan," which answers to our "How do you do?" means,
"Have you eaten your rice?"

Rice requires a wet soil, and the fields in which the grain is raised,
sometimes called "paddy" fields, are periodically irrigated. Before
ripening, the water is drained off, and the crop is then cut with a
sickle, made into shocks, stacked, threshed, and cleaned, much like
wheat. The rice kernel is inclosed within two coverings, a course outer
husk, which is easily removed, and an inner, reddish, siliceous coating.

"Paddy" is the name given in India to the rice grain when inclosed in
its husk. The same is termed "rough rice" in this country. The outer
husk of the rice is usually removed in the process of threshing, but the
inner red skin, or hull, adheres very closely, and is removed by rubbing
and pounding. The rough rice is first ground between large stones, and
then conveyed into mortars, and pounded with iron-shod pestles. Thence,
by fanning and screening, the husk is fully removed, and the grain
divided into three different grades, whole, middlings, and small whole
grains, and polished ready for market. The middlings consist of the
larger broken pieces of the grain; the small rice, of the small
fragments mixed with the chit of the grain. The broken rice, well dried,
is sometimes ground into flour of different degrees of fineness. The
small rice is much sweeter and somewhat superior in point of nutritive
value to the large or head rice usually met with in commerce.

Rice is characterized by a large percentage of starch, and is so
deficient in other food elements that if used alone, unless consumed in
very large quantities, it will not furnish the requisite amount of
nitrogenous material necessary for a perfect health food. For this
reason, it is necessary to supplement its use with some other food
containing an excess of nitrogenous elements, as peas, beans, milk, etc.
Associated with other articles rich in albuminous elements, rice is
exceedingly valuable, and one of the most easily digested foods. Boiled
or steamed rice requires but a little over one hour for digestion.

PREPARATION AND COOKING.--Rice needs to be thoroughly washed to
remove the earthy taste it is so apt to have. A good way to do this is
to put it into a colander, in a deep pan of water. Rub the rice well
with the hands, lifting the colander in and out the water, and changing
the water until it is clear; then drain. In this way the grit is
deposited in the water, and the rice left thoroughly clean.

The best method of cooking rice is by steaming it. If boiled in much
water, it loses a portion of its already small percentage of nitrogenous
elements. It requires much less time for cooking than any of the other
grains. Like all the dried grains and seeds, rice swells in cooking to
several times its original bulk. When cooked, each grain of rice should
be separate and distinct, yet perfectly tender.


RECIPES.

STEAMED RICE.--Soak a cup of rice in one and a fourth cups of water
for an hour, then add a cup of milk, turn into an earthen dish suitable
for serving it from at table, and place in a steam-cooker or a covered
steamer over a kettle of boiling water, and steam for an hour. It should
be stirred with a fork occasionally, for the first ten or fifteen
minutes.

BOILED RICE (Japanese method).--Thoroughly cleanse the rice by
washing in several waters, and soak it overnight. In the morning, drain
it, and put to cook in an equal quantity of boiling water, that is, a
pint of water for a pint of rice. For cooking, a stewpan with tightly
fitting cover should be used. Heat the water to boiling, then add the
rice, and after stirring, put on the cover, which is not again to be
removed during the boiling. At first, as the water boils, steam will
puff out freely from under the cover, but when the water has nearly
evaporated, which will be in eight to ten minutes, according to the age
and quality of the rice, only a faint suggestion of steam will be
observed, and the stewpan must then be removed from over the fire to
some place on the range, where it will not burn, to swell and dry for
fifteen or twenty minutes.

Rice to be boiled in the ordinary manner requires two quarts of boiling
water to one cupful of rice. It should be boiled rapidly until tender,
then drained at once, and set in a moderate oven to become dry. Picking
and lifting lightly occasionally with a fork will make it more flaky and
dry. Care must be taken, however, not to mash the rice grains.

RICE WITH FIG SAUCE.--Steam a cupful of best rice as directed
above, and when done, serve with a fig sauce prepared as directed on
page 89. Dish a spoonful of the fig sauce with each saucer of rice, and
serve with plenty of cream. Rice served in this way requires no sugar
for dressing, and is a most wholesome breakfast dish.

ORANGE RICE.--Wash and steam the rice according to directions
already given. Prepare some oranges by separating into sections and
cutting each section in halves, removing the seeds and all the white
portion. Sprinkle the oranges lightly with sugar, and let them stand
while the rice is cooking. Serve a portion of the orange on each
saucerful of rice.

RICE WITH RAISINS.--Carefully wash a cupful of rice, soak it, and
cook as directed for Steamed Rice. After the rice has began to swell,
but before it has softened, stir into it lightly, using a fork for the
purpose, a cupful of raisins, or Zante currents. Serve with cream.

RICE WITH PEACHES.--Steam the rice as previously directed, and when
done, serve with cream and a nicely ripened peach pared and sliced on
each individual dish.

BROWNED RICE.--Spread a cupful of rice on a shallow baking tin, and
put into a moderately hot oven to brown. It will need to be stirred
frequently to prevent burning and to secure a uniformity of color. Each
rice kernel, when sufficiently browned, should be of a yellowish brown,
about the color of ripened wheat. Steam the same as directed for
ordinary rice, using only two cups of water for each cup of browned
rice, and omitting the preliminary soaking. When properly cooked, each
kernel will be separated, dry, and mealy. Rice prepared in this manner
is undoubtedly more digestible than when cooked without browning.


RYE.

DESCRIPTION.--Rye is much more largely grown and used in European
countries that in America. In appearance it closely resembles wheat,
although somewhat darker in color and smaller in size. Bread made from
rye constitutes the staple food of the people in many parts of Europe.
In nutritive value such bread nearly equals that made from wheat, but it
has an acid taste not relished by persons unaccustomed to its use.

Rye is found in market deprived of its husk and crushed or rolled, and
also in the form of meal and flour.


_RECIPES._

ROLLED RYE.--Into three parts water boiling in the inner dish of a
double boiler, stir one part rolled rye. Boil rapidly until set,
stirring meanwhile, then place in the outer boiler, and cook for three
or more hours.

RYE MUSH.--Stir a cupful of rye meal to a smooth batter with a
cupful of water, then turn it slowly into three cupfuls of water, which
should be boiling on the range, in the inner dish of a double boiler.
Stir until thickened, then place in the outer boiler, and cook for an
hour or longer.


MAIZE, OR INDIAN CORN.

DESCRIPTION.--There can be little doubt that maize is of American
origin. The discoverers of the new world found it cultivated by the
aborigines, and from the fact that corn was the generic term then
largely used to designate grain (in old English, "corn" means grain),
they named it "Indian corn." Since that time it has been carried to
nearly every part of the globe, and probably it is more extensively used
than any other one of the cereals, with the exception of rice. This is
undoubtedly due to the fact that it is the most prolific of the grains,
and is adapted to the widest range of climate.

Maize was the chief food of the slaves of Brazil, as it used to be of
those in our own Southern States, and is very largely consumed in Mexico
and Peru. It was used very little in Europe until the Irish famine in
1847; since then, it has become a staple food with the poorer classes.

The varieties of corn are almost too numerous to be counted. For general
purposes, however, they may be classified as field corn, sweet corn, and
pop corn.

Corn is characterized by an excess of fatty matter, containing upwards
of three times the amount of that element to be found in wheat. Corn
requires stronger powers of digestion than wheat, and is unsuited to
some stomachs.

The skin of the corn kernel is thin, and when subjected to milling
processes, is included in the grinding. When well ground, it can be
digested, with the exception of the siliceous coating.

Sweet corn and some of the field varieties, form a nutritious and
favorite food while green. The mature grain is used in many forms. The
whole grain, hulled, is an agreeable food. Hulled, broken, or split to
various degrees of fineness, it is known according to the size to which
the grain has been reduced as hominy, fine hominy, or grits; or, if
finer still, as samp. Subjected to a process of still finer trituration,
it forms meal. Cornstarch consists of the farinaceous portions of the
grain.

On account of the large proportion of fatty matter contained in maize,
it acquires, if kept for some time and unpleasant, rancid taste,
occasioned by the usual change which takes place in fat when exposed to
the atmosphere.

The new process granular meal, which is prepared from corn dried for a
long period before grinding, becomes rank less quickly than that ground
in the old way.

Maize meal is very largely consumed in the form of mush or porridge.
This, in Ireland, is termed "stirabout;" in Italy it is called
"polenta;" and in British Honduras it is known as "corn lob."

GENERAL SUGGESTIONS FOR COOKING.--Most of the various preparations
from maize require prolonged cooking to render them wholesome; this is
equally true respecting mushes prepared from samp or meal, a dish which
unfortunately some cook in bygone days saw fit to term "hasty pudding."
Unthinking people since, supposing it to have been so named because of
the little time required to cook it, have commonly prepared it in
fifteen or twenty minutes, whereas from one to two hours, or even
longer, are necessary to cook it properly. Hulled corn, hominy, and
grits, all require prolonged cooking. The time for cooking these
preparations may be somewhat lessened if they are previously soaked over
night. They should, however, be cooked in the same water in which they
are soaked.


_RECIPES._

CORN MEAL MUSH.--stir together one pint of cornmeal, one
tablespoonful of flour, and one pint of cold milk. Turn this slowly,
stirring well meanwhile, into one quart of boiling water, which should
not cease to boil during the introduction of the batter. Cook three or
four hours. If milk is not obtainable, water alone may be used, in which
case two tablespoonfuls of flour will be needed. Cook in a double
boiler.

CORN MEAL MUSH WITH FRUIT.--Mush prepared in the above manner may
have some well-steamed raisins or chopped figs added to it just before
serving.

CORN MEAL CUBES.--Left-over corn meal mush may be made into an
appetizing dish by first slicing into rather thick slices, then cutting
into cubes about one inch squares. Put the cubes into a tureen and turn
over them a quantity of hot milk or cream. Cover the dish, let them
stand until thoroughly heated through, then serve.

BROWNED MUSH.--Slice cold corn meal mush rather thin, brush each
slice with thick, sweet cream, and brown in a moderate oven until well
heated through.

SAMP.--Use one part of samp to four and one half parts of boiling
water. It is the best plan to reserve enough of the water to moisten the
samp before adding it to the boiling water, as it is much less likely to
cook in lumps. Boil rapidly, stirring continuously, until the mush has
well set, then slowly for from two to three hours.

CEREALINE FLAKES.--Into one measure of boiling liquid stir an equal
measure of cerealine flakes, and cook in a double boiler from one half
to three fourths of an hour.

HULLED CORN.--_To Hull the Corn._--Put enough wood ashes into a
large kettle to half fill it; then nearly fill with hot water, and boil
ten minutes. Drain off the water from the ashes, turn it into a kettle,
and pour in four quarts of clean, shelled field corn, white varieties
preferred. Boil till the hulls rub off. Skim the corn out of the lye
water, and put it into a tub of fresh cold water. To remove the hulls,
scrub the corn well with a new stiff brush broom kept for the purpose,
changing the water often. Put through half a dozen or more waters, and
then take the corn out by handfuls, rubbing each well between the hands
to loosen the remaining hulls, and drop again into clear water. Pick out
all hulls. Cleanse the corn through several more waters if it is to be
dried and kept before using. Well hulled corn is found in the markets.

_To Cook._--If it is to be cooked at once, it should be parboiled in
clear water twice, and then put into new water and cooked till tender.
It should be nearly or quite dry when done. It may be served with milk
or cream.

COARSE HOMINY.--For coarse hominy use four parts of water or milk
and water to one of grain. It is best steamed or cooked in a double
boiler, though it may be boiled in a kettle over a slow fire. The only
objection to this method is the need of frequent stirring to prevent
sticking, which breaks and mashes the hominy. From four to five hours'
slow cooking will be necessary, unless the grain has been previously
soaked; then about one hour less will be required.

FINE HOMINY OR GRITS.--This preparation is cooked in the same
manner as the foregoing, using three and one half or four parts of water
to one of the grain. Four or five hours will be necessary for cooking
the unsoaked grits.

POPPED CORN.--The small, translucent varieties of maize known as
"pop corn," possessed the property, when gently roasted, of bursting
open, or turning inside out, a process which is owing to the following
facts: Corn contains an excess of fatty matter. By proper means this fat
can be separated from the grain, and it is then a thick, pale oil. When
oils are heated sufficiently in a vessel closed from the air, they are
turned into gas, which occupies many times the bulk of the oil. When pop
corn is gradually heated, and made so hot that the oil inside of the
kernel turns to gas, being unable to escape through the hull of the
kernel, the pressure finally becomes strong enough to burst the grain,
and the explosion is so violent as to shatter it in a most curious
manner.

Popped corn forms an excellent food, the starch of the grain being will
cooked. It should, however, be eaten in connection with other food at
mealtime, and not as a delicacy between meals. Ground pop corn is
considered a delectable dish eaten with milk or cream; it also forms the
base of several excellent puddings.

To pop the corn, shell and place in a wire "popper" over a bed of bright
coals, or on the top of a hot stove; stir or shake continuously, so that
each kernel may be subjected to the same degree of heat on all sides,
until it begins to burst open. If a popper is not attainable, a common
iron skillet covered tightly, and very lightly oiled on the bottom, may
be used for the purpose. The corn must be very dry to begin with, and if
good, nearly every kernel will pop open nicely. It should be used within
twenty-four hours after popping.


MACARONI.

DESCRIPTION.--Macaroni is a product of wheat prepared from a hard,
clean, glutenous grain. The grain is ground into a meal called
_semolina_, from which the bran is excluded. This is made into a tasty
dough by mixing with hot water in the proportion of two thirds
_semolina_ to one third water. The dough after being thoroughly mixed is
put into a shallow vat and kneaded and rolled by machinery. When well
rolled, it is made to assume varying shapes by being forced by a
powerful plunger through the perforated head of strong steel or iron
cylinders arranged above a fire, so that the dough is partially baked as
it issues from the holes. It is afterwards hung over rods or laid upon
frames covered with cloth, and dried. It is called by different names
according to its shape. If in the shape of large, hollow cylinders, it
is _macaroni;_ if smaller in diameter, it is _spaghetti;_ if fine,
_vermicelli;_ if the paste is cut into fancy patterns, it is termed
_pasta d'Italia_.

Macaroni was formerly made only in Italy, but at present is manufactured
to a considerable extent in the United States. The product, however, is
in general greatly inferior to that imported from Italy, owing to the
difference in the character of the wheat from which it is made, the
Italian macaroni being produced from a hard, semi-translucent wheat,
rich in nitrogenous elements, and which is only grown successfully in a
hot climate. Like all cereal foods, macaroni should be kept in a
perfectly dry storeroom.

TO SELECT MACARONI.--Good macaroni will keep in good condition for
years. It is rough, elastic, and hard; while the inferior article is
smooth, soft, breaks easily, becomes moldy with keeping. Inferior
macaroni contains a large percentage of starch, and but a small amount
of gluten. When put into hot water, it assumes a white, pasty
appearance, and splits in cooking. Good macaroni when put into hot water
absorbs a portion of the water, swells to nearly double its size, but
perfectly retains its shape. Inferior macaroni is usually sold a few
cents cheaper per pound than the genuine article. It contains a much
smaller amount of gluten. The best quality of any shape one pleases can
be bought in most markets for ten or fifteen cents a pound.

TO PREPARE AND COOK MACARONI.--Do not wash macaroni. If dusty, wipe
with a clean, dry cloth. Break into pieces of convenient size. Always
put to cook in boiling liquid, taking care to have plenty of water in
the saucepan (as it absorbs a large quantity), and cook until tender.
The length of time required may vary from twenty minutes, if fresh, to
one hour if stale. When tender, turn into a colander and drain, and pour
cold water through it to prevent the tubes from sticking together. The
fluid used for cooking may be water, milk, or a mixture of both; also
soup stock, tomato juice, or any preferred liquid.

Macaroni serves as an important adjunct to the making of various soups,
and also forms the basis of other palatable dishes.


_RECIPES._

HOME-MADE MACARONI.--To four cupfuls of flour, add one egg well
beaten, and enough water to make a dough that can be rolled. Roll thin
on a breadboard and cut into strips. Dry in the sun. The best
arrangement for this purpose is a wooden frame to which a square of
cheese-cloth has been tightly tacked, upon which the macaroni may be
laid in such a way as not to touch, and afterwards covered with a
cheese-cloth to keep off the dust during the drying.

BOILED MACARONI.--Break sticks of macaroni into pieces about an
inch in length, sufficient to fill a large cup; put it into boiling
water and cook until tender. When done, drained thoroughly, then add a
pint of milk, part cream if it can be afforded, a little salt and one
well-beaten egg; stir over the fire until it thickens, and serve hot.

MACARONI WITH CREAM SAUCE.--Cook the macaroni as directed in the
proceeding, and serve with a cream sauce prepared by heating a scant
pint of rich milk to boiling, in a double boiler. When boiling, add a
heaping tablespoonful of flour, rubbed smoothed in a little milk and one
fourth teaspoonful of salt. If desired, the sauce may be flavored by
steeping in the milk before thickening for ten or fifteen minutes, a
slice of onion or a few bits of celery, and then removing with a fork.

MACARONI WITH TOMATO SAUCE.--Break a dozen sticks of macaroni into
two-inch lengths, and drop into boiling milk and water, equal parts. Let
it boil for an hour, or until perfectly tender. In the meantime prepare
the sauce by rubbing a pint of stewed or canned tomatoes through a
colander to remove all seeds and fragments. Heat to boiling, thicken
with a little flour; a tablespoonful to the pint will be about the
requisite proportion. Add salt and if desired, a half cup of very thin
sweet cream. Dish the macaroni into individual dishes, and serve with a
small quantity of the sauce poured over each dish.

MACARONI BAKED WITH GRANOLA.--Break macaroni into pieces about an
inch in length sufficient to fill a large cup, and cook until tender in
boiling milk and water. When done, drain and put a layer of the macaroni
in the bottom of an earthen pudding dish, and sprinkle over it a scant
teaspoonful of granola. Add a second and third layer and sprinkle each
with granola; then turn over the whole a custard sauce prepared by
mixing together a pint of milk, the well beaten yolks of two eggs or one
whole egg, and one-fourth of a teaspoonful of salt. Care should be taken
to arrange the macaroni in layers loosely, so that the sauce will
readily permeate the whole. Bake for a few minutes only, until the
custard has well set, and serve.

EGGS AND MACARONI.--Break fifteen whole sticks of macaroni into
two-inch lengths, and put to cook in boiling water. While the macaroni
is cooking, boil the yolks of four eggs until mealy. The whole egg may
be used if caught so the yolks are mealy in the whites simply jellied,
not hardened. When the macaroni is done, drain and put a layer of it
arranged loosely in the bottom of an earthen pudding dish. Slice the
cooked egg yolks and spread a layer of them over the macaroni. Fill the
dish with alternate layers of macaroni and egg, taking care to have the
top layer of macaroni. Pour over the whole a cream sauce prepared as
follows: Heat one and three fourths cup of rich milk to boiling, add one
fourth teaspoonful of salt and one heaping spoonful of flour rubbed
smooth in a little cold milk. Cook until thickened, then turn over the
macaroni. Sprinkle the top with grated bread crumbs, and brown in a hot
oven for eight or ten minutes. Serve hot.




TABLE TOPICS.

    Sir Isaac Newton, when writing his grail work, "Principia," lived
    wholly upon a vegetable, diet.

    ROBERT COLLYER once remarked; "One great reason why I never had a
    really sick day in my life was that as boy I lived on oatmeal and
    milk and brown bread, potatoes and a bit of meat when I could get
    it, and then oatmeal again."

    HOT-WEATHER DIET.--The sultry period of our summer, although
    comparatively slight and of short duration, is nevertheless felt by
    some people to be extremely oppressive, but this is mainly due to
    the practice of eating much animal food or fatty matters, conjoined
    as it often is with the habit of drinking freely of fluids
    containing more or less alcoholics. Living on cereals, vegetables,
    and fruits, and abstaining from alcoholic drinks, the same persons
    would probably enjoy the temperature, and be free from the thirst
    which is the natural result of consuming needlessly heating
    food.--_Sir Henry Thompson._

    _Mistress_ (arranging for dinner)--"Didn't the macaroni come from
    the grocer's, Bridget?"

    _Bridget_--"Yis, mum, but oi sint it back. Every won av thim leetle
    stims wuz impty."

    Some years since, a great railroad corporation in the West, having
    occasion to change the gauge of its road throughout a distance of
    some five hundred miles, employed a force of 3,000 workmen upon the
    job, who worked from very early in the morning until late at night.
    Alcoholic drinks were strictly prohibited, but a thin gruel made of
    oatmeal and water was kept on hand and freely partaken of by the men
    to quench their thirst. The results were admirable; not a single
    workmen gave out under the severe strain, and not one lost a day
    from sickness. Thus this large body of men were kept well and in
    perfect strength and spirits, and the work was done in considerably
    less time than that counted on for its completion.

    In Scotch households oatmeal porridge is as inevitable as breakfast
    itself, except perhaps on Sundays, as this anecdote will illustrate.
    A mother and child were passing along a street in Glasgow, when this
    conversation was overheard:--

    "What day is the morn, mither?"

    "Sabbath, laddie."

    "An' will wi hae tea to breakfast, mither?"

    "Aye, laddie, gin we're spared."

    "An' gin we're no spared, will we hae parrich?"




BREADSTUFFS AND BREADMAKING

Although the grains form most nutritious and palatable dishes when
cooked in their unground state, this is not always the most convenient
way of making; use of them. Mankind from earliest antiquity has sought
to give these wonderful products of nature a more portable and
convenient form by converting them into what is termed bread, a word
derived from the verb _bray_, to pound, beat, or grind small, indicative
of the ancient manner of preparing the grain for making bread. Probably
the earliest form of bread was simply the whole grain moistened and then
exposed to heat. Afterward, the grains were roasted and ground, or
pounded between stones, and unleavened bread was made by mixing this
crude flour with water, and baking in the form of cakes. Among the many
ingenious arrangements used by the ancients for baking this bread, was a
sort of portable oven in shape something like a pitcher, in the inside
of which a fire was made. When the oven was well heated, a paste made of
meal and water was applied to the outside. Such bread was baked very
quickly and taken off in small, thin sheets like wafers. A flat cake was
the common form in which most of the bread of olden times was baked;
being too brittle to be cut with a knife, the common mode of dividing it
was by breaking and hence the expression "breaking bread" so common in
Scripture.

Various substances have been and are employed for making this needful
article. Until the last few decades, barley was the grain most
universally used. Chestnuts, ground to a flour, are made into bread in
regions where these nuts abound. Quite recently, an immense peanut crop
in the Southern States was utilized for bread-making purposes. In
ancient times, the Thracians made to bread from a flour made from the
_water coltran_, a prickly root of triangular form. In Syria, mulberries
were dried and grounded to flour. Rice, moss, palm tree piths, and
starch producing roots are used by different nationalities in the
preparation of bread. In many parts of Sweden, bread is made from dried
fish, using one half fish flour and one half barley flour; and in
winter, flour made from the bark of trees is added. Desiccated tomatoes,
potatoes, and other vegetables are also mixed with the cereals for
bread-making. In India, the lower classes make their bread chiefly from
millet. Moss bread is made in Iceland from the reindeer moss, which
toward autumn becomes soft, tender, and moist, with a taste like wheat
bran. It contains a large quantity of starch, and the Icelanders gather,
dry, pulverize it, and thus prepare it for bread-making. The ancient
Egyptians often made their bread from equal parts of the whole grain and
meal.

The breadstuff's most universally used among civilized nations at the
present time are barley, rye, oats, maize, buckwheat, rice, and wheat,
of which the last has acquired a decided preference.

If made in the proper manner and from suitable material, bread is, with
the exception of milk, the article best fitted for the nourishment of
the body, and if need be, can supply the place of all other foods. Good
bread does not cloy the appetite as do many other articles of food, and
the simplest bill of fare which includes light, wholesome bread, is far
more satisfying than an elaborate meal without it. Were the tables of
our land supplied with good, nutritious, well-baked bread, there would
be less desire for cake, pastry, and other indigestible particles,
which, under the present system of cookery, are allowed to compensate
for the inferior quality and poor preparation of more wholesome foods.

Bread has been proverbially styled the "staff of life." In nearly all
ancient languages the entomology of the word "bread" signifies all,
indicating; that the bread of earlier periods was in truth what it
should be at the present time,--a staff upon which all the functions of
life might with safety depend.

Notwithstanding the important part bread was designed to play in the
economy of life, it would be hardly possible to mention another aliment
which so universally falls below the standard either through the manner
of its preparation or in the material used.

Bread, to answer the requirements of a good, wholesome article of food,
beside being palatable, must be light, porous, and friable, so that it
can be easily insalivated and digested. It should not contain
ingredients which will in any way be injurious if taken into the system,
but should contain as many as possible of the elements of nutrition.
Wheat, the substance from which bread is most generally made, contains
all the necessary food elements in proper proportions to meet the
requirements of nutrition, and bread should also contain them. The
flour, however, must be made from the whole grain of the wheat, with the
exception of the outer husk.

What is ordinarily termed fine flour has a large part of the most
nutritive properties of the grain left out, and unless this deficiency
is made up by other foods, the use of bread made from such material will
leave the most vital tissues of the body poorly nourished, and tend to
produce innumerable bad results. People who eat bread made from fine
white flour naturally crave the food elements which have been eliminated
from the wheat, and are thus led to an excessive consumption of meat,
and the nerve-starvation and consequent irritability thus induced may
also lead to the use of alcoholic drinks. We believe that one of the
strongest barriers women could erect against the inroads of intemperance
would be to supply the tables of the land with good bread made from
flour of the entire wheat.

The superiority of bread made from the entire wheat or unbolted meal has
been attested by many notable examples in history. In England, under the
administration of William Pitt, there was for several years such a
scarcity of wheat that to make it hold out longer, a law was passed by
Parliament that the army should be supplied with bread made of unbolted
flour. This occasioned much murmuring on the part of the soldiers, but
nevertheless the health of the army improved so greatly as to be a
subject of surprise. The officers and the physicians at last publicly
declared that the soldiers had never before been so robust and healthy.

According to the eminent Prof. Liebig, whole-wheat bread contains 60 per
cent more of the phosphate or bone forming material than does meat, and
200 per cent more gluten than white bread. To the lack of these elements
in a food so generally used as white flour bread, is undoubtedly due the
great prevalence of early decaying teeth, rickets, and other bone
diseases. Indeed, so many are the evils attendant upon a continued use
of fine flour bread that we can in a great measure agree with a writer
of the last century who says, in a quaint essay still to be seen at the
British Museum, that "fine flour, spirituous liquors, and strong
ale-house beer are the foundations of almost all the poverty and all the
evils that affect the labouring part of mankind."

Bread made from the entire wheat is looked upon with far more favor than
formerly, and it is no longer necessary to use the crude products of the
grain for its manufacture, since modern invention has worked such a
revolution in milling processes that it is now possible to obtain a fine
flour containing all the nutritious elements of the grain. The old-time
millstone has been largely superceded by machinery with which the entire
grain may be reduced to fine flour without the loss of any of its
valuable properties. To be sure, the manufacture of fine white flour of
the old sort, is still continued, and doubtless will be continued so
long as color takes precedence over food value. The improved processes
of milling have, however, enabled the millers to utilize a much larger
proportion of the nutritious elements of the grain than formerly, and
still preserve that whiteness is so pleasing to many consumers. Although
it is true that there are brands of white flour which possess a large
percentage of the nutrient properties of the wheat, it is likewise true
that flour which contains _all_ the nutritive elements is _not_ white.

Of flours made from the entire grain there are essentially two different
varieties, that which is termed _unbolted wheat meal_ or _Graham_ flour,
and that called _wheat-berry, whole-wheat_, or _entire-wheat_ flour. The
principal difference between the two consists in the preliminary
treatment of the wheat kernel before reduction, Graham flour containing
more or less of the flinty bran, which is wholly innutritious and to a
sensitive stomach somewhat irritating. In the manufacture of _whole_ or
_entire_-wheat flour, the outer, flinty bran is first removed by special
machinery, and then the entire grain pulverized, by some of approved
method, to different grades of fineness. The absence of the indigestible
bran renders the entire-wheat flour superior in this respect to Graham,
though for many persons the latter is to preferred.

HOW TO SELECT FLOUR.--The first requisite in the making of good
bread is good flour. The quality of a brand of flour will of course
depend much upon the kind of grain from which it is prepared--whether
new or old, perfect, or deteriorated by rust, mold, or exposure, and
also upon the thoroughness with which it has been cleansed from dust,
chaff, and all foreign substances, as well as upon the method by which
it is ground. It is not possible to judge with regard to all these
particulars by the appearance of the flour, but in general, good flour
will be sweet, dry, and free from any sour or musty smell or taste. Take
up a handful, and if it falls from the hand light and elastic, it is
pretty sure to be good. If it will retain the imprint of the fingers
and falls and a compact mass or a damp, clammy, or sticky to the touch,
it is by no means the best. When and knead a little of it between the
fingers; if it works soft and sticky, it is poor. Good flour, when made
into dough, is elastic, and will retain its shape. This elastic property
of good flour is due to the gluten which it contains. The more gluten
and the stronger it is, the better the flour. The gluten of good flour
will swell to several times its original bulk, while that of poor flour
will not.

In buying white flour, do not select that which is pure white with a
bluish tinge, but that which is of a creamy, yellowish-white tint. While
the kinds of flour that contain the entire nutritive properties of the
wheat will necessarily be darker in color, we would caution the reader
not to suppose that because flour is dark in color it is for that reason
good, and rich in nutritive elements. There are many other causes from
which flour may be dark, such as the use of uncleansed or dark varieties
of wheat, and the large admixture of bran and other grains; many
unscrupulous millers and flour dealers make use of this fact to palm off
upon their unsuspecting customers an inferior article. Much of the
so-called Graham flour is nothing more than poor flour mixed with bran,
and is in every way inferior to good white flour. Fine flour or made
from the entire wheat may generally be distinguished from a spurious
article by taking a small portion into the mouth and chewing it. Raw
flour made from the entire grain has a sweet taste, and a rich, nutty
flavor the same as that experienced in chewing a whole grain of wheat,
and produces a goodly quantity of gum or gluten, while a spurious
article tastes flat and insipid like starch, or has a bitter, pungent
taste consequent upon the presence of impurities. This bitter taste is
noticeable in bread made from such flour. A given quantity of poor flour
will not make as much bread as the same quantity of good flour, so that
adulteration may also be detected in this way. Doubtless much of the
prejudice against the use of whole-wheat flour has arisen from the use
of a spurious article.

As it is not always possible to determine accurately without the aid of
chemistry and a microscope whether flour is genuine, the only safe way
is to purchase the product of reliable mills.

It is always best to obtain a small quantity of flour first, and put it
to the test of bread-making; then, if satisfactory, purchase that brand
so long as it proves good. It is true economy to buy a flour known to be
good even though it may cost more than some others. It is not wise to
purchase too large a quantity at once unless one has exceptionally good
facilities for storage, as flour is subject to many deteriorating
influences. It is estimated that a barrel of good flour contains
sufficient bread material to last one person one year; and from this
standard it can be easily estimated in what proportion it is best to
purchase.

TO KEEP FLOUR.--Flour should always be kept in a tight receptacle,
and in a cool, dry, well-ventilated place. It should not be allowed to
remain in close proximity to any substances of strong odor, as it very
readily absorbs odors and gaseous impurities. A damp atmosphere will
cause it to absorb moisture, and as a result the gluten will lose some
of its tenacity and become sticky, and bread made from the flour will be
coarser and inferior in quality. Flour which has absorbed dampness from
any cause should be sifted into a large tray, spread out thin and
exposed to the hot sun, or placed in a warming oven for a few hours.

DELETERIOUS ADULTERATIONS OF FLOUR.--Besides the fraud frequently
practiced of compounding whole-wheat flour from inferior mill products,
white flour is sometimes adulterated--more commonly, however, in
European countries that in this--with such substances as alum, ground
rice, plaster of Paris, and whiting. Alum is doubtless the most commonly
used of all these substances, for the reason that it gives the bread a
whiter color and causes the flour to absorb and retain a larger amount
of water than it would otherwise hold. This enables the user to make,
from an inferior brand of flour, bread which resembles that made from a
better quality. Such adulteration is exceedingly injurious, as are other
mineral substances used for a similar purpose.

The presence of alum in flour or bread may be detected in the following
way: Macerate a half slice of bread in three or four tablespoonfuls of
water; strain off the water, and add to it twenty drops of a strong
solution of logwood, made either from the fresh chips or the extract.
Then add a large teaspoonful of a strong solution of carbonate of
ammonium. If alum is present, the mixture will change from pink to
lavender blue.

The _Journal of Trade_ gives the following simple mode of testing for
this adulterant: "Persons can test the bread they buy for themselves, by
taking a piece of it and soaking it in water. Take this water and mix it
with an equal part of fresh milk, and if the bread contains alum, the
mixture will coagulate. If a better test is required, boil the mixture,
and it will form perfect clot."

Whiting can be detected by dipping the ends of the thumb and forefinger
in sweet oil and rubbing the flour between them. If whiting is present,
the flour will become sticky like putty, and remain white; whereas pure
flour, when so rubbed, becomes darker in color, but not sticky. Plaster
of Paris, chalk, and other alkaline adulterants may be detected by a few
drops of lemon juice: if either be present, effervescence will take
place.

CHEMISTRY OF BREAD-MAKING.--Good flour alone will not insure good
bread. As much depends upon its preparation as upon the selection of
material; for the very best of flour may be transformed into the poorest
of bread through improper or careless preparation. Good bread cannot be
produced at random. It is not the fruit of any luck or chance, but the
practical result of certain fixed laws and principles to which all may
conform.

The first step in the conversion of flour into bread is to incorporate
with it a given amount of fluid, by which each atom of flour is
surrounded with a thin film of moisture, in order to hydrate the starch,
to dissolve the sugar and albumen, and to develop the adhesiveness of
the gluten, thus binding the whole into one coherent mass termed
_dough_, a word from a verb meaning to wet or moisten. If nothing more
be done, and this simple form of dough be baked, the starch granules
will be ruptured by the heat and thus properly prepared for food; but
the moistening will have developed the glue-like property of the gluten
to the extent of firmly cementing the particles of flour together, so
that the mass will be hard and tough, and almost incapable of
mastication. If, however, the dough be thoroughly kneaded, rolled very
thin, made into small cakes, and then quickly baked with sufficient
heat, the result will be a brittle kind of bread termed unleavened
bread, which, although it requires a lengthy process of mastication, is
more wholesome and digestible than soft bread, which is likely to be
swallowed insufficiently insalivated.

The gluten of wheat flour, beside being adhesive, is likewise remarkably
elastic. This is the reason why wheat flour is much more easily made
into light bread than the product of other cereals which contain less or
a different quality of gluten. Now if while the atoms of flour are
supplied with moisture, they are likewise supplied with some form of
gaseous substance, the elastic walls of the gluten cells will become
distended, causing the dough to "rise," or grow in bulk, and at the same
time become light, or porous, in texture.

This making of bread light is usually accomplished by the introduction
of air into the dough, or by carbonic acid gas generated within the
mass, either before or during the baking, by a fermentative or chemical
process.

When air is the agency used, the gluten, by its glue-like properties,
catches and retains the air for a short period; and if heat is applied
before the air, which is lighter than the dough, rises and escapes, it
will expand, and in expanding distend the elastic glutinous mass,
causing it to puff up or rise. If the heat is sufficient to harden the
gluten quickly, so that the air cells throughout the whole mass become
firmly fixed before the air escapes, the result will be a light, porous
bread. If the heat is not sufficient, the air does not properly expand;
or if before a sufficient crust is formed to retain the air and form a
framework of support for the dough, the heat is lessened or withdrawn,
the air will escape, or contract to its former volume, allowing the
distended glutinous cell walls to collapse; in either case the bread
will be heavy.

If carbonic acid gas, generated within the dough by means of
fermentation or by the use of chemical substances, be the means used to
lighten the mass, the gluten by virtue of its tenacity holds the bubbles
of gas as they are generated, and prevents the large and small ones from
uniting, or from rising to the surface, as they seek to do, being
lighter than the dough. Being thus caught where they are generated, and
the proper conditions supplied to expand them, they swell or raise the
dough, which is then termed a loaf. (This word "loaf" is from the
Anglo-Saxon _hlifian_, to raise or lift up.) The structure is rendered
permanent by the application of heat in baking.


BREAD MADE LIGHT BY FERMENTATION.

For general use, the most convenient form of bread is usually considered
to be that made from wheat flour, raised or made light by some method of
fermentation, although in point of nutritive value and healthfulness, it
does not equal light, unfermented, or aërated bread made without the aid
of chemicals.

THE PROCESS OF FERMENTATION.--Fermentation is a process of
decomposition, and hence more or less destructive to the substances
subjected to its influence. When animal and vegetable substances
containing large amounts of nitrogenous elements are in a moist state
and exposed to air, they very soon undergo a change, the result of which
is decomposition or decay. This is occasioned by the action of germs,
which feed upon nitrogenous substances, as do the various species of
fungi. Meat, eggs, milk, and other foods rich in nitrogenous elements
can be preserved but a short time if exposed to the atmosphere. The
carbonaceous elements are different in this respect. When pure starch,
sugar, or fat is exposed to the air in a moistened state, they exhibit
the very little tendency to change or decay. Yet if placed in contact
with decomposing substances containing nitrogen, they soon begin to
change, and are themselves decomposed and destroyed. This communication
of the condition of change from one class of substances to another, is
termed fermentation. If a fermenting substance be added to a watery
solution containing sugar, the sugar will be changed or decomposed, and
two new substances, alcohol and carbonic acid gas, are produced.

The different stages of fermentation are noted scientifically as
alcoholic, acetous, and putrefactive. The first is the name given to the
change which takes place in the saccharine matter of the dough, which
results in the formation of alcohol and carbonic acid gas. This same
change takes place in the saccharine matter of fruits under the proper
with conditions of warmth, air, and moisture, and is utilized in the
production of wines and fermented liquors.

In bread-making, the alcohol and carbonic acid gas produced during the
fermentation, are formed from sugar,--that originally contained in the
flour and the additional quantity formed from starch during the
fermenting process. It is evident, therefore, that bread cannot be
fermented without some loss in natural sweetness and nutritive value,
and bread made after this method should be managed so as to deteriorate
the material as little as possible.

If this fermentation continues long enough, the acetous fermentation is
set up, and _acetic_ acid, the essential element of vinegar, is formed
and the dough becomes sour. If the process of fermentation is very much
prolonged, the putrefactive change is set up, and the gluten is more or
less decomposed.

If the dough be baked during the alcoholic and carbonic-acid stage of
fermentation, the gas will render the loaf light and porous. The alcohol
will be dissipated by the heat during the baking, or evaporated shortly
afterward, provided the baking be thorough. If the fermentation is
allowed to proceed until the acetous fermentation has begun, the loaf,
when baked, will be "sad" and heavy, since there is no longer any gas to
puff it up. If, however, during the first or alcoholic stage of
fermentation, new material be added, the same kind of fermentation will
continue for a certain period longer.

These facts serve to show that great care and attention are necessary to
produce good bread by a fermentative process. If the fermentation has
not been allowed to proceed far enough to generate a sufficient amount
of gas to permeate the whole mass, the result will be a heavy loaf; and
if allowed to proceed too far, acid fermentation begins, the gas
escapes, and we have sour as well as heavy bread. It is not enough,
however, to prevent bread from reaching the acetous or sour stage of
fermentation. Bread may be over-fermented when there is no appreciable
sourness developed. Fermentation may be carried so far as to destroy
much of the richness and sweetness of the loaf, and yet be arrested by
the baking process just before the acetous stage begins, so that it will
be light and porous, but decidedly lacking in flavor and substance.
Over-fermentation also develops in the bread various bitter substances
which obscure the natural sweetness of the bread and give to it an
unpleasant flavor. Many of these substances are more or less harmful in
character, and include many poisons known as ptomaines, a class of
chemical compounds produced by germs whenever fermentation or
decomposition of organic matter takes place. Much skill is required to
determine at what point to arrest the fermentation, in order to save the
sweetness and richness of the bread.

FERMENTATIVE AGENTS.--Fermentation in vegetable matter is always
accompanied by the growth of living organisms. The development of these
minute organisms is the exciting cause of fermentation and putrefaction.
The germs or spores of some of these fermenting agents are always
present in the air. It is well known to housekeepers that if a batter of
flour and water and a little salt be kept in a jar of water at a
temperature of from 100° to 110°, it will ferment in the course of five
or six hours. Scientists assure us that this fermentation is occasioned
by the introduction of the spores of certain species of fungi which are
continually floating in the atmosphere, and the proper conditions of
warmth and moisture being supplied, they at once begin to grow and
multiply. This method of securing fermentation is utilized by housewives
in making what is termed salt-rising bread. The raising of dough by this
process is lengthy and uncertain, and a far more convenient method is to
accelerate the fermentation by the addition of some active ferment. The
ancient method of accomplishing this was by adding to the dough a
leaven, a portion of old dough which had been kept until it had begun to
ferment; but since the investigations of modern chemistry have made
clear the properties of yeast, that has come to be considered the best
agent for setting up the process of alcoholic fermentation in bread. The
use of leaven is still practiced to somewhat in some European countries.
The bread produced with leaven, although light and spongy in texture,
has an unpleasant, sour taste, and is much less wholesome than that
produced with fresh yeast.

Yeast is a collection of living organisms or plants belonging to the
family of fungi, which, like all other plants, require warmth, moisture,
and food, in order to promote growth, and when properly supplied with
these, they begin to grow and multiply rapidly. Fermentation will not
take place at a temperature below 30°, it proceeds slowly at 45°, but
from 70° to 90° it goes on rapidly. Fermentation may be arrested by the
exhaustion of either the fermenting agent or the food supply, or by
exposure to heat at the temperature of boiling water. This latter fact
enables the housewife to arrest the process of fermentation, when the
loaf has become sufficiently light, by baking it in a hot oven. Heat
destroys most of the yeast cells; a few, however, remain in the loaf
unchanged, and it is for this reason that yeast bread is considered less
wholesome for dyspeptics than light unleavened bread. It is apparent,
then, that the more thoroughly fermented bread is baked, the more
wholesome it will be, from the more complete destruction of the yeast
germs which it contains.

YEAST.--Next to good flour, the most important requisite in the
manufacture of fermented bread is good yeast. The best of flour used in
conjunction with poor yeast will not produce good bread. The most
convenient and reliable kind of marketable yeast, when fresh, is the
compressed yeast. The dry though they are always ready for use, the
quality of the bread they produce is generally inferior to that made
with either compressed yeast or good liquid yeast. If this sort of yeast
must be depended upon, the cakes known as "Yeast Foam" are the best of
any with which we are acquainted.

Of homemade yeasts there are almost as many varieties as there are
cooks. Their comparative value depends mainly upon the length of time
they will keep good, or the facility with which they can be prepared.
Essentially the same principles are involved in the making of them all;
viz., the introduction of a small quantity of fresh, lively yeast into a
mixture of some form of starch (obtained from flour, potato, or a
combination of both) and water, with or without the addition of such
other substances as will promote fermentation, or aid in preventing the
yeast from souring. Under proper conditions of warmth, the small amount
of original yeast begins to supply itself with food at once by
converting the starch into dextrine, and then into grape sugar, and
multiplies itself with great rapidity, and will continue to do so as
long as there is material to supply it with the means of growth. While
its growth is rapid, its decay is equally so; and unless some means of
preservation be employed, the yeast will die, and the mixture become
sour and foul. Ordinarily it can be kept good for several days, and
under the best conditions, even three or four weeks. After it has been
kept from four to six hours, it should be placed in some receptacle as
nearly air-tight as possible and set in the cellar or refrigerator,
where it can be kept at a temperature not conducive to fermentation.
Thus the little yeast organisms will remain in a quiescent state, but
yet alive and capable of multiplying themselves when again surrounded
with favorable conditions.

The yeast should be kept in glass or glazed earthen ware. The vessel
containing it should be washed and scalded with scrupulous care before
new yeast is put in, since the smallest particle of sour or spoiled
yeast will ruin the fresh supply in a very short time. It is generally
conceded that yeast will keep longer if the material of which it is made
be mixed with liquid of a boiling temperature, or cooked for a few
minutes at boiling heat before adding the yeast. The reason for this
undoubtedly lies in the fact that the boiling kills foreign germs, and
thus prevents early souring or putrefaction. The yeast must not be
added, however, until the liquid has cooled to a little more than blood
heat, as too great heat will kill the yeast cells.

The starch of the potato is thought to furnish better material for the
promotion of yeast growth than that of wheat flour; but whether the
potato be first cooked, mashed, and then combined with the other
ingredients, or grated raw and then cooked in boiling water, makes
little difference so far as results are concerned, though the latter
method may have the advantage of taking less time. If potatoes are used
for this purpose, they should be perfectly mature. New ones will not
answer.

Sugar assists in promoting the growth of the yeast plant, and a small
amount is usually employed in making yeast. Hops serve to prevent the
yeast from souring, and an infusion of them is frequently used for this
purpose.

While it is essential that the water used should be boiling, it is also
necessary that the mixture should cooled to a lukewarm temperature
before the introduction of the original yeast, as intense heat will kill
the yeast plant. Freezing cold will likewise produced the same result.
While a cool temperature is one of the requisites for keeping yeast
fresh, care must be taken, especially in winter, that it does not get
chilled.

When yeast is needed for bread, it is always the best plan to take a cup
to the cellar or refrigerator for the desired quantity, and re-cover the
jar as quickly as possible. A half hour in a hot kitchen would be quite
likely to spoiled it. Always shake or stir the whole well before
measuring out the yeast. In making yeast, used earthen bowls for mixing,
porcelain-lined or granite-ware utensils for boiling, and silver or
wooden spoons for stirring.

BITTER YEAST.--It sometimes happens that an excessive use of hops
in the making of yeast gives to it so bitter a flavor as to communicate
a disagreeable taste to the bread. To correct this bitterness, mix with
the yeast a considerable quantity of water, and let it stand for some
hours, when the thickest portion will have settled at the bottom. The
water, which will have extracted much of the bitterness, can then be
turned off and thrown away. Yeast also sometimes becomes a bitter from
long keeping. Freshly burnt charcoal thrown into the yeast is said to
absorb the odors and offensive matter and render the yeast more sweet;
however, we do not recommend the use of any yeast so stale as to need
sweetening or purifying. Yeast that is new and fresh is always best; old
and stale yeast, even though it may still possess the property of
raising the dough, will give an unpleasant taste to the bread, and is
much less wholesome.

TESTS FOR YEAST.--Liquid yeast, when good, is light in color and
looks foamy and effervescent; it has a pungent odor somewhat similar to
weak ammonia, and if tasted will have a sharp, biting flavor. Yeast is
poor when it looks dull and watery, and has a sour odor. Compressed
yeast, if good, breaks off dry and looks white; if poor, it appears
moist and stringy.

If there is any question as to the quality of yeast, it is always best
to test it before use by adding a little flour to a small quantity and
setting it in a warm place. If it begins to ferment in the course of
fifteen or twenty minutes, it is good.

STARTING THE BREAD.--Having secured good yeast, it is necessary in
some way to diffuse it through the bread material so that it will set up
an active fermentation, which, by the evolution of gas, will render the
whole mass light and porous. As fermentation is more sure, more rapid,
and requires less yeast to start it when set in action in a thin mixture
than when introduced into stiff dough, the more common method of
starting fermented bread is by "setting a sponge;" viz., preparing a
batter of flour and liquid, to which potato is sometimes added, and into
which the yeast is introduced. Some cooks, in making the batter, use
the whole amount of liquid needed for the bread, and as the sponge
rises, add flour in small quantities, beating it back, and allowing it
to rise a second, third, or even fourth time, until sufficient flour has
been added to knead; others use only half the liquid in preparing the
sponge, and when it has well risen, prepare a second one by adding the
remainder of the liquid and fresh flour, in which case the fermented
batter acts as a double portion of yeast and raises the second sponge
very quickly. The requisite amount of flour is then added, the dough
kneaded, and the whole allowed to rise a third time in the loaf. Other
cooks dispense altogether with the sponge, adding to the liquid at first
the requisite amount of flour, kneading it thoroughly and allowing it to
rise once in mass and again after molding into loaves. As to the
superiority of one method over another, much depends upon their
adaptability to the time and convenience of the user; light bread can be
produced by either method. Less yeast but more time will be required
when the bread is started with a sponge. The end to be attained by all
is a complete and equal diffusion of gas bubbles generated during
fermentation throughout the whole mass of dough.

The preferable method of combining the materials needed for the batter
is by first mingling the yeast with the water or milk. If condensed or
dry yeast is used, previously dissolve it well in a half cupful or less
of lukewarm water. Stir the flour slowly into the liquid mixture and
beat it _very thoroughly_ so that the yeast shall be evenly distributed
throughout the whole.

PROPORTION OF MATERIALS NEEDED.--The material needed for making:
the bread should all be carefully measured out beforehand and the flour
well sifted. Many housekeepers fail in producing good bread, because
they guess at the quantity of material to be used, particularly the
flour, and with the same quantity of liquid will one time use much more
flour that at another, thus making the results exceedingly variable.
With this same brand of flour, this same quantity should always be used
to produce a given amount of bread. This amount will depend upon the
quality of the material used. Good flour will absorb a larger quantity
of liquids than that of an inferior quality, and the amount of liquid a
given quantity of flour will take up determines the quantity of bread
that can be produced from it. This amount is chiefly dependent upon the
proportion of gluten contained in the flour. One hundred pounds of good
flour will absorb sufficient water to produce one hundred and fifty
pounds of bread. One reason why bread retains so much water is that
during the baking a portion of starch is converted into gum, which holds
water more strongly than starch. Again: the gluten, when wet, is not
easily dried, while the dry crust which forms around the bread in baking
is merely impervious to water, and, like the skin of a baking potato,
prevents the moisture from escaping.

Kinds of flour vary so considerably in respect to their absorbent
properties that it is not possible to state the exact proportions of
flour and liquid required; approximately, three heaping measures of
flour for one scant measure of liquid, including the yeast, will in
general be found a good proportion. Bread made from the entire wheat
will require from one half to one cupful less flour than that made of
white flour. A quart of liquid, including the yeast, is sufficient for
three ordinary-sized loaves. One half or two thirds of a cup of homemade
yeast, according to its strength, or one half a cake of compressed yeast
dissolved in a half cup of lukewarm water, will be sufficient for one
quart of liquid. It is a common mistake to use too much yeast. It
lessens the time required, but the result is less satisfactory. Bread to
be set over night requires less yeast.

Whether water or milk should be used for bread-making, depends upon
taste and convenience. Bread retains more nearly the natural flavor of
the grain if made with water, and is less apt to sour; at the same time,
bread made with milk is more tender than that made with water. Bread
made with milk requires from one half to one cupful less of flour.

Potatoes are sometimes used in conjunction with flour for bread-making.
They are by no means necessary when good flour is used, but bread made
from inferior flour is improved by their use. Only potatoes that are
fully matured should be used for this purpose, and they should be well
cooked and smoothly mashed. Neither sugar nor salt is essential for the
production of good bread, though most cook books recommend the use of
one or both. The proportion of the former should not exceed one even
tablespoonful to three pints of flour, and the very smallest amount of
salt, never more than a half teaspoonful, and better less. No butter or
other free fat is required; the tenderness of texture produced by its
use can be secured as well by the use of unskimmed milk and thorough
kneading.

UTENSILS.--For bread-making purposes, earthen or china ware is
preferable to either tin or wooden utensils: being a poor conductor, it
protects the sponge from the cold air much more effectually than tin,
and is much more easily kept clean and sweet than wood. The utensil
should be kept exclusively for the purpose of bread-making, and should
never be allowed to contain any sour substance. The bowl should be
thoroughly scalded before and after each using. Use silver or
granite-ware spoons for stirring the bread. Iron and tin discolor the
sponge. For measuring the material, particularly the liquid and the
yeast, half-pint cups, divided by marks into thirds and fourths, as
shown in the cut, are especially serviceable.

[Illustration: Measuring Cup] [Illustration: Measuring Cup]

WHEN TO SET THE SPONGE.--The time to set the sponge for
bread-making is a point each housekeeper must determine for herself. The
fact before stated, that temperature controls the activity of
fermentation, and that it is retarded or accelerated according to the
conditions of warmth, enables the housewife, by keeping the
bread-mixture at a temperature of about 50° F., to set her bread in the
evening, if desired, and find it light and ready for further attention
in the morning. In winter, the sponge will need to be prepared early in
the evening and kept during the night at as even a temperature as
possible. A good way to accomplish this is to cover the bowl with a
clean napkin and afterwards wrap it about very closely with several
folds of a woolen blanket. In extremely cold weather bottles of hot
water may be placed around the bowl outside the wrappings. In case this
plan is employed, care must be taken to have sufficient wrappings
between the bread and the bottles to prevent undue heat, and the bottles
should be covered with an additional blanket to aid in retaining the
heat as long as possible.

If the sponge is set in the evening, if in very warm weather, it should
be started as late as practicable, and left in a rather cool place.
Cover closely to exclude the air, but do not wrap in flannel as in
winter. It will be likely to need attention early in the morning.

TEMPERATURE FOR BREAD-MAKING.--Except in very warm weather, the
ferment or sponge should be started with liquid at a lukewarm
temperature.

The liquid should never be so cold as to chill the yeast. Milk, if used,
should be first sterilized by scalding, and then cooled before using.

After the sponge is prepared, the greatest care must be taken to keep it
at an equable temperature. From 70° to 90° is the best range of
temperature, 75° being considered the golden mean throughout the entire
fermentative process of bread-making.

After fermentation has well begun, it will continue, but much more
slowly if the temperature be gradually lowered to 45° or 50°. If it is
necessary to hasten the rising, the temperature can be raised to 80° or
85°, but it will necessitate careful watching, as it will be liable to
over-ferment, and become sour. Cold arrests the process of fermentation,
while too great heat carries forward the work too rapidly. Too much
stress cannot be laid upon the importance of an equable temperature. The
housewife who permits the fermentation to proceed very slowly one hour,
forces it rapidly by increased heat the next, and perhaps allows it to
subside to a chilling temperature the third, will never be sure of good
bread.

Putting the bowl containing the sponge into a dish of warm (not hot)
water, or keeping it in the warming oven, or on the back of the range,
are all methods which may bring about good results, provided the same
degree of heat can be maintained continuously; but if the fire is one
which must be increased or diminished to suit the exigencies of
household details, nothing but the closest and most careful attention
will keep the sponge at uniform temperature. The better way is to cover
the bowl with a napkin, and in cold weather wrap closely in several
thicknesses of flannel, and place on a stand behind the stove, or in
some place not exposed to draughts. A bread-raiser purposely arranged
for keeping the bread at proper temperature is a great convenience. Two
small and rather thick earthen ware crocks of the same size, serve very
well for this purpose. Scald both with hot water, and while still warm,
put the sponge in one, invert the other for a cover, and leave in a warm
room. All flour used in the bread should be warm when added.

LIGHTNESS OF THE BREAD.--The time required for bread in its
different stages to grow light will vary according to the quantity and
strength of the yeast used and the amount of warmth supplied. A thin
batter is light enough when in appearance it resembles throughout a mass
of sea foam. It will not greatly increase in bulk, but will be in the
state of constant activity, sending up little bubbles of gas and
emitting a sharp, pungent odor like fresh yeast.

When the thicker batter or second sponge is sufficiently light, it will
have risen to nearly double its original bulk and become cracked over
the top like "crazed" china. It should never be allowed to rise to the
point of sinking or caving in, and should be kneaded as soon as ready.
If for any reason it is not possible to knead the bread at once when it
has arrived at this stage, do not allow it to stand, but take a knife or
spoon and gently beat it back a little. This dissipates some of the gas
and reduces the volume somewhat. Let it rise again, which it will do in
a short time, if it has not been allowed to become too light. If dough
that has been kneaded and allowed to rise in mass, becomes sufficiently
light at some inopportune moment for shaping into loaves, it may be kept
from becoming too light and souring, by taking a knife and cutting it
away from the sides of the bowl and gradually working it over toward the
center. Re-cover and put in a warm place. It will soon assume its former
bulk. This "cutting down" may be repeated several times if necessary,
provided the bread has not been allowed to become too light at any time,
and some cook's recommend it as a uniform practice. We do not, however,
except in case of necessity; since, though it may possibly make the
bread more light, the long-continued fermentation destroys more than is
necessary of the food elements of the flour, and develops an unnecessary
amount of the products of fermentation. Lightness is not the only
requisite for bread, and should be secured with as little deterioration
of the flour as possible.

An important point in the preparation of bread is to decide when it is
sufficiently light after having been molded and placed in pans. The
length of time cannot be given, because it will vary with the
temperature, the quality of the flour, and the quantity added during the
kneading. At a temperature of 75°, an hour or an hour and a half is
about the average length of time needed. A loaf should nearly double its
size after being placed in a pan, before baking; when perfectly risen,
the bread feels light when lifted and weighed upon the hand. It is
better to begin the baking before it has perfectly risen them to wait
until it has become so light as to commence to fall, since if the
fermentation proceeds too far, the sweetness of the grain will be
destroyed, and the bread will be tasteless and innutritious, even if it
does not reach the acetous stage.

The exercise of a little judgment and careful attention to detail will
soon enable a person successfully to determine the proper degree of
lightness of bread in its various stages. Bread which passes the extreme
point of fermentation, or in common phrase gets "too light," will have a
strong acid odor, and will pull away from the bowl in a stringy mass,
having a watery appearance very different from the fine, spongy texture
of properly risen dough. The acidity of such dough may be neutralized by
the addition of an alkali, and housewives who through carelessness and
inattention have allowed their bread to become "sour," often resort to
saleratus or soda to neutralize the acid. The result of such treatment
is unwholesome bread, wholly unfit for food. It is better economy to
throw away bread material which needs to be sweetened with soda than to
run the risk of injury to health by using it.

KNEADING THE DOUGH.--As fresh flour is added during the
bread-making, it is necessary to mix it in thoroughly. As long as the
batter is thin, this can be done by thoroughly beating the mixture with
the addition of material; but when it is a thick dough, some other
method must be adopted to bring about the desired result. The usual way
is by mixing the dough to a proper consistency, and working it with the
hands. This is termed _kneading_. Much of the excellence of bread
depends upon the thoroughness of this kneading, since if the yeast is
not intimately and equally mixed with every particle of flour, the bread
will not be uniform; some portions will be heavy and compact, while
others will be full of large, open cavities, from the excessive
liberation of gas.

The length of time required for kneading depends upon the perfection
with which the yeast cells have been previously diffused throughout the
sponge, and upon the quality of the flour used in preparing the bread,
much less time being required for kneading dough made from good flour.
Some consider an hour none too long to knead bread. Such a lengthy
process may be advantageous, since one of the objects of kneading is to
render the glutinous parts of the flour so elastic that the dough may be
capable of expanding to several times its bulk without cracking or
breaking, but excellent results can be obtained from good flour with
less labor. Bread has been kneaded all that is necessary when it will
work clean of the board, and when, after a smart blow with the fist in
the center of the mass, it will spring back to its original shape like
an India rubber ball. Its elasticity is the surest test of its goodness;
and when dough has been thus perfectly kneaded, it can be molded into
any shape, rolled, twisted, or braided with ease. Chopping, cutting,
stretching, and pulling--the dough are other methods for accomplishing
the same end.

If a large mass is to be kneaded, it is better to divide it into several
portions and knead each separately. It is less laborious and more likely
to result in an equal diffusion of the yeast. Bread is often spoiled by
the addition of too much flour during kneading. Dough should always be
kneaded as soft as it can be handled, and only sufficient flour added to
prevent its sticking to the board. Stiff bread is close in texture, and
after a day or two becomes dry and hard.

HOW TO MANIPULATE THE DOUGH IN KNEADING.--Sprinkle the board well
with flour, and scrape the dough from the bowl with a knife. Dust the
hands with flour, and then draw the dough with a rolling motion from the
farthest side toward you, using the finger tips for the purpose, but
pressing firmly down upon the mass with the palm of the hands. Reach
forward again with the finger tips, and again press the ball of the
hands upon the dough. Continue this process of manipulation until the
mass is very much elongated; then turn at right angles and repeat the
process, taking care that the finger tips do not break through the light
film which will form upon the outside of soft dough when well managed.
_Keep the dough constantly in motion_ until it is smooth, elastic, and
fine-grained. The hands and the board may need a light dusting of flour
at frequent intervals. If the dough sticks, lift it quickly, and clean
the board, that it may be kept smooth. The dough will not stick if kept
in constant motion. Do not rub off little wads of dough either from the
hands or the board and keep kneading them into the loaf; they will
seriously injure the uniform texture of the bread.

HOW MANY TIMES SHALL BREAD BE KNEADED?--As the objects to be
attained in kneading dough are to render the gluten more elastic and
thoroughly to diffuse the yeast, it will be seen that there has been
sufficient kneading when all the flour necessary for the bread has been
added. Furthermore, it must be apparent that continued manipulation of
the dough at this stage will dissipate and press out the little vesicles
of gas held in place by the elastic gluten, and thus lose in part what
so much pains has been taken to secure. At whatever stage the requisite
amount of flour be added, the dough should then be thoroughly kneaded
once for all. If allowed to rise in bulk, when light it should be shaped
into loaves with the greatest care, handled lightly, and worked as
little as possible, and if at all diminished, allowed to rise again
before baking.

DRYNESS OF THE SURFACE.--Bread in all stages should be covered over
the top, since it rises much more evenly, and does not have a stiff,
dried surface, as when placed in a warm place exposed to air. It
sometimes happens that this precaution is forgotten or not sufficiently
attended to, and a dry crust forms and over the dough, which, if kneaded
into the loaves, leaves hard, dry spots in the bread. In case of such a
mishap, take the dry crust off, dissolve it in a little warm water, add
flour enough to mold, make it into a small loaf, and raise it
separately.

SIZE OF LOAVES.--The lightness of the bread after baking depends
upon the perfection with which the little air-cells, formed during the
fermenting process, have become fixed by the heat during the baking. The
heat expands the carbonic acid gas contained within the open spaces in
the dough, and at the same time checks further development of gas by
destroying the yeast plant. The sooner, then, that the cells can be made
permanent after the arrest of fermentation, the more light and porous
the bread will be. Although this fixing of the cells is largely
dependent upon the degree of heat maintained, it likewise in a measure
depends upon the size of the loaf, as the heat will penetrate and fix
the cells of a small loaf throughout much sooner than, those of a large
one. Therefore, bake in small loaves, and have a separate pan for each,
as that admits of an equal degree of heat to all sides. This aids in a
more rapid fixing of the air-cells and likewise gives more crust, which
is the sweetest and most digestible part of the bread.

Sheet-iron pans, about eight inches in length, four in width, and five
in depth, are the most satisfactory. After the dough is molded, divide
it into loaves which will fill such pans to the depth of two inches. Let
them rise until double their first volume, and then put them in the
oven. In baking, the loaves will rise still higher, and if about five
inches high when done, will have expanded to about the right
proportions.

[Illustration: Bread Pan]

PROPER TEMPERATURE OF THE OVEN.--The objects to be attained in the
baking of bread are to break up the starch and gluten cells of the Sour
so as to make them easily digestible, to destroy the yeast plant, and
render permanent the cells formed by the action of the carbonic acid
gas. To accomplish well these ends, the loaf must be surrounded by a
temperature ranging from 400° to 600°. The oven should be one in which
the heat is equal in all parts, and which can be kept at a steady,
uniform heat. Old-fashioned brick ovens were superior in this respect to
most modern ranges. The fire for baking bread should be of sufficient
strength to keep the oven heated for at least an hour. If the oven has
tendency to become too hot upon the bottom, a thin, open grate, broiler,
or toasting rack, should be placed underneath the tins to allow a
circulation of air and avoid danger of burning. If the heat be
insufficient, fermentation will not cease until the bread has become
sour; the cells will be imperfectly fixed or entirely collapsed; too
little of the moisture will have evaporated, and the result will be a
soft, wet, and pasty or sour loaf. If the heat be too great, the bread
will be baked before it has perfectly risen, or a thick, burned crust
will be produced, forming a non-conducting covering to the loaf, which
will prevent the heat from permeating the interior, and thus the loaf
will have an overdone exterior, but will be raw and doughy within. If,
however, the temperature of the oven be just right, the loaf will
continue for a little time to enlarge, owing to the expansion of the
carbonic acid gas, the conversion of the water into steam, and the
vaporizing of the alcohol, which rises in a gaseous form and is driven
off by the heat; a nicely browned crust will be formed over the surface,
the result of the rapid evaporation of water from the surface and
consequent consolidation of the dough of this portion of the loaf, and a
chemical change caused by the action of the heat upon the starch by
which is converted into dextrine, finally assuming a brown color due to
the production of a substance known to the chemist as _assama_.

Bread is often spoiled in the baking. The dough may be made of the best
of flour and yeast, mixed and kneaded in the most perfect manner, and
may have risen to the proper degree of lightness' before going to the
oven, yet if the oven is either too hot or not hot enough, the bread
will be of an inferior quality.

Without an oven thermometer, there is no accurate means of determining
the temperature of the oven; but housekeepers resort to various means to
form a judgment about it. The baker's old-fashioned method is to throw a
handful of flour on the oven bottom. If it blackens without igniting,
the heat is deemed sufficient. Since the object for which the heat is
desired is to cook the flour, not to burn it, it might be supposed that
this would indicate too high a temperature; but the flour within the
loaf to be baked is combined with a certain amount of moisture, the
evaporation of which lowers the temperature of the bread considerably
below that of the surrounding heated atmosphere. The temperature of the
inner portion of the loaf cannot exceed 212° so long as it continues
moist. Bread might be perfectly cooked at this temperature by steam, but
it would lack that most digestible portion of the loaf, the crust.

A common way of ascertaining if the heat of the oven is sufficient, is
to hold the bare arm inside it for a few seconds. If the arm cannot be
held within while thirty is counted, it is too hot to begin with. The
following test is more accurate: For rolls, the oven should be hot
enough to brown a teaspoonful of flour in _one_ minute, and for loaves
in _five_ minutes.

The temperature should be high enough to arrest the fermentation, which
it will do at a point considerably below the boiling point of water, and
at the same time to form a shell or crust, which will so support the
dough as to prevent it from sinking or collapsing when the evolution of
carbonic acid gas shall cease; but it should not be hot enough to brown
the crust within ten or fifteen minutes. The heat should increase for
the first fifteen minutes, remain steady for the next fifteen minutes,
and may then gradually decrease during the remainder of the baking. If
by any mischance the oven be so hot as to brown the crust too soon,
cover the loaf with a clean paper for a few minutes. Be careful that no
draught reaches the bread while baking; open the oven door very seldom,
and not at all for the first ten minutes. If it is necessary to turn the
loaf, try to do so without bringing it to the air. From three fourths of
an hour to an hour is usually a sufficient length of time to bake an
ordinary sized loaf. Be careful not to remove the bread from the oven
until perfectly done. It is better to allow it to bake ten minutes too
long than not long enough. The crust of bread, when done, should be
equally browned all over.

The common test for well-baked bread is to tap it on the bottom with the
finger; if it is light and well done, it will sound hollow; heavy bread
will have a dull sound. A thoroughly baked loaf will not burn the hand
when lifted upon it from the pan.

CARE OF BREAD AFTER BAKING.--When done, remove the loaves from the
tins, and tilt them upon edge so that the air may circulate freely on
all sides of them to prevent "sweating." Do not, however, lay them on a
pine shelf or table to absorb the odor of the wood. A large tin dripping
pan turned over upon the table does very well to tilt them on. If they
are turned often, so that they will not soften on one side, but a fine
wire bread cooler is the best thing. If this is not obtainable, a fair
substitute can be easily improvised by tacking window-screen wire to a
light frame of sufficient size to hold the requisite number of loaves.
If the bread is left exposed to the air until cold, the crust will be
crisp; if a soft crust is desired, it can be secured by brushing the top
of the loaf while hot, with tepid water, and covering with several
thicknesses of a clean bread cloth.

If by accident any portion of the crust is burnt, grate it away as soon
as cold; this is preferable to cutting or clipping it off.

BEST METHOD OF KEEPING BREAD.--When the bread is quite cold, put it
away in a bread box, which should be of tin, or of wood lined with tin,
convenient in form and supplied with a well-fitting cover. Never use an
unlined wooden box of any kind, as it cannot easily be kept fresh and
free from musty odors, which bread so readily absorbs.

Stone and earthen ware are not open to this objection, but they are
likely to collect moisture, and hence are not equal to a tin receptacle.
Do not keep bread in the cellar or any other damp place, nor in a close
closet, where there are other foods from which it can absorb odors. The
bread box should be kept well covered, and free from crumbs and stale
bits. It should be carefully washed in boiling soapsuds, scalded, and
dried, every two or three days. If cloths are used to wrap or cover the
bread, they too should be washed and scalded every week, and oftener if
at any time the loaf about which they are wrapped becomes moldy or
musty.

TEST OF GOOD FERMENTED BREAD.--A loaf of good bread, well risen and
perfectly baked, may be taken in the hands, and, with the thumb on the
top crust and fingers upon the bottom of the loaf, pressed to less than
half its thickness, and when the pressure is removed, it will
immediately expand like a sponge, to its former proportions.

Good yeast bread, while it should be firm and preserve a certain amount
of moisture, will, when cold, crumble easily when rubbed between the
fingers. If, instead, it forms a close, soggy mass, it may be regarded
as indigestible. This is one reason why hot, new yeast bread and biscuit
are so indigestible. In demonstration of this, take a small lump of new
bread, gently roll it into a ball, and put into a glass of water, adding
a similar quantity of stale bread of the same kind also. The latter will
crumble away very soon, while the former will retain its form for hours,
reminding one of its condition in the stomach, "as hard as a bullet,"
for a long time resisting the action of the gastric juice, although,
meanwhile, the yeast germs which have not been killed in the oven are
converting the mass into a lump of yeast, by which the whole contents of
the stomach are soured. A soluble article like salt or sugar in fine
powdered form is much more easily and quickly dissolved than the same
article in solid lumps, and so it is with food. The apparent dryness of
stale bread is not caused by its loss of moisture; for if carefully
weighed, stale bread will be found to contain almost exactly the same
proportion of water as new bread that has become cold. The moisture has
only passed into a state of concealment, as may be demonstrated by
subjecting a stale loaf inclosed in a tightly-sealed receptacle to a
temperature equal to boiling heat in an oven for half an hour, when it
will again have the appearance of new bread.

Hot bread eaten with butter is still more unwholesome, for the reason
that the melted grease fills up the pores of the bread, and further
interferes with the action of the digestive fluids.

WHOLE-WHEAT AND GRAHAM BREADS.--The same general principles are
involved in the making of bread with whole-wheat and Graham flours as in
the production of bread from white flour. Good material and good care
are absolutely essential.

Whole-wheat flour ferments more readily and rises more quickly than does
white flour, hence bread made with it needs more careful management, as
it is more liable to sour. The novice in bread-making should not
undertake the preparation of bread with whole-wheat flour, until she has
thoroughly mastered all the details of the art by practical experience,
and can produce a perfect loaf from white flour.

Breads from whole-wheat and Graham flours require less yeast and less
flour than bread prepared from white flour. A slower process of
fermentation is also advantageous.

Such breads will be lighter if at least one third white flour be
employed in their manufacture. When the bread is made with a sponge,
this white flour may be utilised for the purpose. Thus the length of
time the whole-wheat flour will be undergoing fermentation will be
somewhat lessened, and its liability to become sour diminished. This
plan is a preferable one for beginners in bread-making.

Graham and whole-wheat flour breads must be kneaded longer than
white-flour bread, and require a hotter oven at first and a longer time
for baking. Much Graham and whole-wheat bread is served insufficiently
baked, probably owing to the fact that, being dark in color, the crust
appears brown very soon, thus deluding the cook into supposing that the
loaf is well baked. For thorough baking, from one to one and a half
hours are needed, according to the size of the loaf and the heat of the
oven.

TOAST.--Toasting, if properly done, renders bread more digestible,
the starch being converted into dextrine by the toasting process; but by
the ordinary method of preparing toast, that of simply browning each
side, only the surfaces of the slices are really toasted, while the
action of the heat upon the interior of the slice, it is rendered
exactly in the condition of new bread, and consequently quite as
indigestible. If butter is added while the toast is hot, we have all the
dyspepsia-producing elements of new bread and butter combined. Although
considered to be the dish _par excellence_ for invalids, nothing could
be more unwholesome than such toast. To properly toast the bread, the
drying and browning should extend throughout the entire thickness of the
slice. Bread may be thus toasted before an open fire, but the process
would be such a lengthy and troublesome one, it is far better to secure
the same results by browning the bread in a moderate oven.

Such toast is sometimes called _zwieback_ (twice baked), and when
prepared from good whole-wheat bread, is one of the most nourishing and
digestible of foods. Directions for its preparation and use will be
found in the chapter on "Breakfast Dishes."

STEAMED BREAD.--Steaming stale bread is as open to objection as the
surface toasting of bread, if steamed so as to be yielding and adhesive.
It is not, perhaps, as unwholesome as new bread, but bread is best eaten
in a condition dry and hard enough to require chewing, that its starch
may be so changed by the action of the saliva as to be easily digested.


LIQUID YEAST.


_RECIPES._

RAW POTATO YEAST.--Mix one fourth of a cup of flour, the same of
white sugar, and a teaspoonful of salt to a paste with a little water.
Pare three medium-size, fresh, and sound potatoes, and grate them as
rapidly as possible into the paste; mix all quickly together with a
silver spoon, then pour three pints of boiling water slowly over the
mixture, stirring well at the same time. If this does not rupture the
starch cells of the flour and potatoes so that the mixture becomes
thickened to the consistency of starch, turn it into a granite-ware
kettle and boil up for a minute, stirring well to keep it from sticking
and burning. If it becomes too much thickened, add a little more boiling
water. It is impossible to give the exact amount of water, since the
quality of the flour will vary, and likewise the size of the potatoes;
but three pints is an approximate proportion. Strain the mixture through
a fine colander into an earthen bread bowl, and let it cool. When
lukewarm, add one cup of good, lively yeast. Cover with a napkin, and
keep in a moderately warm place for several hours, or until it ceases to
ferment. As it begins to ferment, stir it well occasionally, and when
well fermented, turn into a clean glass or earthen jar. The next morning
cover closely, and put in the cellar or refrigerator, not, however, in
contact with the ice. It is best to reserve enough for the first baking
in some smaller jar, so that the larger portion need not be opened so
soon. Always shake the yeast before using.

RAW POTATO YEAST NO. 2.--This is made in the same manner as the
preceding, with this exception, that one fourth of a cup of loose hops
tied in a clean muslin bag, is boiled in the water for five minutes
before pouring it into the potato and flour mixture. Many think the
addition of the hops aids in keeping the yeast sweet for a longer
period. But potato yeast may be kept sweet for two weeks without hops,
if cared for, and is preferred by those who dislike the peculiar flavor
of the bread made from hop yeast.

HOP YEAST.--Put half a cup of loose hops, or an eighth of an ounce
of the pressed hops (put up by the Shakers and sold by druggists), into
a granite-ware kettle; pour over it a quart of boiling water, and simmer
about five minutes. Meanwhile stir to a smooth paste in a tin basin or
another saucepan, a cup of flour, and a little cold water. Line a
colander with a thin cloth, and strain the boiling infusion of hops
through it onto the flour paste, stirring continually. Boil this thin
starch a few minutes, until it thickens, stirring constantly that no
lumps be formed. Turn it into a large earthen bowl, add a tablespoonful
of salt and two of white sugar, and when it has cooled to blood heat,
add one half cup of lively yeast, stirring all well together. Cover the
bowl with a napkin, and let it stand in some moderately warm place
twenty-four hours, or until it ceases to ferment or send up bubbles,
beating back occasionally as it rises; then put into a wide-mouthed
glass or earthen jar, which has been previously scalded and dried, cover
closely, and set in a cool place. Yeast made in this manner will keep
sweet for two weeks in summer and longer in winter.

BOILED POTATO YEAST.--Peel four large potatoes, and put them to
boil in two quarts of cold water. Tie two loose handfuls of hops
securely in a piece of muslin, and place in the water to boil with the
potatoes. When the potatoes are tender, remove them with a perforated
skimmer, leaving the water still boiling. Mash them, and work in four
tablespoons of flour and two of sugar. Over this mixture pour gradually
the boiling hop infusion, stirring constantly, that it may form a smooth
paste, and set it aside to cool. When lukewarm, add a gill of lively
yeast, and proceed as in the preceding recipe.

BOILED POTATO YEAST NO. 2.--To one teacupful of very smoothly
mashed, mealy potato, add three teaspoonfuls of white sugar, one
teaspoonful of salt, and one cup of lively yeast, or one cake of Yeast
Foam, dissolved in a very little water. The potatoes should be warm, but
not hot enough to destroy the yeast. Allow this to stand until light,
when it is ready for use.


FERMENTED BREADS.

In the preparation of breads after the following recipes, the measure of
flour should be heaping.


_RECIPES._

MILK BREAD WITH WHITE FLOUR.--Scald and cool on pint of unskimmed
milk. Add to the milk when lukewarm, one fourth of a cup, or three
tablespoonfuls, of liquid yeast, and three cups of flour. Give the
batter a vigorous beating, turn it into a clean bread bowl or a small
earthen crock, cover, and let it rise over night. In the morning, when
well risen, add two or three cupfuls of warm flour, or sufficient to
knead. Knead well until the dough is sufficiently elastic to rebound
when struck forcibly with the fist. Allow it to rise again in mass; then
shape into loaves; place in pans; let it stand until light, and bake. If
undesirable to set the bread over night, and additional tablespoonfuls
or two of cheese may be used, to facilitate the rising.

VIENNA BREAD.--Into a pint of milk sterilized by scalding, turn a
cup and a half of boiling water. When lukewarm, add one half cup of warm
water, in which has been dissolved a cake of compressed yeast, and a
quart of white flour. Beat the batter thus made very thoroughly, and
allow it to rise for one hour; then add white flour until the dough is
of a consistency to knead. Knead well, and allow it to rise again for
about three hours, or until very light. Shape into four loaves, handling
lightly. Let it rise again in the pans, and bake. During the baking,
wash the tops of the loaves with a sponge dipped in milk, to glaze them.

WATER BREAD.--Dissolve a tablespoonful of sugar in a pint of
boiling water. When lukewarm, add one fourth of a cup full of liquid
yeast, and sufficient flour to make a batter thick enough to drop from
the spoon. Beat vigorously for ten minutes, turn into a clean,
well-scalded bread bowl, cover (wrapping in a blanket if in cold
weather), and let it rise over night. In the morning, when well risen,
add flour to knead. Knead well for half an hour, cover, and let it
become light in mass. When light, shape into loaves, allow it to rise
again, and bake.

FRUIT ROLL.--Take some bread dough prepared as for Milk Bread,
which has been sufficiently kneaded and is ready to mold, and roll to
about one inch in thickness. Spread over it some dates which have been
washed, dried, and stoned, raisins, currants, or chopped figs. Roll it
up tightly into a loaf. Let and it rise until very light, and bake.

FRUIT LOAF.--Set a sponge with one pint of rich milk, one fourth
cup of yeast, and a pint of flour, over night. In the morning, add two
cups of Zante currents, one cup of sugar, and three cups of flour, or
enough to make a rather stiff dough. Knead well, and set to rise; when
light, mold into loaves; let it rise again, and bake.

POTATO BREAD.--Cook and mash perfectly smooth, potatoes to make a
cupful. Add a teaspoonful of best white sugar, one cup and a half of
warm water, and when the mixture is lukewarm, one half cup of yeast,
prepared as directed for Boiled Potato Yeast No. 2, and flour to make a
very thick batter. Allow it to rise over night. In the morning, add a
pint of warm water and flour enough to knead. The dough will need to be
considerably stiffer than when no potato is used, or the result will be
a bread too moist for easy digestion. Knead well. Let it rise, mold into
four loaves, and when again light, bake.

PULLED BREAD.--Remove a loaf from the oven when about half baked,
and lightly pull the partially set dough into pieces of irregular shape,
about half the size of one's fist. Do not smooth or mold the pieces;
bake in a slow oven until browned and crisp throughout.

WHOLE WHEAT BREAD.--The materials needed for the bread are: one
pint of milk, scalded and cooled, one quart of wheat berry flour, one
pint Minnesota spring wheat flour, one third cup of a soft yeast, or one
fourth cake of compressed yeast, dissolved in one third cup of cold
water. Stir enough flour into the milk to make a stiff batter, put in
the yeast, and let it rise until foamy. Have the milk so warm that, when
the flour is put in, the batter will be of a lukewarm temperature. Wrap
in a thick blanket, and keep at an equable temperature. When light, stir
in, slowly, warm flour to make a soft dough. Knead for fifteen minutes,
and return to the bowl (which has been washed and oiled) to rise again.
When risen to double its size, form into two loaves, place in separate
pans, let rise again, and bake from three fourths to one and one half
hours, according to the heat of the oven.

WHOLE-WHEAT BREAD NO. 2.--Scald one pint of unskimmed milk; when
lukewarm, add one half cup of liquid yeast, or one fourth cake of
compressed yeast, dissolved in one half cup of warm water, and a pint of
Pillsbury's best white flour. Beat this batter thoroughly, and allow it
to rise. When well risen, add three and two thirds cups of wheat berry
flour. Knead thoroughly, and allow it to become light in mass; then
shape into two loaves, allow it to rise again, and bake.

MISS. B'S ONE-RISING BREAD.--Sift and measure three and three
fourths cups of wheat berry flour. Scald and cool a pint of unskimmed
milk. When lukewarm, add one tablespoonful of lively liquid yeast. By
slow degrees add the flour, beating vigorously until too stiff to use a
spoon, then knead thoroughly for half an hour, shape into a loaf, place
in a bread pan, cover with a napkin in warm weather, wrap well with
blankets in cold weather, and let rise over night. In the morning, when
perfectly light, pat in a well heated oven, and bake.

POTATO BREAD WITH WHOLE WHEAT FLOUR.--Take a half gill of liquid
yeast made as for Boiled Potato Yeast No. 2, and add milk, sterilised
and cooled to lukewarm, to make a pint. And one cup of well-mashed,
mealy potato and one cup of white flour, or enough to make a rather
thick batter Beat thoroughly, cover, and set to rise. When well risen,
add sufficient whole-wheat flour to knead. The quantity will vary
somewhat with the brand of flour used, but about four and one fourth
cupfuls will in general be needed. Knead well, let it rise in mass and
again in the loaf, and bake.

RYE BREAD.--Prepare a sponge over night with white flour as for
Water Bread. In the morning, when light, add another tablespoonful of
sugar, and rye flour to knead. Proceed as directed for the Water Bread,
taking care to use only enough rye flour to make the dough Just stiff
enough to mold. Use white flour for dusting than kneading board, as the
rye flour is sticky.

GRAHAM BREAD.--Take two tablespoonfuls of lively liquid yeast, or a
little less than one fourth cake of compressed yeast, dissolved in a
little milk, and add new milk, scalded and cooled to lukewarm, to make
one pint. Add one pint of white flour, beat very thoroughly, and set to
rise. When very light, add three find one half cupfuls of sifted Graham
flour, or enough to make a dough that can be molded. Knead well for half
an hour. Place in a clean, slightly oiled bread bowl, cover, and allow
it to rise. When light, shape into a loaf: allow it to rise again, and
bake.

GRAHAM BREAD NO. 2.--Mix well one pint of white and two pints of
best Graham flour. Prepare a batter with a scant pint of milk, scalded
and cooled, two table spoonfuls of liquid yeast, or a little less than
one fourth of a cake of compressed yeast, dissolved in two table
spoonfuls of milk, and a portion of the mixed flour. Give it a vigorous
beating, and put it in a warm place to rise. When well risen, add more
flour to make a dough sufficiently stiff to knead. There will be some
variation in the amount required, dependent upon the brands of flour
used, but in general, two and one half pints of the flour will be enough
for preparing the sponge and kneading the dough. Knead thoroughly for
twenty-five or thirty minutes. Put into a clean and slightly oiled bread
bowl, cover, and set to rise again. When double its first bulk, mold
into a loaf; allow it to rise again, and bake.

GRAHAM BREAD NO. 3.--Mix three pounds each of Graham and Minnesota
spring wheat flour. Make a sponge of one and a half pints of warm water,
one half cake compressed yeast, well dissolved in the water, and flour
to form a batter. Let this rise. When well risen, add one and a half
pints more of warm water, one half cup full of New Orleans molasses, and
sufficient flour to knead. Work the bread thoroughly, allow it to rise
in mass; then mold, place in pans, and let it rise again. The amount of
material given is sufficient for four loaves of bread.

RAISED BISCUIT.--These may be made from dough prepared by any of
the preceding recipes for bread. They will be more tender if made with
milk, and if the dough is prepared expressly for biscuits, one third
cream may be used. When the dough has been thoroughly kneaded the last
time, divide into small, equal-sized pieces. A quantity of dough
sufficient for one loaf of bread should be divided into twelve or
sixteen such portions. Shape into smooth, round biscuits, fit closely
into a shallow pan, and let them rise until very light. Biscuit should
be allowed to become lighter than bread before putting in the oven,
since, being so much smaller, fermentation is arrested much sooner, and
they do not rise as much in the oven as does bread.

ROLLS.--Well kneaded and risen bread dough is made into a variety
of small forms termed rolls, by rolling with the hands or with a
rolling-pin, and afterward cutting or folding into any shape desired,
the particular manner by which they are folded and shaped giving to the
rolls their characteristic names. Dough prepared with rich milk or part
cream makes the best rolls. It may be divided into small, irregular
portions, about one inch in thickness, and shaped by taking each piece
separately in the left hand, then with the thumb and first finger of the
right hand, slightly stretch one of the points of the piece and draw it
over the left thumb toward the center of the roll, holding it there with
the left thumb. Turn the dough and repeat the operation until you have
been all around the dough, and each point has been drawn in; then place
on the pan to rise. Allow the rolls to become very light, and bake.
Rolls prepared in this manner are termed _Imperial Rolls_, and if the
folding has been properly done, when well baked they will be composed of
a succession of light layers, which can be readily separated.

_French Rolls_ may be made by shaping each portion of dough into small
oval rolls quite tapering at each end, allowing them to become light,
and baking far enough apart so that one will not touch another.

If, when the dough is light and ready to shape, it be rolled on the
board until about one eighth of an inch in thickness, and cut into
five-inch squares, then divided through the center into triangles,
rolled up, beginning with the wide side, and placed in the pan to rise
in semicircular shape, the rolls are called _Crescents_.

What are termed _Parker House Rolls_ may be made from well-risen dough
prepared with milk, rolled upon the board to a uniform thickness of
about one forth inch; cut into round or oval shapes with the cutter;
folded, one third over the other two thirds; allowed to rise until very
light, and baked.

The light, rolled dough, may be formed into a _Braid_ by cutting into
strips six inches in length and one in width, joining the ends of each
three, and braiding.

The heat of the oven should be somewhat greater for roils and biscuit
than for bread. The time required will depend upon the heat and the size
of the roll, but it will seldom exceed one half hour. Neither rolls nor
biscuits should be eaten hot, as they are then open to the same
objections as other new yeast bread.

BROWN BREAD.--To one and one fourth cups of new milk which has been
scalded and cooled, add one fourth of a cup of lively yeast, three
tablespoonfuls of sugar, and one cup each of white flour, rye flour or
sifted rye meal, and yellow corn meal. With different brands of flour
there may need to be some variation in the quantity of liquid to be
used. The mixture should be thick enough to shape. Allow it to rise
until light and cracked over the top; put into a bread pan, and when
again well risen, bake for an hour and a half or two hours in an oven
sufficiently hot at first to arrest fermentation and fix the bread
cells, afterwards allowing the heat to diminish somewhat, to permit a
slower and longer baking. Graham flour may be used in place of rye, if
preferred.

DATE BREAD.--Take a pint of light white bread sponge prepared with
milk, add two tablespoons of sugar, and Graham flour to make a very
stiff batter. And last a cupful of stoned dates. Turn into a bread pan.
Let it rise, and bake.

FRUIT LOAF WITH GRAHAM AND WHOLE-WHEAT FLOUR.--Dissolve one fourth
cake of compressed yeast in a pint of sterilized milk; and a pint of
white flour; heat thoroughly, and set to rise. When well risen, add
three and one fourth cups of flour (Graham and whole-wheat, equal
proportions, thoroughly mixed), or sufficient to knead. Knead well for
half an hour, and just at the last add a cup of raisins, well washed,
dried, and dusted with flour. Let the loaf rise in mass; then shape, put
in the pan, allow it to become light again, and bake.

RAISED CORN BREAD.--Into two cupfuls of hot mush made from white
granular corn meal, stir two cupfuls of cold water. Beat well, and add
one half cup of liquid yeast, or one half cake of compressed yeast,
dissolved in one half cup of warm water, and two teaspoonfuls of
granulated sugar. Stir in white or sifted Graham flour to make it stiff
enough to knead. Knead very thoroughly, and put in a warm place to rise.
When light, molded into three loaves, put into pans, and allow it to
rise again. When well risen, bake at least for three fourths of an hour.

CORN CAKE.--Sterilise a cupful of rich milk or thin cream. Cool to
lukewarm, and dissolve in it half a cake of compressed yeast Add two
small cupfuls of white flour; beat very thoroughly, and put in a warm
place to rise. When light, add a cup of lukewarm water or milk, and two
cups of best yellow cornmeal. Turn into a shallow square pan, and leave
until again well risen. Bake in a quick oven. A tablespoonful of sugar
may be added with the corn meal, if desired.

OATMEAL BREAD.--Mix a quart of well-cooked oatmeal mush with a pint
of water, beating it perfectly smooth; add a cupful of liquid yeast and
flour to make a stiff batter. Cover, and let it rise. When light, add
sufficient flour to mold; knead as soft as possible, for twenty or
thirty minutes; shape into four or more loaves, let it rise again, and
bake.

MILK YEAST BREAD.--Prepare the yeast the day before by scalding
three heaping teaspoonfuls of fresh cornmeal with boiling milk. Set in a
warm place until light (from seven to ten hours); then put in a cool
place until needed for use. Start the bread by making a rather thick
batter with one cupful of warm water, one teaspoonful of the prepared
yeast, and white flour. Put in a warm place to rise. When light, add to
it a cupful of flour scalded with a cupful of boiling milk, and enough
more flour to make the whole into a rather stiff batter. Cover, and
allow it to rise. When again well risen, add flour enough to knead.
Knead well; shape into a loaf; let it rise, and bake. Three or four
cupfuls of white flour will be needed for all purposes with the amount
of liquid given; more liquid and flour may be added in forming the
second sponge if a larger quantity of bread is desired. In preparing
both yeast and bread, all utensils used should first be sterilized by
scalding in hot sal-soda water.

GRAHAM SALT-RISING BREAD.--Put two tablespoonfuls of milk into a
half-pint cup, add boiling water to fill the cup half full, one half
teaspoonful of sugar, one fourth teaspoonful of salt, and white flour to
make a rather stiff batter. Let it rise over night. In the morning, when
well risen, add a cup and a half of warm water, or milk scalded and
cooled, and sufficient white flour to form a rather stiff batter. Cover,
and allow it again to rise. When light, add enough sifted Graham flour
to knead. When well kneaded, shape into a loaf; allow it to become light
again in the pan, and bake. All utensils used should be first well
sterilized by scalding in hot sal-soda water.

UNFERMENTED BREADS.

The earliest forms of bread were made without fermentation. Grain was
broken as fine as possible by pounding on smooth stones, made into dough
with pure water, thoroughly kneaded, and baked in some convenient way.
Such was the "unleavened breads" or "Passover cakes" of the Israelites.
In many countries this bread is the only kind used. Unleavened bread
made from barley and oats is largely used by the Irish and Scotch
peasantry. In Sweden an unleavened bread is made of rye meal and water,
flavored with anise seed, and baked in large, thin cakes, a foot or more
in diameter.

[Illustration: Mexican Woman Making Tortillas]

Some savage tribes subsists chiefly upon excellent corn bread, made
simply of meal and water. Unleavened bread made of corn, called
_tortillas_, forms the staple diet of the Mexican Indians. The corn,
previously softened by soaking in lime water, is ground to a fine paste
between a stone slab and roller called a _metate_, then patted and
tossed from hand to hand until flattened into thin, wafer-like cakes,
and baked over a quick fire, on a thin iron plate or a flat stone.

Unquestionably, unleavened bread, well kneaded and properly baked, is
the most wholesome of all breads, but harder to masticate than that made
light by fermentation, but this is an advantage; for it insures more
thorough mixing with that important digestive agent, the saliva, than is
usually given to more easily softened food.

[Illustration: Stone Metate.]

What is usually termed unfermented bread, however, is prepared with
flour and liquid, to which shortening--of some kind is added, and the
whole made light by the liberation of gas generated within the dough
during the process of baking. This is brought about either by mixing
with the flour certain chemical substances, which, when wet and brought
into contact, act upon each other so as to set free carbonic acid gas,
which expands and puffs up the loaf; or by introducing into the dough
some volatile substance as carbonate of ammonia, which the heat during
baking will, cause to vaporize, and which in rising produces the same
result.

Carbonic acid gas maybe for this purpose developed by the chemical
decomposition of bicarbonate of potassa (saleratus), or bicarbonate of
soda, by some acid such as sour milk, hydrochloric acid, tartaric acid,
nitrate of potassa, or the acid phosphate of lime.

The chemical process of bread-raising originally consisted in adding to
the dough definite proportions of muriatic acid and carbonate of soda,
by the union of which carbonic acid gas and common salt were produced.
This process was soon abandoned, however, on account of the propensity
exhibited by the acid for eating holes in the fingers of the baker as
well as in his bread pans; and a more convenient one for hands and
pans, that of using soda or salaratus with cream of tartar or sour milk,
was substituted. When there is an excess of soda, a portion of it
remains in the loaf uncombined, giving to the bread a yellow color and
an alkaline taste, and doing mischief to the delicate coating of the
stomach. Alkalies, the class of chemicals to which soda and salaratus
belong, when pure and strong, are powerful corrosive poisons. The acid
used with the alkali to liberate the carbonic-acid gas in the process of
bread-making, if rightly proportioned, destroys this poisonous property,
and unites with it to form a new compound, which, although not a poison,
is yet unwholesome.

We can hardly speak too strongly in condemnation of the use of chemicals
in bread-making, when we reflect that the majority of housewives who
combine sour milk and salaratus, or cream of tartar and soda, more
frequently than otherwise _guess_ at the proportions, or measure them by
some "rule of thumb," without stopping to consider that although two
cups of sour milk may at one time be sufficiently acid to neutralize a
teaspoonful of saleratus, milk may vary in degree of acidity to such an
extent that the same quantity will be quite insufficient for the purpose
at another time; or that though a teaspoonful of some brand of cream of
tartar will neutralize a half teaspoonful of one kind of soda, similar
measures will not always bring about the same result. Very seldom,
indeed, will the proportions be sufficiently exact to perfectly
neutralise the alkali, since chemicals are subject to variations in
degree of strength, both on account of the method by which they are
manufactured and the length of time they have been kept, to say nothing
of adulterations to which they may have been subjected, and which are so
common that it is almost impossible to find unadulterated cream of
tartar in the market.

Baking powders are essentially composed of bicarbonate of soda and cream
of tartar, mixed in the proper proportions to exactly neutralize each
other, and if they were always pure, would certainly be as good as soda
and cream of tartar in any form, and possess the added advantage of
perfect proportions; but as was demonstrated not long ago by the
government chemist, nearly every variety of baking powder in the market
is largely adulterated with cheaper and harmful substances. Alum, a most
frequent constituent of such baking powders, is exceedingly injurious to
the stomach. Out of several hundred brands of baking powder examined,
only one was found pure.

Even when in their purest state, these chemicals are not harmless, as is
so generally believed. It is a very prevalent idea that when soda is
neutralized by an acid, both chemical compounds are in some way
destroyed or vaporized in the process, and in some occult manner escape
from the bread during the process of baking. This is altogether an
error. The alkali and acid neutralize each other chemically, but they do
not destroy each other. Their union forms a salt, exactly the same as
the Rochelle salts of medicine, a mild purgative, and if we could
collected from the bread and weigh or measure it, we would find nearly
as much of it as there was of the baking powder in the first place. If
two teaspoonfuls of baking powder to the quart of flour be used, we have
remaining in the bread made with that amount of flour 165 grains of
crystallized Rochelle salts, or 45 grains more than this to be found in
a Seidlitz powder. It may be sometimes useful to take a dose of salts,
but the daily consumption of such chemical substances in bread can
hardly be considered compatible with the conditions necessary for the
maintenance of health. These chemical substances are unusable by the
system, and must all be removed by the liver and excretory organs, thus
imposing upon them an extra and unnecessary burden. It has also been
determined by scientific experimentation that the chemicals found in
baking powders in bread retard digestion.

These substances are, fortunately, not needed for the production of good
light bread. The purpose of their use is the production of a gas; but
air is a gas much more economical and abundant than carbonic-acid gas,
and which, when introduced into bread and subjected to heat, has the
property of expanding, and in doing, puffing up the bread and making it
light. Bread made light with air is vastly superior to that compounded
with soda or baking powder, in point of healthfulness, and when well
prepared, will equal it in lightness and palatableness. The only
difficulty lies in catching and holding the air until it has
accomplished the desired results. But a thorough understanding of the
necessary conditions and a little practice will soon enable one to
attain sufficient skill in this direction to secure most satisfactory
results.

[Illustration: Gem Irons]

GENERAL DIRECTIONS.--All materials used for making aërated bread
should be of the very best quality. Poor flour will not produce good
bread by this or by any other process. Aërated breads are of two kinds:
those baked while in the form of a batter, and such as are made into a
dough before baking.

[Illustration: Perforated Sheet Iron Pan for Rolls.]

All breads, whether fermented or unfermented, are lighter if baked in
some small form, and this is particularly true of unfermented breads
made light with air. For this reason, breads made into a dough are best
baked in the form of rolls, biscuits, or crackers, and batter breads in
small iron cups similar to those in the accompanying illustration. These
cups or "gem irons" as they are sometimes called, are to be obtained in
various shapes and sizes, but for this purpose the more shallow cups are
preferable. For baking the dough breads a perforated sheet of Russia
iron or heavy tin, which any tinner can make to fit the oven, is the
most serviceable, as it permits the hot air free access to all sides of
the bread at once. If such is not obtainable, the upper oven grate,
carefully washed and scoured, may be used Perforated pie tins also
answer very well for this purpose.

[Illustration: Making Unfermented Bread.]

The heat of the oven for baking should be sufficient to form a slight
crust over all sides of the bread before the air escapes, but not
sufficient to brown it within the first fifteen minutes. To aid in
forming the crust on the sides and bottom of batter breads, the iron
cups should be heated previous to introducing the batter. The degree of
heat required for baking will be about the same as for fermented rolls
and biscuit, and the fire should be so arranged as to keep a steady but
not greatly increasing heat.

Air is incorporated into batter breads by brisk and continuous agitating
and beating; into dough breads by thorough kneading, chopping, or
pounding.

Whatever the process by which the air is incorporated, it must be
_continuous_. For this reason it is especially essential in making
aërated bread that every thing be in readiness before commencing to put
the bread together. All the materials should be measured out, the
utensils to be used in readiness, and the oven properly heated. Success
is also dependent upon the dexterity with which the materials when ready
are put together. Batter bread often proves a failure although the
beating is kept up without cessation, because it is done slowly and
carelessly, or interspersed with stirring, thus permitting the air to
escape between the strokes.

If the bread is to be baked at once, the greater the dispatch with which
it can be gotten into a properly-heated oven the lighter it will be.
Crackers, rolls and other forms of dough breads often lack in lightness
because they were allowed to stand some time before baking. The same is
true of batter breads. If, for any reason, it is necessary to keep such
breads for any length of time after being prepared, before baking, set
the dish containing them directly on ice.

The lightness of aërated bread depends not only upon the amount of air
incorporated in its preparation, but also upon the expansion of the air
during the baking. The colder the air, the greater will be its expansion
upon the application of heat. The colder the materials employed, then,
for the bread-making, the colder will be the air confined within it, and
the lighter will be the bread. For this reason, in making batter bread,
it will be found a good plan, when there is time, to put the materials
together, and place the dish containing the mixture on ice for an hour
or two, or even over night. When ready to use, beat thoroughly for ten
or fifteen minutes to incorporate air, and bake in heated irons. Rolls
and other breads made into a dough, may be kneaded and shaped and put
upon ice to become cold. Thus treated, less kneading is necessary than
when prepared to be baked at once.

Many of the recipes given for the batter breads include eggs. The yolk
is not particularly essential, and if it can be put to other uses, may
be left out. The white of an egg, because of its viscous nature, when
beaten, serves as a sort of trap to catch and hold air, and added to the
bread, aids in making it light. Very nice light bread may be made
without eggs, but the novice in making aërated breads will, perhaps,
find it an advantage first to become perfectly familiar with the
processes and conditions involved, by using the recipes with eggs before
attempting those without, which are somewhat more dependent for success
upon skill and practice.

When egg is used in the bread, less heating of the irons will be
necessary, and not so hot an oven as when made without.

If the bread, when baked, appears light, but with large holes in the
center, it is probable that either the irons or the oven was too hot at
first. If the bread after baking, seems sticky or dough-like in the
interior, it is an indication that either it was insufficiently baked,
or that not enough flour in proportion to the liquid has been used. It
should be stated, that although the recipes given have been prepared
with the greatest care, and with the same brands of flour, careful
measurement, and proper conditions, prove successful every time, yet
with different brands of flour some variation in quantity may needed,--a
trifle more or less,--dependent upon the absorbent properties of the
flour, and if eggs are used, upon the size of the eggs.

A heavy bread may be the result of the use of poor flour, too much
flour, careless or insufficient beating, so that not enough air was
incorporated, or an oven not sufficiently hot to form a crust over the
bread before the air escaped. Breads made into a dough, if moist and
clammy, require more flour or longer baking. Too much flour will make
them stiff and hard.

The length of time requisite for baking aërated breads made with
whole-wheat, wheat berry, or Graham flours, will vary from forty minutes
to one hour, according to the kind and form in which the bread is baked,
and the heat of the oven.

The irons in which batter breads are to be baked should not be smeared
with grease; if necessary to oil them at all, they should only be wiped
out lightly with a clean, oiled cloth. Irons well cared for, carefully
washed, and occasionally scoured with Sapolio to keep them perfectly
smooth, will require no greasing whatever.

In filling the irons, care should be taken to fill each cup at first as
full as it is intended to have; it, as the heat of the irons begins the
cooking of the batter as soon as it is put in, and an additional
quantity added has a tendency to make the bread less light.


_RECIPES._

WHOLE-WHEAT PUFFS.--Put the yolk of an egg into a basin, and beat
the white in a separate dish to a stiff froth. Add to the yolk, one half
a cupful of rather thin sweet cream and one cupful of skim milk. Beat
the egg, cream, and milk together until perfectly mingled and foamy with
air bubbles; then add, gradually, beating well at the same time, one
pint of wheat berry flour. Continue the beating vigorously and without
interruption for eight or ten minutes; then stir in, lightly, the white
of the egg. Do not beat again after the white of the egg is added, but
turn at once into heated, shallow irons, and bake for an hour in a
moderately quick oven. If properly made and carefully baked, these puffs
will be of a fine, even texture throughout, and as light as bread raised
by fermentation.

WHOLE-WHEAT PUFFS NO. 2.--Make a batter by beating together until
perfectly smooth the yolk of one egg, one and one half cups of new or
unskimmed milk, and one pint of whole-wheat flour. Place the dish
containing it directly upon ice, and leave for an hour or longer. The
bread may be prepared and left on the ice over night, if desired for
breakfast. When ready to bake the puffs, whip the white of the egg to a
stiff froth, and after vigorously beating the batter for ten minutes,
stir in lightly the white of the egg; turn at once into heated irons,
and bake. If preferred, one third white flour and two thirds sifted
Graham flour may be used in the place of the wheat berry flour.

WHOLE-WHEAT PUFFS NO. 3.--Take one cupful of sweet cream
(twelve-hour cream), one half cupful of soft ice water, and two slightly
rounded cupfuls of wheat berry flour. Beat the material well together,
and set the dish containing it on ice for an hour or more before using.
When ready to bake, beat the mixture vigorously for ten minutes, then
turn into heated iron cups (shallow ones are best), and bake for about
an hour in a quick oven.

GRAHAM PUFFS.--Beat together vigorously until full of air bubbles,
one pint of unskimmed milk, the yolk of one egg, and one pint and three
or four tablespoonfuls of Graham flour, added a little at a time. When
the mixture is light and foamy throughout, stir in lightly and evenly
the white of the egg, beaten to a stiff froth; turn into heated irons,
and bake in a rather quick oven. Instead of all Graham, one third white
flour may be used if preferred.

GRAHAM PUFFS NO. 2.--Beat the yolks of two eggs in two cupfuls of
ice water; then add gradually, beating well meantime, three and one
fourth cupfuls of Graham flour. Continue the beating, after all the
flour is added, until the mixture is light and full of air bubbles. Add
last the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth, and bake at once
in heated irons.

CURRANT PUFFS.--Prepare the puffs as directed in any of the
foregoing recipes with the addition of one cup of Zante currants which
have been well washed, dried, and floured.

GRAHAM GEMS.--Into two cupfuls of unskimmed milk which has been
made very cold by standing on ice, stir gradually, sprinkling it from
the hand, three and one fourth cupfuls of Graham flour. Beat vigorously
for ten minutes or longer, until the batter is perfectly smooth and full
of air bubbles. Turn at once into hissing hot gem irons, and bake in a
hot oven. If preferred, the batter may be prepared, and the dish
containing it placed on ice for an hour or longer; then well beaten and
baked. Graham gems may be made in this manner with soft water instead of
milk, but such, in general, will need a little more flour than when made
with milk. With some ovens, it will be found an advantage in baking
these gems to place them on the upper grate for the first ten minutes or
until the top has been slightly crusted, and then change to the bottom
of the oven for the baking.

CRUSTS.--Beat together very thoroughly one cupful of ice-cold milk,
and one cupful of Graham flour. When very light and full of air bubbles,
turn into hot iron cups, and bake twenty-five or thirty minutes. The
best irons for this purpose are the shallow oblong, or round cups of the
same size at the bottom as at the top. Only a very little batter should
be put in each cup. The quantity given is sufficient for one dozen
crusts.

RYE PUFFS.--Beat together the same as for whole-wheat puffs one
cupful of milk, one tablespoonful of sugar, and the yolk of an egg. Add
one cupful of good rye flour, mixed with one half cupful of Graham
flour, and stir in lastly the well beaten white of the egg. Bake at
once, in heated gem-irons.

RYE PUFFS NO. 2.--Beat together until well mingled one pint of thin
cream and the yolk of one egg. Add gradually, beating meanwhile, four
cups of rye flour. Continue to beat vigorously for ten minutes, then add
the stiffly-beaten white of the egg, and bake in heated irons.

RYE GEMS.--Mix together one cupful of corn meal and one cupful of
rye meal. Stir the mixed meal into one and a half cupfuls of ice water.
Beat the batter vigorously for ten or fifteen minutes, then turn into
hot irons, and bake.

BLUEBERRY GEMS.--To one cupful of rich milk add one tablespoonful
of sugar, and the yolk of an egg. Beat well till full of air bubbles;
then add gradually one cupful of Graham flour, and one cupful of white
flour, or white corn meal. Beat vigorously until light; stir in the
beaten white of the egg, and one cupful of fresh, sound blueberries.
Bake in heated irons, in a moderately quick oven. Chopped or sour apples
may be used in place of the berries.

HOMINY GEMS.--Beat one egg until very light, add to it one
tablespoonful of thick sweet cream, a little salt if desired, and two
cupfuls of cooked hominy (fine). Thin the mixture with one cupful or
less of boiling water until it will form easily, beat well, and bake in
heated irons.

SALLY LUNN GEMS.--Beat together the yolk of one egg, two
tablespoonfuls of sugar, and one cupful of thin, ice-cold, sweet cream.
Add slowly, beating at the same time, one cup and two tablespoonfuls of
sifted Graham flour. Beat vigorously, until full of air bubbles, add the
white of the egg beaten stiffly, and bake in heated irons.

CORN PUFFS.--Mingle the yolk of one egg with one cupful of rich
milk. Add to the liquid one cupful of flour, one-half cupful of fine,
yellow corn meal, and one-fourth cupful of sugar, all of which have
previously been well mixed together. Place the batter on ice for an
hour, or until very cold. Then beat it vigorously five or ten minutes,
till full of air bubbles; stir in lightly the stiffly beaten white of
the egg, and put at once into heated irons. Bake in a moderately quick
oven, thirty or forty minutes.

CORN PUFFS NO. 2.--Scald two cupfuls of fine white corn meal with
boiling water. When cold, add three tablespoonfuls of thin sweet cream,
and the yolk of one egg. Beat well, and stir in lastly the white of the
egg, beaten to a stiff froth. The batter should be sufficiently thin to
drop easily from a spoon, but not thin enough to pour. Bake in heated
irons, in a moderately quick oven.

CORN PUFFS NO. 3.--Take one cupful of cold mashed potato, and one
cupful of milk, rubbed together through a colander to remove all lumps.
Add the yolk of one well beaten, egg, and then stir in slowly, beating
vigorously meantime, one cupful of good corn meal. Lastly, stir in the
white of the egg beaten to a stiff froth, and bake in heated irons, in a
rather quick oven.

CORN PUFFS NO. 4.--Beat together one and one-half cupfuls of
unskimmed milk and the yolks of two eggs, until thoroughly blended. Add
two cupfuls of flour, and one cupful best granular corn meal. Beat the
batter thoroughly; stir in lightly the whites of the eggs, beaten to a
stiff froth, turn into heated irons, and bake.

CORN DODGERS.--Scald one cupful of best granular corn meal, with
which a tablespoonful of sugar has been sifted, with one cup of boiling
milk. Beat until smooth, and drop on a griddle, in cakes about one inch
in thickness, and bake slowly for an hour. Turn when brown.

CORN DODGERS NO. 2.--Mix one tablespoonful of sugar with two cups
best corn meal. Scald with one cup of boiling water. Add rich milk to
make a batter thin enough to drop from a spoon. Lastly, add one egg,
yolk and white beaten separately, and bake on a griddle in the oven from
three fourth of an hour to one hour.

CREAM CORN CAKES.--Into one cup of thin cream stir one and one half
cups of granular corn meal, or enough to make a stiff batter; beat well,
drop into heated irons, and bake.

HOE CAKES.--Scald one pint of white corn meal, with which, if
desired, a tablespoonful of sugar, and one half teaspoonful of salt have
been mixed, with boiling milk, or water enough to make a batter
sufficiently thick not to spread. Drop on a hot griddle, in large or
small cakes, as preferred, about one half inch in thickness. Cook
slowly, and when well browned on the under side, turn over. The cake may
be cooked slowly, until well done throughout, or, as the portion
underneath becomes well browned the first browned crust may be peeled
off with a knife, and the cake again turned. As rapidly as a crust
becomes formed and browned, one may be removed, and the cake turned,
until the whole is all browned. The thin wafer-like crusts are excellent
served with hot milk or cream.

OATMEAL GEMS.--To one cupful of well-cooked oatmeal add one half
cupful of rich milk or thin cream, and the yolk of one egg. Beat all
together thoroughly; then add, continuing to beat, one and one third
cupfuls of Graham flour, and lastly the stiffly beaten white of the egg.
Bake in heated irons. If preferred, one cupful of white flour may be
used in place of the Graham.

SNOW GEMS.--Beat together lightly but thoroughly two parts clean,
freshly fallen, dry snow, and one part best granular corn meal. Turn
into hot gem irons and bake quickly. The snow should not be packed in
measuring, and the bread should be prepared before the snow melts.

POP OVERS.--For the preparation of these, one egg, one cupful of
milk, and one scant cupful of white flour are required. Beat the egg,
yolk and white separately. Add to the yolk, when well beaten, one half
of the milk, and sift in the flour a little at a time, stirring until
the whole is a perfectly smooth paste. Add the remainder of the milk
gradually, beating well until the whole is an absolutely smooth, light
batter about the thickness of cream. Stir in the stiffly beaten white of
the egg, and bake in hot earthen cups or muffin rings, and to prevent
them from sticking, sift flour into the rings after slightly oiling,
afterward turning them upside down to shake off all of the loose flour.

GRANOLA GEMS.--Into three fourths of a cup of rich milk stir one
cup of Granola (prepared by the Sanitarium Food Co.). Drop into heated
irons, and bake for twenty or thirty minutes.

BEAN GEMS.--Prepare the gems in the same manner as for Whole-Wheat
Puffs, using one half cup of milk, one egg, one cup of cooked beans
which have been rubbed through a colander and salted, and one cup and
one tablespoonful of white flour. A little variation in the quantity of
the flour may be necessary, dependent upon the moisture contained in the
beans, although care should be taken to have them quite dry.

BREAKFAST ROLLS.--Sift a pint and a half of Graham flour into a
bowl, and into it stir a cupful of very cold thin cream or unskimmed
milk. Pour the liquid into the flour slowly, a few spoonfuls at a time,
mixing each spoonful to a dough with the flour as fast as poured in.
When all the liquid has been added, gather the fragments of dough
together, knead thoroughly for ten minutes or longer, until perfectly
smooth and elastic. The quantity of flour will vary somewhat with the
quality, but in general, the quantity given will be quite sufficient for
mixing the dough and dusting the board. When well kneaded, divide into
two portions; roll each over and over with the hands, until a long roll
about once inch in diameter is formed; cut this into two-inch lengths,
prick with a fork and place on perforated tins, far enough apart so that
one will not touch another when baking. Each roll should be as smooth
and perfect as possible, and with no dry flour adhering. Bake at once,
or let stand on ice for twenty minutes. The rolls should not be allowed
to stand after forming, unless on ice. From thirty to forty minutes will
be required for baking. When done, spread on the table to cool, but do
not pile one on top of another.

Very nice rolls may be made in the same manner, using for the wetting
ice-cold soft water. They requite a longer kneading, are more crisp, but
less tender than those made with cream.

With some brands of Graham flour the rolls will be much lighter if one
third white flour be used. Whole-wheat flour may be used in place of
Graham, if preferred.

STICKS.--Prepare, and knead the dough the same as for rolls. When
ready to form, roll the dough much smaller; scarcely larger than one's
little finger, and cut into three or four-inch lengths. Bake the same as
rolls, for about twenty minutes.

CREAM GRAHAM RAILS.--To one half cup cold cream add one half cup of
soft ice water. Make into a dough with three cups of Graham flour,
sprinkling in slowly with the hands, beating at the same time, so as to
incorporate as much air as possible, until the dough is too stiff to be
stirred; then knead thoroughly, form into rolls, and bake.

CORN MUSH ROLLS.--Make a dough of one cup of corn meal mush, one
half cup of cream, and two and one half cups of white flour; knead
thoroughly, shape into rolls, and bake.

FRUIT ROLLS.--Prepare the rolls as directed in the recipe for
Breakfast Rolls, and when well kneaded, work into the dough a half
cupful of Zante currants which have been well washed, dried, and
floured. Form the rolls in the usual manner, and bake.

CREAM MUSH ROLLS.--Into a cupful of cold Graham mush beat
thoroughly three tablespoonfuls of thick, sweet cream. Add sufficient
Graham flour to make a rather stiff dough, knead thoroughly, shape into
roils, and bake. Corn meal, farina, and other mushes may be used in the
place of the Graham mush, if preferred.

BEATEN BISCUIT.--Into a quart of whole-wheat flour mix a large cup
of must be very stiff, and rendered soft and pliable by thorough
kneading and afterward pounding with a mallet for at least half an hour
in the following manner: Pound the dough oat flat, and until of the same
thickness throughout; dredge lightly with flour; double the dough over
evenly and pound quickly around the outside, to fasten the edges
together and thus retain the air within the dough. When well worked, the
dough will appear flaky and brittle, and pulling a piece off it quickly
will cause a sharp, snapping sound. Mold into small biscuits, making an
indenture in the center of each with the thumb, prick well with a fork,
and place on perforated sheets, with a space between, and put at once
into the oven. The oven should be of the same temperature as for rolls.
If they are "sad" inside when cold, they were not well baked, as they
should be light and tender. If preferred, use one third white flour,
instead of all whole-wheat. Excellent results are also obtained by
chopping instead of pounding the dough.

CREAM CRISPS.--Make a dough of one cupful of thin cream, and a
little more than three cups of Graham flour. Knead until smooth, then
divide the dough into several pieces, and place in a dish on ice for an
hour, or until ice cold. Roll each piece separately and quickly as thin
as brown paper. Cut with a knife into squares, prick with a fork, and
bake on perforated tins, until lightly browned on both sides.

CREAM CRISPS NO. 2.--Into two and one half cups of cold cream or
rich milk, sprinkle slowly with the hands, beating meanwhile to
incorporate air, four cups of best Graham flour, sifted with one half
cup of granulated sugar. Add flour to knead; about two and one fourth
cups will be required. When well kneaded, divide into several portions,
roll each as thin as a knife blade, cut into squares, prick well with a
fork, and bake.

GRAHAM CRISPS.--Into one half cupful of ice-cold soft water, stir
slowly, so as to incorporate as much air as possible, enough Graham
flour to make a dough stiff enough to knead. A tablespoonful of sugar
may be added to the water before stirring in the flour, if desired.
After kneading fifteen minutes, divide the dough into six portions;
roll each as thin as brown paper, prick with a fork, and bake on
perforated tins, turning often until both sides are a light, even brown.
Break into irregular pieces and serve.

OATMEAL CRISPS.--Make a dough with one cupful of oatmeal porridge
and Graham flour. Knead thoroughly, roll very thin, and bake as directed
for Graham Crisps. A tablespoonful of sugar may be added if desired.

GRAHAM CRACKERS.--Make a dough of one cup of cream and Graham flour
sufficient to make a soft dough. Knead thoroughly, and place on ice for
half an hour; then roll thin, cut into small cakes with a cookie-cutter,
prick with a fork, and bake on floured pans, in a brisk oven. A
tablespoonful of sugar may be added if desired.

FRUIT CRACKERS.--Prepare a dough with one cup of cold sweet cream
and three cups of Graham flour, knead well, and divide into two
portions. Roll each quite thin. Spread one thickly with dates or figs
seeded and chopped; place the other one on top and press together with
the rolling pin. Cut into squares and bake. An additional one fourth of
a cup of flour will doubtless be needed for dusting the board and
kneading.




TABLE TOPICS.


    Behind the nutty loaf is the mill wheel; behind the mill is the
    wheat field; on the wheat field rests the sunlight; above the sun is
    God.--_James Russell Lowell._


    Bread forms one of the most important parts of the ration of the
    German soldier. In time of peace, the private soldier is supplied
    day by day with one pound and nine ounces of bread; when fighting
    for the Fatherland, every man is entitled to a free ration of over
    two pounds of bread, and field bakery trains and steam ovens for
    providing the large amount of bread required, form a recognized part
    of the equipment of the German army.

    The wandering Arab lives almost entirely upon bread, with a few
    dates as a relish.

    According to Count Rumford, the Bavarian wood-chopper, one of the
    most hardy and hard-working men in the world, receives for his
    weekly rations one large loaf of rye bread and a small quantity of
    roasted meal. Of the meal he makes an infusion, to which he adds a
    little salt, and with the mixture, which he calls burned soup, he
    eats his rye bread. No beer, no beef, no other food than that
    mentioned, and no drink but water; and yet he can do more work and
    enjoys a better digestion and possesses stronger muscles than the
    average American or Englishman, with their varied dietary.


    The following truthful bit of Scandinavian history well illustrates
    the influence of habits of frugality upon national character: "The
    Danes were approaching, and one of the Swedish bishops asked how
    many men the province of Dalarna could furnish.

    "'At least twenty thousand,' was the reply; 'for the old men are
    just as strong and brave as the young ones.'

    "'But what do they live upon?'

    "'Upon bread and water. They take little account of hunger and
    thirst, and when corn is lacking, they make their bread out of tree
    bark.'

    "'Nay,' said the bishop, 'a people who eat tree bark and drink
    water, the devil himself could not vanquish!' and neither were they
    vanquished. Their progress was one series of triumphs, till they
    placed Gustavus Vasa on the throne of Sweden."

    The word _biscuit_ embodies the process by which this form of bread
    was made from time immemorial down to within the last century. _Bis_
    (twice), and _coctus_ (cooked), show that they were twice baked.

    Fragments of unfermented bread were discovered in the Swiss
    lake-dwellings, which belong to the Neolithic age.

    Fermented bread is seldom seen in Northern Europe and Asia except
    among the rich or the nobility. At one time, the captain of an
    English vessel requested a baker of Gottenburg to bake a large
    quantity of loaves of raised bread. The baker refused to undertake
    an order of such magnitude, saying it would be quite impossible to
    dispose of so much, until the captain agreed to take and pay for it
    all.

    I made a study of the ancient and indispensable art of bread-making,
    consulting such authorities as offered, going back to the primitive
    days and first invention of the unleavened kind, and traveling
    gradually down in my studies through that accidental souring of the
    dough which it is supposed taught the leavening process, and through
    the various fermentations thereafter till I came to "good, sweet,
    wholesome bread,"--the staff of life. Leaven, which some deemed the
    soul of bread, the _spiritus_ which fills its cellular tissues,
    which is religiously preserved like the vestal fire,--some precious
    bottleful, I suppose, brought over in the Mayflower, did the
    business for America, and its influence is still rising, swelling,
    spreading in cerulean billows over the land,--this seed I regularly
    and faithfully procured from the village, until one morning I forgot
    the rules and scalded my yeast; by which accident I discovered that
    even this was not indispensable, and I have gladly omitted it ever
    since. Neither did I put any soda or other acid or alkali into my
    bread. It would seem that I made it according to the recipe which
    Marcus Porcius Cato gave about two centuries before Christ: "Make
    kneaded bread thus: Wash your hands and trough well. Put the meal
    into the trough, add water gradually, and knead it thoroughly. When
    you have needed it well, mold it, and bake it under a cover," that
    is in a baking kettle.--_Thoreau in Walden._




FRUITS

Of all the articles which enter the list of foods, none are more
wholesome and pleasing than the fruits which nature so abundantly
provides. Their delicate hues and perfect outlines appeal to our sense
of beauty, while their delicious flavors gratify our appetite. Our
markets are supplied with an almost unlimited variety of both native and
tropical fruits, and it might be supposed that they would always appear
upon the daily bill of fare; yet in the majority of homes this is rarely
the case. People are inclined to consider fruit, unless the product of
their own gardens, a luxury too expensive for common use. Many who use a
plentiful supply, never think of placing it upon their tables, unless
cooked. Ripe fruit is a most healthful article of diet when partaken of
at seasonable times; but to eat it, or any other food, between meals, is
a gross breach of the requirements of good digestion.

Fruits contain from seventy-five to ninety-five per cent of water, and a
meager proportion of nitrogenous matter; hence their value as
nutrients, except in a few instances, is rather small; but they supply a
variety of agreeable acids which refresh and give tone to the system,
and their abundant and proper use does much to keep the vital machinery
in good working order.

Aside from the skin and seeds, all fruits consist essentially of two
parts,--the cellulose structure containing the juice, and the juice
itself. The latter is water, with a small proportion of fruit sugar
(from one to twenty per cent in different varieties), and vegetable
acids. These acids are either free, or combined with potash and lime in
the form of acid salts. They are mallic, citric, tartaric, and pectic
acids. The last-named is the jelly-producing principle.

While the juice, as we commonly find it, is readily transformable for
use in the system, the cellular structure of the fruit is not so easily
digested. In some fruits, as the strawberry, grape, and banana, the cell
walls are so delicate as to be easily broken up; but in watermelons,
apples, and oranges, the cells are coarser, and form a larger bulk of
the fruit, hence are less easily digested. As a rule, other points being
equal, the fruits which yield the richest and largest quantity of
juices, and also possess a cellular framework the least perceptible on
mastication, are the most readily digested. A certain amount of waste
matter is an advantage, to give bulk to our food; but persons with weak
stomachs, who cannot eat certain kinds of fruit, are often able to
digest the juice when taken alone.

Unripe fruits differ from ripe fruits in that they contain, starch,
which during ripening is changed into sugar, and generally some
proportion of tannic acid, which gives them their astringency. The
characteristic constituent of unripe fruit, however, is pectose, an
element insoluble in water, but which, as maturation proceeds, is
transformed into pectic and pectosic acids. These are soluble in boiling
water, and upon cooling, yield gelatinous solutions. Their presence
makes it possible to convert the juice of ripe fruits into jelly. Raw
starch in any form is indigestible, hence unripe fruit should never be
eaten uncooked. As fruit matures, the changes it undergoes are such as
best fit for consumption and digestion. The following table shows the
composition of the fruits in common use:--


ANALYSIS.

                 Water. Albumen. Sugar. Free Acid. Pectose. Cellulose Mineral
                                                                      Matter.
    Apples        83.0   0.4      6.8      1.0     5.2       3.2         0.4
    Pears         84.0   0.3      7.0      0.1     4.6       3.7         0.3
    Peaches       85.0   0.5      1.8      0.7     8.0       3.4         0.6
    Grapes        80.0   0.7    Glucose. Tartaric. 3.1       2.0         0.4
                                 13.0      0.8
    Plums         82.0   0.2      3.6      0.5     5.7       ...         0.6
    Gooseberries  86.0   0.4      7.0      1.5     1.9       2.7         0.5
    Strawberries  87.6   0.5      4.5      1.3     0.1       ...         0.6
    Raspberries   86.+   0.5      4.7      1.3     1.7       ...         0.4
    Currants      85.2   0.4      6.4      1.8     0.2       ...         0.5
    Blackberries  86.4   0.5      4.4      1.1     1.4       ...         0.4
    Cherries      75.0   0.9     13.1      0.3     2.2       ...         0.6
    Apricots      85.0    .08     1.0      ...     5.9       ...         0.8
    Oranges       86.0   [A]   8 to 10     ...     ...       ...         ...
    Dates         20.8   6.6     54.0      Fat.   12.3       5.5         1.6
                                           0.2
    Bananas       73.9   4.8     19.7[B]   Fat.    ...       0.2         0.8
                                           0.6
    Turkey Figs   17.5   6.1     57.5      Fat.    8.4[C]    7.3         2.3
                                           0.9

[Table Note A: Small quantities of albumen, citric acid, citrate of
potash, cellulose, etc.]

[Table Note B: Sugar and pectose.]

[Table Note C: Starch, pectose, etc.]


There is a prevailing notion that the free use of fruits, especially in
summer, excites derangement of the digestive organs. When such
derangement occurs, it is far more likely to have been occasioned by the
way in which the fruit was eaten than by the fruit itself. Perhaps it
was taken as a surfeit dish at the end of a meal. It may have been eaten
in combination with rich, oily foods, pastry, strong coffee, and other
indigestible viands, which, in themselves, often excite an attack of
indigestion. Possibly it was partaken of between meals, or late at
night, with ice cream and other confections, or it was swallowed without
sufficient mastication. Certainly, it is not marvelous that stomach and
bowel disorders do result under such circumstances. The innocent fruit,
like many other good things, being found in "bad company," is blamed
accordingly. An excess of any food at meals or between meals, is likely
to prove injurious, and fruits present no exception to this rule. Fruit
taken at seasonable times and in suitable quantities, alone or in
combination with proper foods, gives us one of the most agreeable and
healthful articles of diet. Fruit, fats, and meats do not affiliate, and
they are liable to create a disturbance whenever taken together.

Partially decayed, stale, and over-ripe, as well as unripe fruit, should
never be eaten. According to M. Pasteur, the French scientist, all
fruits and vegetables, when undergoing even incipient decay, contain
numerous germs, which, introduced into the system, are liable to produce
disturbances or disease. Perfectly fresh, ripe fruit, with proper
limitations as to quantity and occasion, may be taken into a normal
stomach with impunity at any season.

It is especially important that all fruits to be eaten should not only
be sound in quality, but should be made perfectly clean by washing if
necessary, since fruit grown near the ground is liable to be covered
with dangerous bacteria (such as cause typhoid fever or diphtheria),
which exist in the soil or in the material used in fertilizing it.

Most fruits, properly used, aid digestion either directly or indirectly.
The juicy ones act as dilutents, and their free use lessens the desire
for alcohol and other stimulants. According to German analysts, the
apple contains a larger percentage of phosphorus than any other fruit,
or than any vegetable. In warm weather and in warm climates, when foods
are not needed for a heat-producing purpose, the diet may well consist
largely of fruits and succulent vegetables, eaten in combination with
bread and grains. In case of liver and kidney affections, rheumatism,
and gout, the use of fruit is considered very beneficial by many
scientific authorities.

To serve its best purpose, raw fruit should be eaten without sugar or
other condiments, or with the addition of as small a quantity as
possible.

It is a disputed question whether fruits should begin or end the meal;
but it is generally conceded by those who have given the matter
attention, that fruit eaten at the beginning of a meal is itself the
more readily digested, and aids in the digestion of other foods, since
fruits, like soups, have the property of stimulating the flow of the
digestive juices. Something, however, must depend upon the character of
the fruit; oranges, melons, and like juicy fruits, are especially useful
as appetizers to begin the meal, while bananas and similar fruits agree
better if taken with other food, so as to secure thorough mixture with
saliva. This is true of all fruits, except such pulpy fruits as
strawberries, peaches, melons, grapes, and oranges. It is often
erroneously asserted that fruit as dessert is injurious to digestion.
For those people, however, who regulate their bill of fare in accordance
with the principles of hygiene, a simple course of fruit is not only
wholesome, but is all that is needed after a dinner; and much time,
labor, and health will be saved when housekeepers are content to serve
desserts which nature supplies all ready for use, instead of those
harmful combinations in the preparing of which they spend hours of
tiresome toil.

DESCRIPTION.--For convenience, fruits may be grouped together; as,
_pomaceous_ fruits, including the apple, quince, pear, etc.; the
_drupaceous_ fruits, those provided with a hard stone surrounded by a
fleshy pulp, as the peach, apricot, plum, cherry, olive, and date; the
orange or citron group, including the orange, lemon, lime, citron, grape
fruit, shaddock, and pomegranate; the _baccate_ or berry kind,
comprising the grape, gooseberry, currant, cranberry, whortleberry,
blueberry, and others; the _arterio_ group, to which belong raspberries,
strawberries, dewberries, and blackberries; the fig group; the gourd
group, including--melons and cantaloupes; and foreign fruits.

It is impossible, in the brief scope of this work, to enumerate the
infinite varieties of fruit; but we will briefly speak of some of the
most common found in the gardens and markets of this latitude.

APPLES.--The origin and first home of the apple, is unknown. If
tradition is to be believed, it was the inauspicious fruit to which may
be traced all the miseries of mankind. In pictures of the temptation in
the garden of Eden, our mother Eve is generally represented as holding
an apple in her hand.

We find the apple mentioned in the mythologies of the Greeks, Druids,
and Scandinavians. The Thebans offered apples instead of sheep as a
sacrifice to Hercules, a custom derived from the following
circumstance:--

"At one time, when a sacrifice was necessary, the river Asopus had so
inundated the country that it was impossible to take a sheep across it
for the purpose, when some youths, recollecting that the Greek word
_melon_ signified both sheep and an apple, stuck wooden pegs into the
fruit to represent legs, and brought this vegetable quadruped as a
substitute for the usual offering. After this date, the apple was
considered as especially devoted to Hercules."

In ancient times, Greece produced most excellent apples. They were the
favorite dessert of Phillip of Macedon and Alexander the Great, the
latter causing them to be served at all meals. Doubtless they came to be
used to excess; for it is recorded of the Athenian lawgiver, Solon, that
he made a decree prohibiting a bridegroom from partaking of more than
one at his marriage banquet, a law which was zealously kept by the
Greeks, and finally adopted by the Persians. In Homer's time the apple
was regarded as one of the precious fruits. It was extensively
cultivated by the Romans, who gave to new varieties the names of many
eminent citizens, and after the conquest of Gaul, introduced its culture
into Southwestern Europe, whence it has come to be widely diffused
throughout all parts of the temperate zone.

Apples were introduced into the United States by the early settlers,
and the first trees were planted on an island in Boston Harbor, which
still retains the name of Apple Island. The wild crab tree is the parent
of most of the cultivated varieties.

THE PEAR.--The origin of the pear, like that of the apple, is
shrouded in obscurity, though Egypt, Greece, and Palestine dispute for
the honor of having given birth to the tree which bears this prince of
fruits. Theophrastus, a Greek philosopher of the fourth century, speaks
of the pear in terms of highest praise; and Galen, the father of medical
science, mentions the pear in his writings as possessing "qualities
which benefit the stomach." The pear tree is one of the most hardy of
all fruit trees, and has been known to live several hundred years.

THE QUINCE.--This fruit appears to have been a native of Crete,
from whence it was introduced into ancient Greece; and was largely
cultivated by both Greeks and Romans. In Persia, the fruit is edible in
its raw state; but in this country it never ripens sufficiently to be
palatable without being cooked. The fruit is highly fragrant and
exceedingly acid, and for these reasons it is largely employed to flavor
other fruits.

THE PEACH.--This fruit, as its botanical name, _prinus Persica_,
indicates, is a native of Persia, and was brought from that country to
Greece, from whence it passed into Italy. It is frequently mentioned by
ancient writers, and was regarded with much esteem by the people of
Asia. The Romans, however, had the singular notion that peaches gathered
in Persia contained a deadly poison, but if once transplanted to another
soil, this injurious effect was lost. In composition, the peach is
notable for the small quantity of saccharine matter it contains in
comparison with other fruits.

THE PLUM.--The plum is one of the earliest of known fruits. Thebes,
Memphis, and Damascus were noted for the great number of their plum
trees in the early centuries. Plum trees grow wild in Asia, America, and
the South of Europe, and from these a large variety of domestic plum
fruits have been cultivated.

Plums are more liable than most other fruits to produce disorders of
digestion, and when eaten raw should be carefully selected, that they be
neither unripe nor unripe. Cooking renders them less objectionable.

THE PRUNE.--The plum when dried is often called by its French
cognomen, _prune_. The larger and sweeter varieties are generally
selected for drying, and when good and properly cooked, are the most
wholesome of prepared fruits.

THE APRICOT.--This fruit seems to be intermediate between the peach
and the plum, resembling the former externally, while the stone is like
that of the plum. The apricot originated in Armenia, and the tree which
bears the fruit was termed by the Romans "the tree of Armenia." It was
introduced into England in the time of Henry VIII. The apricot is
cultivated to some extent in the United States, but it requires too much
care to permit of its being largely grown, except in certain sections.

THE CHERRY.--The common garden cherry is supposed to have been
derived from the two species of wild fruit, and historians tell us that
we are indebted to the agricultural experiments of Mithridates, the
great king of ancient Pontus, for this much esteemed fruit. It is a
native of Asia Minor, and its birthplace.

THE OLIVE.--From time immemorial the olive has been associated with
history. The Scriptures make frequent reference to it, and its
cultivation was considered of first importance among the Jews, who used
its oil for culinary and a great variety of other purposes. Ancient
mythology venerated the olive tree above all others, and invested it
with many charming bits of fiction. Grecian poets sang its praises, and
early Roman writers speak of it with high esteem. In appearance and size
the fruit is much like the plum; when ripe, it is very dark green,
almost black, and possesses a strong, and, to many people, disagreeable
flavor. The pulp abounds in a bland oil, for the production of which it
is extensively cultivated in Syria, Egypt, Italy, Spain, and Southern
France. The fruit itself is also pickled and preserved in various ways,
but, like all other similar commodities when thus prepared, it is by no
means a wholesome article of food.

THE DATE.--The date is the fruit of the palm tree so often
mentioned in the Sacred Writings, and is indigenous to Africa and
portions of Asia. The fruit grows in bunches which often weigh from
twenty to twenty-five pounds, and a single tree will bear from one to
three thousand pounds in a season. The date is very sweet and
nutritious. It forms a stable article of diet for the inhabitants of
some parts of Egypt, Arabia, and Persia, and frequently forms the chief
food of their horses, dogs, and camels. The Arabs reduce dried dates to
a meal, and make therefrom a bread, which often constitutes their sole
food on long journeys through the Great Desert. The inhabitants of the
countries where the date tree flourishes, put its various productions to
innumerable uses. From its leaves they make baskets, bags, mats, combs,
and brushes; from its stalks, fences for their gardens; from its fibers,
thread, rope, and rigging; from its sap, a spirituous liquor; from its
fruit, food for man and beast; while the body of the tree furnishes them
with fuel. The prepared fruit is largely imported to this country. That
which is large, smooth, and of a soft reddish yellow tinge, with a
whitish membrane between the flesh and stone, is considered the best.

THE ORANGE.--According to some authors, the far-famed "golden fruit
of the Hesperides," which Hercules stole, was the orange; but it seems
highly improbable that it was known to writers of antiquity. It is
supposed to be indigenous to Central and Eastern Asia. Whatever its
nativity, it has now spread over all the warmer regions of the earth.
The orange tree is very hardy in its own habitat, and is one of the most
prolific of all fruit-bearing trees, a single tree having been known to
produce twenty thousand good oranges in a season. Orange trees attain
great age. There are those in Italy and Spain which are known to have
flourished for six hundred years. Numerous varieties of the orange are
grown, and are imported to our markets from every part of the globe.
Florida oranges are among the best, and when obtained in their
perfection, are the most luscious of all fruits.

THE LEMON.--This fruit is supposed to be a native of the North of
India, although it is grown in nearly all sub-tropical climates. In
general, the fruit is very acid, but in a variety known as the sweet
lemon, or bergamot (said to be a hybrid of the orange and lemon), the
juice is sweet. The sour lemon is highly valued for its antiscorbutic
properties, and is largely employed as a flavoring ingredient in
culinary preparations, and in making a popular refreshing beverage.

THE CITRON.--The citron is a fruit very similar to the lemon,
though larger in size and less succulent. It is supposed to be identical
with the Hebrew _tappuach_, and to be the fruit which is mentioned in
the English version of the Old Testament as "apple." The citron is not
suitable for eating in its raw state, though its juice is used in
connection with water and sugar to form an excellent acid drink. Its
rind, which is very thick, with a warty and furrowed exterior, is
prepared in sugar and largely used for flavoring purposes.

THE LIME.--The fruit of the lime is similar to the lemon, though
much smaller in size. It is a native of Eastern Asia, but has long been
cultivated in the South of Europe and other sub-tropical countries. The
fruit is seldom used except for making acidulous drinks, for which it is
often given the preference over the lemon.

THE GRAPE FRUIT.--This fruit, a variety of shaddock, belongs to the
great _citrus_ family, of which there are one hundred and sixty-nine
known varieties. The shaddock proper, however, is a much larger fruit,
frequently weighing from ten to fourteen pounds. Although a certain
quantity of grape fruit is brought from the West Indies, our principal
supply is derived from Florida. It is from two to four times the size of
an ordinary orange, and grows in clusters. It is rapidly gaining in
favor with fruit lovers. Its juice has a moderately acid taste and makes
a pleasing beverage. The pulp, carefully separated, is also much
esteemed.

THE POMEGRANATE.--This fruit has been cultivated in Asia from
earliest antiquity, and is still quite generally grown in most tropical
climes. In the Scriptures it is mentioned with the vine, fig, and olive,
among the pleasant fruits of the promised land. It is about the size of
a large peach, of a fine golden color, with a rosy tinge on one side.
The rind is thick and leathery. The central portion is composed of
little globules of pulp and seeds inclosed in a thin membrane, each seed
being about the size of a red currant. It is sub-acid, and slightly
bitter in taste. The rind is strongly astringent, and often used as a
medicine.

THE GRAPE.--Undoubtedly the grape was one of the first fruits eaten
by mankind, and one highly valued from antiquity down to the present
time. Although this fruit is often sadly perverted in the manufacture of
wine, when rightly used it is one of the most excellent of all fruits.
The skins and seeds are indigestible and should be rejected, but the
fresh, juicy pulp is particularly wholesome and refreshing. Several
hundred varieties of the grape are cultivated. Some particularly sweet
varieties are made into raisins, by exposure to the sun or to artificial
heat. Sun-dried grapes make the best raisins. The so-called English or
Zante currant belongs to the grape family, and is the dried fruit of a
vine which grows in the Ionian Islands and yields a very small berry.
The name _currant_, as applied to these fruits, is a corruption of the
word _Corinth_, where the fruit was formerly grown.

THE GOOSEBERRY.--The gooseberry probably derives its name from
gorse or goss, a prickly shrub that grows wild in thickets and on
hillsides in Europe, Asia, and America. It was known to the ancients,
and is mentioned in the writings of Theocritus and Pliny. Gooseberries
were a favorite dish with some of the emperors, and were extensively
cultivated in gardens during the Middle Ages. The gooseberry is a
wholesome and agreeable fruit, and by cultivation may be brought to a
high state of perfection in size and flavor.

THE CURRANT.--This fruit derives its name from its resemblance to
the small grapes of Corinth, sometimes called Corinthus, and is
indigenous to America, Asia, and Europe. The fruit is sharply acid,
though very pleasant to the taste. Cultivation has produced white
currants from the red, and in a distinct species of the fruit grown in
Northern Europe and Russia, the currants are black or yellow.

THE WHORTLEBERRY AND BLUEBERRY.--These are both species of the same
fruit, which grows in woods and waste places in the North of Europe and
America. Of the latter species there are two varieties, the high-bush
and the low-bush, which are equally palatable. The fruit is very sweet
and pleasant to the taste, and is one of the most wholesome of all
berries.

THE CRANBERRY.--A German writer of note insists that the original
name of this fruit was cram-berry, because after dinner, when one was
filled with other food, such was its pleasant and seductive flavor that
he could still "cram" quite a quantity thereof, in defiance of all
dietetic laws. Other writers consider the name a corruption of
craneberry, so called because it is eagerly sought after by the cranes
and other birds which frequent the swamps and marshes where it chiefly
grows. The fruit is extremely acid, and is highly valued for sauces and
jellies. Cranberries are among the most convenient fruits for keeping.
Freezing does not seem to hurt them, and they may be kept frozen all
winter, or in water without freezing, in the cellar, or other cool
places, for a long period.

THE STRAWBERRY.--The flavor of antiquity rests upon the wild
strawberry. Its fruit was peddled by itinerant dealers about the streets
of ancient Grecian and Roman cities. Virgil sings of it in pastoral
poems, and Ovid mentions it in words of praise. The name by which the
fruit was known to the Greeks indicates its size; with the Latins its
name was symbolic of its perfume. The name _strawberry_ probably came
from the old Saxon _streawberige_, either from some resemblance of the
stems to straw, of from the fact that the berries have the appearance
when growing of being strewn upon the ground. In olden times, children
strung the berries upon straws, and sold so many "straws of berries" for
a penny, from which fact it is possible the name may have been derived.
The strawberry is indigenous to the temperate regions of both the
Eastern and Western Hemispheres, but it seems to have been matured in
gardens, only within the last two centuries.

THE RASPBERRY.--This fruit grows in both a wild and a cultivated
state. It derives its name from the rough rasps or spines with which the
bushes are covered. Among the ancients it was called "the bramble of Mt.
Ida," because it was abundant upon that mountain. It is a hardy fruit,
found in most parts of the world, and is of two special varieties, the
black and the red.

THE BLACKBERRY.--This fruit is a native of America and the greater
part of Europe. There are one hundred and fifty-one named species,
although the high-blackberry and the low-blackberry, or dewberry, are
said to have furnished the best cultivated varieties.

THE MULBERRY.--Different varieties of the mulberry tree produce
white, red, and black mulberries of fine aromatic flavor, and acidulous
or sweet taste. Persia is supposed to be the native home of this fruit,
from whence it was carried, at an early date, to Asia Minor and to
Greece. The Hebrews were evidently well acquainted with it. It was also
cultivated by the farmers of Attica and Peloponnesus. The ancient
mulberry was considered the wisest and most prudent of trees, because it
took care not to put forth the smallest bud until the cold of winter had
disappeared, not to return. Then, however, it lost no time, but budded
and blossomed in a day. Several varieties are found in the United
States.

THE MELON.--This is the generic name for all the members of the
gourd tribe known as cantaloupes, muskmelons, and watermelons. The fruit
varies greatly in size and color, and in the character of the rind. When
fresh and perfectly ripe, melons are among the most delicious of edible
fruits.

THE FIG.--In the most ancient histories, the fig tree is referred
to as among the most desirable productions of the earth. It was the
only tree in the garden of Eden of which the Sacred Writings make
particular mention. Among the inhabitants of ancient Syria and Greece,
it formed one of the principal articles of food. Its cultivation was,
and is still, extensively carried on in nearly all Eastern countries;
also in Spain, Southern France, and some portions of the United States.
The fruit is pear-shaped, and consists of a pulpy mass full of little
seeds. Dried and compressed figs are largely imported, and are to be
found in all markets. Those brought from Smyrna are reputed to be the
best.

THE BANANA.--This is essentially a tropical fruit growing very
generally in the East, the West Indies, South American countries, and
some of the Southern States. The plant is an annual, sending up stems to
the height of ten or fifteen feet, while drooping from the top are
enormous leaves three or four feet in length, and looking, as one writer
has aptly said, like "great, green quill pens." It is planted in fields
like corn, which in its young growth it much resembles. Each plant
produces a single cluster of from eighty to one hundred or more bananas,
often weighing in the aggregate as high as seventy pounds. The banana is
exceedingly productive. According to Humboldt, a space of 1,000 feet,
which will yield only 38 pounds of wheat, or 462 pounds of potatoes,
will produce 4,000 pounds of bananas, and in a much shorter period of
time. It is more nutritious than the majority of fruits, and in tropical
countries is highly valued as a food, affording in some localities the
chief alimentary support of the people. Its great importance as a food
product is shown by the fact that three or four good sized bananas are
equal in nutritive value to a pound of bread. The amount of albumen
contained in a pound of bananas is about the same as that found in a
pound of rice, and the total nutritive value of one pound of bananas is
only a trifle less than that of an equal quantity of the best beefsteak.

The unripe fruit, which contains a considerable percentage of starch, is
often dried in the oven and eaten as bread, which, in this state, it
considerably resembles in taste and appearance. Thus prepared, it may be
kept for a long time, and is very serviceable for use on long journeys.
The variety of the banana thus used is, however, a much larger kind
than any of those ordinarily found in our Northern markets, and is known
as the plantain. The dried plantain, powdered, furnishes a meal of
fragrant odor and bland taste, not unlike common wheat flour. It is said
to be easy of digestion, and two pounds of the dry meal or six pounds of
the fruit is the daily allowance for a laborer in tropical America.

THE PINEAPPLE.--This delicious fruit is a native of South America,
where it grows wild in the forests. It is cultivated largely in tropical
America, the West Indies, and some portions of Europe. The fruit grows
singly from the center of a small plant having fifteen or more long,
narrow, serrated, ridged, sharp-pointed leaves, seemingly growing from
the root. In general appearance it resembles the century plant, though
so much smaller that twelve thousand pineapple plants may be grown on
one acre. From the fibers of the leaves is made a costly and valuable
fabric called _pina_ muslin.

Nothing can surpass the rich, delicate flavor of the wild pineapple as
found in its native habitat. It is in every way quite equal to the best
cultivated variety. The most excellent pineapples are imported from the
West Indies, but are seldom found in perfection in out Northern markets.


FRESH FRUIT FOR THE TABLE.

All fruit for serving should be perfectly ripe and sound. Immature fruit
is never wholesome, and owing to the large percentage of water in its
composition, fruit is very prone to change; hence over-ripe fruit should
not be eaten, as it is liable to ferment and decompose in the digestive
tract.

Fruit which has begun, however slightly, to decay, should be rejected.
Juice circulates through its tissues in much the same manner as the
blood circulates through animal tissues, though not so rapidly and
freely. The circulation is sufficient, however, to convey to all parts
the products of decomposition, when only a small portion has undergone
decay, and although serious results do not always follow the use of
such fruit, it certainly is not first-class food.

If intended to be eaten raw, fruit should be well ripened before
gathering, and should be perfectly fresh. Fruit that has stood day after
day in a dish upon the table, in a warm room, is far less wholesome and
tempting than that brought fresh from the storeroom or cellar. All
fruits should be thoroughly cleansed before serving. Such fruit as
cherries, grapes, and currants may be best washed by placing in a
colander, and dipping in and out of a pan of water until perfectly
clean, draining and drying before serving.


_DIRECTIONS FOR SERVING FRUITS._

APPLES.--In serving these, the "queen of all fruits," much
opportunity is afforded for a display of taste in their arrangement.
After wiping clean with a damp towel, they may be piled in a fruit
basket, with a few sprigs of green leaves here and there between their
rosy cheeks. The feathery tops of carrots and celery are pretty for this
purpose. Oranges and apples so arranged, make a highly ornamental dish.

Raw mellow sweet apples make a delicious dish when pared, sliced, and
served with cream.

BANANAS.--Cut the ends from the fruit and serve whole, piled in a
basket with oranges, grapes, or plums. Another way is to peel, slice,
and serve with thin cream. Bananas are also very nice sliced, sprinkled
lightly with sugar, and before it had quite dissolved, covered with
orange juice. Sliced bananas, lightly sprinkled with sugar, alternating
in layers with sections of oranges, make a most delicious dessert.

CHERRIES.--Serve on stems, piled in a basket or high dish, with
bits of green leaves and vines between. Rows of different colored
cherries, arranged in pyramidal form, make also a handsome dish.

CURRANTS.--Large whole clusters may be served on the stem, and when
it is possible to obtain both red and white varieties, they make a most
attractive dish. Put them into cold water for a little time, cool
thoroughly, and drain well before using. Currants, if picked from the
stems after being carefully washed and drained, may be served lightly
sprinkled with sugar. Currants and raspberries served together, half and
half, or one third currants two thirds raspberries, are excellent. Only
the ripest of currants should be used.

GOOSEBERRIES.--When fresh and ripe, the gooseberry is one of the
most delicious of small fruits. Serve with stems on. Drop into cold
water for a few moments, drain, and pile in a glass dish for the table.

GRAPES.--Grapes need always to be washed before serving. Drop the
bunches into ice water, let them remain ten of fifteen minutes, then
drain and serve. An attractive dish may be made by arranging bunches of
different colored grapes together on a plate edged with grape leaves.

MELONS.--Watermelons should be served very cold. After being well
washed on the outside, put on ice until needed. Cut off a slice at the
ends, that each half may stand upright on a plate, and then cut around
in even slices. Instead of cutting through the center into even halves,
the melon may be cut in points back and forth around the entire
circumference, so that when separated, each half will appear like a
crown. Another way is to take out the central portion with a spoon, in
cone-shaped pieces, and arrange on a plate with a few bits of ice. Other
melons may be served in halves, with the seeds removed. The rough skin
of the cantaloupe should be thoroughly scrubbed with a vegetable brush,
then rinsed and wiped, after which bury the melon in broken ice till
serving time; divide into eighths or sixteenths, remove the seeds,
reconstruct the melon, and serve surrounded with ice, on a folded
napkin, or arranged on a bed of grape leaves. Do not cool the melon by
placing ice upon the flesh, as the moisture injures the delicate flavor.

ORANGES.--Serve whole or cut the skin into eighths, halfway down,
separating it from the fruit, and curling it inward, thus showing half
the orange white and the other half yellow; or cut the skin into
eighths, two-thirds down, and after loosening from the fruit, leave them
spread open like the petals of a lily. Oranges sliced and mixed with
well ripened strawberries, in the proportion of three oranges to a quart
of berries, make--a palatable dessert.

PEACHES AND PEARS.--Pick out the finest, and wipe the wool from the
peaches. Edge a plate with uniform sized leaves of foliage plant of the
same tints as the fruit, and pile the fruit artistically upon it,
tucking sprays or tips of the plant between. Bits of ice may also be
intermingled. Yellow Bartlett pears and rosy-cheeked peaches arranged in
this way are most ornamental.

PEACHES AND CREAM.--Pare the peaches just as late as practicable,
since they become discolored by standing. Always use a silver knife, as
steel soon blackens and discolors the fruit. If sugar is to be used, do
not add it until the time for serving, as it will start the juice, and
likewise turn the fruit brown, destroying much of its rich flavor. Keep
on ice until needed for the table. Add cream with each person's dish.

PINEAPPLES.--The pineapple when fresh and ripened to perfection, is
as mellow and juicy as a ripe peach, and needs no cooking to fit it for
the table. Of course it must be pared, and have the eyes and fibrous
center removed. Then it may be sliced in generous pieces and piled upon
a plate, or cut into smaller portions and served in saucers. No
condiments are necessary; even the use of sugar detracts from its
delicate flavor. Pineapples found in our Northern markets are, however,
generally so hard and tough as to require cooking, or are valuable only
for their juice, which may be extracted and used for flavoring other
fruits. When sufficiently mellow to be eaten raw, they are usually so
tart as to seem to require a light sprinkling of sugar to suit most
tastes. Pineapples pared, cut into dice or small pieces, lightly
sprinkled with sugar, to which just before serving, a cup of orange
juice is added, form a delicious dish.

PLUMS.--Plums make a most artistic fruit piece, served whole and
arranged with bunches of choice green grapes, in a basket or glass dish.
A fine edge may be made from the velvety leaves of dark purple foliage
plants.

PRESSED FIGS.--Look over carefully, and select only such as are
perfectly good. They may be served dry, mixed with bunches of raisins,
or steamed over a kettle of boiling water. Steamed figs make an
excellent breakfast dish, and are considered much more wholesome then
when used dry. Steamed raisins are likewise superior to dried raisins.

RASPBERRIES, BLACKBERRIES, DEWBERRIES, BLUEBERRIES AND WHORTLEBERRIES,
require careful looking over to remove all insects, stems, and over-ripe
fruit. Blueberries and whortleberries frequently need to be washed. They
are then drained by spreading on a sieve or colander. Perfectly ripe,
they are more healthful without condiments; but sugar and cream are
usually considered indispensable.

If necessary to wash strawberries, they should be put into cold water, a
few at a time, pushed down lightly beneath the water several times until
entirely clean, then taken out one by one, hulled, and used at once.
Like all other small fruits and berries they are more wholesome served
without cream, but if cream is used, each person should be allowed to
add it to his own dish, as it quickly curdles and renders the whole dish
unsightly; if allowed to stand, it also impairs the flavor of the fruit.

FROSTED FRUIT.--Prepare a mixture of the beaten white of egg,
sugar, and a very little cold water. Dip nice bunches of clean currants,
cherries, or grapes into the mixture; drain nearly dry, and roll lightly
in powdered sugar. Lay them on white paper to dry. Plums, apricots, and
peaches may be dipped in the mixture, gently sprinkled with sugar, then
allowed to dry. This method of preparing fruit is not to be commended
for its wholesomeness, but it is sometimes desirable for ornament.


KEEPING FRESH FRUIT.

Of the numerous varieties of fruits grown in this country, apples and
pears are about the only ones that can be kept for any length of time
without artificial means. As soon as fruit has attained its maturity, a
gradual change or breaking down of tissues begins. In some fruits this
process follows rapidly; in other it is gradual. There is a certain
point at which the fruits are best suited for use. We call it
mellowness, and say that the fruit is in "good eating condition." When
this stage has been reached, deterioration and rotting soon follow. In
some fruits, as the peach, plum, and early varieties of apples and
pears, these changes occur within a few days after maturity, and it is
quite useless to attempt to keep them; in others, like the later
varieties of apples and pears, the changes are slow but none the less
certain. To keep such fruits we must endeavor to retard or prolong the
process of change, by avoiding all conditions likely to hasten decay.
Even with ordinary care, sound fruit will keep for quite a length of
time; but it can be preserved in better condition and for a longer
period by careful attention to the following practical points:--

1. If the fruit is of a late variety, allow it to remain on the tree as
long as practicable without freezing.

2. Always pick and handle the fruit with the greatest care.

3. Gather the fruit on a dry, cool day, and place in heaps or bins for
two or three weeks.

4. Carefully sort and pack in barrels, placing those most mellow and
those of different varieties in different barrels; head the barrels,
label, and place in a cool, dry place where the temperature will remain
equable. Some consider it better to keep fruit in thin layers upon broad
shelves in a cool place. This plan allows frequent inspection and
removal of all affected fruit without disturbance of the remainder.

5. Warmth and moisture are the conditions most favorable to
decomposition, and should be especially guarded against.

6. The best temperature for keeping fruit is about 34° F., or 2° above
freezing.

Another method which is highly recommended is to sprinkle a layer of
sawdust on the bottom of a box, and then put in a layer of apples, not
allowing them to tough each other. Upon this pack more sawdust; then
another layer of apples, and so on until the box is filled. After
packing, place up from the ground, in a cellar or storeroom, and they
will keep perfectly, retaining their freshness and flavor until brought
out. The _Practical Farmer_ gives the following rough but good way to
store and keep apples: "Spread plenty of buckwheat chaff on the barn
floor, and on this place the apples, filling the interstices with the
chaff. Cover with the chaff and then with straw two or three feet deep.
The advantage of this is that covering and bedding in chaff excludes
cold, prevents air currents, maintains a uniform temperature, absorbs
the moisture of decay, and prevents the decay produced by moisture."

The ordinary cellar underneath the dwelling house is too warm and damp
for the proper preservation of fruit, and some other place should be
provided if possible. A writer in the _American Agriculturist_ thus
calls attention to an additional reason why fruit should not be stored
beneath living-rooms: "After late apples are stored for the winter, a
gradual change begins within the fruit. It absorbs oxygen from the air
of the room, and gives off carbonic acid gas. Another change results in
the formation of water, which is given off as moisture. The taking up of
oxygen by the fruit and the giving off of carbonic acid, in a short time
so vitiates the atmosphere of the room in which the fruit is kept, that
it will at once extinguish a candle, and destroy animal life. An
atmosphere of this kind tends to preserve the fruit. There being little
or no oxygen left in the air of the room, the process of decay is
arrested. Hence it is desirable that the room be air tight, in order to
maintain such an atmosphere."

The production of carbonic acid shows that a cellar in or under a
dwelling, is an improper place for storing fresh fruit. When the gas is
present in the air in sufficient proportion, it causes death, and a very
small quantity will cause headache, listlessness, and other unpleasant
effects. No doubt many troubles attributed to malaria, are due to gases
from vegetables and fruits stored in the cellar. A fruit cellar should
be underneath some other building rather than the dwelling, or a fruit
house may be built entirely above the ground. A house to keep fruit
properly must be built upon the principle of a refrigerator. Its walls,
floor, and ceiling should be double, and the space between filled with
sawdust. The doors and windows should be double; and as light is
undesirable, the windows should be provided with shutters. There should
be a small stove for use if needed to keep a proper temperature in
severe weather.

TO KEEP GRAPES.--Select such bunches as are perfect, rejecting all
upon which there are any bruised grapes, or from which a grape has
fallen. Spread them upon shelves in a cool place for a week or two. Then
pack in boxes in sawdust which has been recently well dried in an oven.
Bran which has been dried may also be used. Dry cotton is employed by
some. Keep in a cool place.

Some consider the following a more efficient method: select perfect
bunches, and dip the broken end of the stems in melted paraffine or
sealing wax. Wrap separately in tissue paper, hang in a cool place, or
pack in sawdust.

TO KEEP LEMONS AND ORANGES.--Lemons may be kept fresh for weeks by
placing them in a vessel of cold water in a very cool cellar or ice
house. Change the water every day. Oranges may be kept in the same way.
The usual method employed by growers for keeping these fruits is to wrap
each one separately in tissue paper, and put in a cool, dry place.

TO KEEP CRANBERRIES.--Put them in water and keep in a cool place
where they will not freeze. Change the water often, and sort out berries
which may have become spoiled.


COOKED FRUIT.

Perfectly ripe fruit is, as a rule, more desirable used fresh than in
any other way. Fruits which are immature, require cooking. Stewing and
baking are the simplest methods of preparation.

GENERAL SUGGESTIONS FOR COOKING FRUIT.--The utensils for stewing
should be porcelain-lined, or granite ware. Fruit cooked in tin loses
much of its delicate flavor; while if it be acid, and the tin of poor
quality, there is always danger that the acid of the fruit acting upon
the metal will form a poisonous compound. Cover with a china plate or
granite-ware cover, never with a tin one, as the steam will condense and
run down into the kettle, discoloring the contents. Use only silver
knives for preparing the fruit, and silver or wooden spoons for
stirring. Prepare just before cooking, if you would preserve the fruit
perfect in flavor, and unimpaired by discoloration. In preparing apples,
pears, and quinces for stewing, it is better to divide the fruit into
halves or quarters before paring. The fruit is more easily handled, can
be pared thinner and cored more quickly. Peaches, apricots, and plums,
if divided and stoned before paring, can be much more easily kept whole.

Cook in a small quantity of boiling water, and if economy is a point to
be considered, do not add sugar until the fruit is done. Sugar boiled
with an acid will be converted into glucose, two and one half pounds of
which only equal one pound of cane sugar in sweetening properties. It
will require a much larger amount of sugar to sweeten fruit if added
before the cooking process is completed. Fruit should be cooked by
stewing, or by gentle simmering; hard boiling will destroy the fine
flavor of all fruits, and especially of berries and other small fruits.
Cinnamon, cloves, or other spices, should not be added, as their
stronger flavors deaden or obliterate the natural flavor, which should
always be preserved as perfectly as possible. If desirable to add some
foreign flavor, let it be the flavor of another fruit, or the perfume
of flowers. For Instance, flavor apple with lemon, pineapple, quince, or
rose water.

Unripe fruit is improved by making the cooking quite lengthy, which acts
in the place of the ripening process, changing the starchy matter to
saccharine elements. In cooking fruit, try to preserve its natural form.
The more nearly whole it is, the better it looks, and the more natural
will be its flavor.

Apples are best cooked by baking. Pears and quinces are also excellent
baked. The oven should be only moderately hot; if the heat is too great,
they brown on the outside before they are done throughout. In cooking
fruit by any method, pains should be taken to cook together such as are
of the same variety, size, and degree of hardness; if it is to be cut in
pieces, care should be taken to have the pieces of uniform size.


_RECIPES._

BAKED APPLES.--Moderately tart apples or very juicy sweet ones are
best for baking. Select ripe apples, free from imperfections, and of
nearly equal size. Wipe carefully and remove the blossom ends. Water
sufficient to cover bottom of the baking dish, should be added if the
fruit is not very juicy. If the apples are sour and quite firm, a good
way is to pare them before baking, and then place them in an earthen pie
dish with a little hot water. If they incline to brown too quickly,
cover the tops with a granite-ware pie dish. If the syrup dries out, add
a little more hot water. When done, set them away till nearly cold, then
transfer to a glass dish, pour the syrup, which should be thick and
amber colored, over them. Sour apples are excellent pared, cored, and
baked with the centers filled with sugar, jelly, or a mixture or chopped
raisins and dates. They should be put into a shallow earthen dish with
water sufficient to cover the bottom, and baked in a quick oven, basting
often with the syrup. Sweet apples are best baked without paring. Baked
apples are usually served as a relish, but with a dressing of cream they
make a most delicious dessert.

CITRON APPLES.--Select a few tart apples of the same degree of
hardness, and remove the cores. Unless the skins are very tender, it is
better to pare them. Fill the cavities with sugar, first placing in each
apple a few bits of chopped citron. If the skins have been removed,
place the stuffed apples on a flat earthen dish with a tablespoonful of
water on the bottom; cover closely, and bake till perfectly tender, but
not till they have fallen to pieces. If the skins are left on, they may
be baked without covering. When cold, serve in separate dishes, with or
without a spoonful or two of whipped cream on each apple.

LEMON APPLES.--Prepare tart apples the same as for citron apples.
Fill the cavities made by removing the cores with a mixture of grated
lemon and sugar, squeeze a few drops of lemon juice over each apple, and
bake. Serve with or without whipped cream.

BAKED PEARS.--Hard pears make an excellent dessert when baked.
Pare, halve, remove seeds, and place in a shallow earthen dish, with a
cup of water to each two quarts of fruit. If the pears are sour, a
little sugar may be added. Bake, closely covered, in a moderate oven
until tender. Serve with sugar and cream. Tart pears are the best for
baking, as the sweet varieties are often tasteless.

BAKED QUINCES.--Pare and remove the cores. Fill the cavities with
sugar, put in a shallow earthen dish, and add water to cover the bottom;
bake till soft, basting often with the syrup. If the syrup dries out
before the fruit is perfectly tender, add a little more hot water.

PIPPINS AND QUINCE.--Pare and quarter nice golden pippins, and cook
in boiling water until reduced to a jelly. Add two or three quinces
sliced, and simmer slowly in the jelly until the quince is tender. Add
sugar to taste. Serve cold.

BAKED APPLE SAUCE.--Pare, core, and quarter apples to fill an
earthen crock or deep pudding dish, taking care to use apples of the
same degree of hardness, and pieces of the same size. For two quarts of
fruit thus prepared, add a cup of water, and if the apples are sour, a
cup of sugar. Cover closely, and bake in a moderate oven several hours,
or until of a dark red color.

Sweet apples and quinces in the proportion of two parts of apple to one
of quince, baked in this way, are also good. Cut the apples into
quarters, but slice the quinces much thinner, as they are more difficult
to cook. Put a layer of quince on the bottom of the dish, alternating
with a layer of apple, until the dish is full. Add cold water to half
cover the fruit, and stew in the oven well covered, without stirring,
until tender.

Pears may be cooked in a similar way, and both apples and pears thus
cooked may be canned while hot and kept for a long period.

BAKED APPLE SAUCE NO. 2.--Prepare nice tart apples as for No. 1.
Bake, with a small quantity of water, in a covered pudding dish, in a
moderate oven, until soft. Mash with a spoon, add sugar, and when cold,
a little grated orange rind.

APPLES STEWED WHOLE.--Take six large red apples, wash carefully,
and put in a fruit kettle with just enough boiling water to cover. Cover
the kettle, and cook slowly until the apples are soft, with the skins
broken and the juice a rich red color. After removing the apples, boil
the juice to a syrup, sweeten, and pour over the apples.

STEAMED APPLES.--Select pound sweets of uniform size, wipe, cut
out the blossom-ends, and pack in a large pudding dish. Pour in a cupful
of water, cover the dish closely, set in a moderate oven, and steam till
the apples are tender. Remove from the dish, and pour the liquor over
them frequently as they cool.

COMPOTE OF APPLES.--Pare and extract the cores from moderately
tart, juicy apples. Place them in a deep pudding dish with just enough
water to cover them. Cover, place in a moderate oven, and stew until
they are tender. Remove the apples and place in a deep dish to keep hot.
Measure the juice and pour it into a saucepan, add a few bits of lemon
rind, and boil up until thickened almost like a jelly. While the juice
is boiling, heat some sugar, one tablespoonful to each cup of juice, in
the oven, and add to the juice when thickened. Pour scalding hot over
the apples, and cover until cold.

APPLE COMPOTE NO. 2.--Pare eight or ten rather tart, finely
flavored and easy-cooking apples, carefully removing the cores, and put
them into a broad, shallow, granite-ware saucepan with just enough hot
water to cover the bottom. Cover tightly and place over the fire. The
steam will cook the apples tender in a short time. Do not allow them to
fall to pieces. Make a syrup by dissolving one cup of sugar in a pint of
hot water. Add three teaspoonfuls of the juice of canned pineapple, and
pour over the apples while both are hot.

STEWED PEARS.--Select some fine Bartlett pears which are ripe, but
have hardly begun to soften; remove the skins, cut in halves or
quarters, and take out the seeds. Put loosely in a granite-ware kettle,
and add a pint of water for three and a half quarts of fruit. Cover
closely, and when it begins to boil, set it where it will just simmer
until the top pieces are tender. Serve cold. Sugar will not be necessary
if the fruit is of good quality.

SMOOTH APPLE SAUCE.--If fruit is not sufficiently perfect to be cut
into uniform quarters, a good way to prepare it is to pare, core, and
slice into thin slices. Cook in as small a quantity of water as
possible, the fruit covered closely, so that the top portion will steam
tender as soon as the bottom, and when done rub through a colander, or
beat smooth with a wooden spoon or an egg beater. Let it cool before
adding sugar. A little lemon peel may be added to the fruit just long
enough before it is done to flavor it, if desired.

BOILED APPLES WITH SYRUP.--Halve and remove the cores of a half
dozen nice apples, leaving the skins on. Boil till tender in sufficient
water to cover them. Take out with a fork into a glass dish. Add to the
juice three or four slices of a large lemon; boil for ten or fifteen
minutes; sweeten to taste; then pour over the apples, and cool.

STEWED APPLES.--Select fine fruit of a sub-acid flavor and not
over-ripe. Pare, remove the cores and all blemishes, and divide into
sixths if large, into quarters if small. Put into a porcelain or
granite-ware kettle with enough boiling water to cook and leave a good
liquor. Cover, and simmer gently, without stirring, from one to two
hours. Do not add sugar till cold. Be careful not to break the fruit in
serving.

STEWED CRAB APPLES.--Select perfect fruit. Wash and stew in but
little water until they are very soft. Rub through a coarse sieve or
colander to remove the seeds and skins. Sweeten to taste.

SWEET APPLE SAUCE WITH CONDENSED APPLE JUICE.--For the juice, wash,
divide, and core rather tart apples and cook until softened with one cup
of water for every six pounds of fruit. When soft, put into a percolater
and drain off the juice or extract it with a fruit press. Boil until it
is reduced one half. Skim if needed while boiling, and if not perfectly
clear allow it to settle before using. A considerable quantity of the
juice may be thus prepared and put into stone jars, to be used as
needed. For the sauce, pare, core, and quarter sweet apples. Put into a
porcelain kettle with enough of the condensed juice to cover. Cook
slowly until tender.

APPLES WITH RAISINS.--Pare, core, and quarter a dozen or more
medium sized sour apples. Clean thoroughly one fourth as many raisins as
apples, and turn over them a quart of boiling water. Let them steep
until well swollen, then add the apples, and cook until tender. Sugar to
sweeten may be added if desired, although little will be needed unless
the apples are very tart. Dried apples soaked over night may be made
much more palatable by stewing with raisins or English currants, in the
same way.

APPLES WITH APRICOTS.--Pare, core, and quarter some nice, sour
apples. Put them to cook with two halves of dried apricot for each
apple. When tender, make smooth by beating or rubbing through a
colander, and sweeten. Dried apples may be used in place of fresh ones.

PEACHES, PLUMS, CHERRIES, BERRIES, and all small fruits may be
cooked for sauce by stewing in a small amount of water, adding sugar to
sweeten when done.

BAKED APPLES.--Take any good tart apples; peel, cut in halves, and
remove the cores. Scatter a few spoonfuls of sugar in the bottom of a
dish, and lay the apples in, flat side down; add a teacupful of cold
water, and bake till tender. Let stand in the dish till cold, then take
up the pieces in a vegetable dish, and poor over them what juice
remains. Sweet apples are good baked in this way without sugar.

BAKED PEARS.--Peel ripe pears; cut in halves, and pack in layers in
a stone ware jar. Strew a little sugar over each layer, and add a small
cupful of water, to prevent burning. Cover tightly, and bake three or
four hours in a well-heated oven. Let them get very cold, and serve
with sweet cream.

BAKED PEACHES.--Peaches which are ripe but too hard for eating, are
nice baked. Pare, remove the stones, and place in loose layers in a
shallow, earthen pudding dish with a little water. Sprinkle each layer
lightly with sugar, cover and bake.

CRANBERRIES.--Cranberries make an excellent sauce, but the skins
are rather hard of digestion, and it is best to exclude them. Stew in
the proportion of a quart of berries to a pint of water, simmering
gently until the skins have all burst, and the quantity is reduced to a
pint. Put through a colander to remove the skins, and when nearly cool,
add for the quart of berries two thirds of a cup of sugar.

CRANBERRIES WITH RAISINS.--Cook the cranberries as in the preceding
recipe, and when rubbed through the colander, add for every pound of
cranberries before cooking, one fourth pound of raisins which have been
steeped for half an hour in just sufficient boiling water to cover. A
little less sugar will be needed to sweeten than when served without the
raisins.

CRANBERRIES AND SWEET APPLES.--Stew equal parts of cranberries and
sweet apples together. Mash, rub through a fine sieve or colander to
remove the skins and make the whole homogeneous. This makes a very
palatable sauce without the addition of sugar. California prunes and
cranberries stewed together in equal proportion, in a small quantity of
water, also make a nice sauce without sugar.

ORANGES AND APPLES.--The mild, easy cooking, tart varieties of
apples make an excellent sauce stewed with one third sliced oranges from
which the seeds have been removed. Pare, core, and slice the apples, and
cook gently so as to preserve the form of both fruits until the apples
are tender. Add sugar to sweeten, and if desired a very little of the
grated yellow of the orange rind.

STEWED RAISINS.--Soak a pint of good raisins, cleaned and freed
from stems, in cold water for several hours. When ready to cook, put
them, with the water in which they were soaked, in a fruit kettle and
simmer until the skins are tender. Three or four good-sized figs,
chopped quite fine, cooked with the raisins, gives an additional
richness and thickness of juice. No sugar will be needed.

DRIED APPLES.--Good apples properly dried make a very palatable
sauce; but unfortunately the fruit generally selected for drying is of
so inferior a quality that if cooked in its fresh state it would not be
good. The dried fruit in most of our markets needs to be looked over
carefully, and thoroughly washed before using. Put into a granite-ware
kettle, cover with boiling water, and cook gently until tender. Fresh
steam-dried or evaporated apples will cook in from one half to three
fourths of an hour; if older, they may require from one to two more
hours. Add boiling water, as needed, during the cooking. If when tender
they are lacking in juice, add a little boiling water long enough before
lifting from the fire to allow it to boil up once. If the fruit is very
poor, a few very thin slices of the yellow portion of lemon or orange
rind added a half hour before it is done, will sometimes be an
improvement.

DRIED APPLES WITH OTHER DRIED FRUIT.--An excellent sauce may be
made by cooking a few dried plums with dried or evaporated apples. Only
enough of the plums to give a flavor to the apples will be needed; a
handful of the former to a pound of apples will be sufficient. Dried
cherries, raisins, English currants, dried apricots, prunelles, and
peaches are also excellent used in combination with dried apples.

DRIED APRICOTS AND PEACHES.--These fruits, if dried with the skins
on, need, in addition to the preparation for cooking recommended for
dried apples, a thorough rubbing with the fingers, while being washed,
to remove the down. Put into boiling water in about the proportion of
two parts of fruit to three of water. If the fruit was pared before
drying, a little more water will be required. Cook quickly, but gently,
until just tender, and take from the fire as soon as done. If too soft,
they will be mushy and insipid.

EVAPORATED PEACH SAUCE.--Soak the peaches over night in just enough
water to cover. In the morning put to cook in boiling water. When
tender, sweeten and beat perfectly smooth with an egg beater.

DRIED PEARS.--These may be treated in the same way as dried apples.

SMALL FRUITS.--These when dried must be carefully examined,
thoroughly washed, and then cooked rather quickly in boiling water. They
swell but little, do not require much water, and usually cook in a few
minutes. They should be taken from the fire as soon as soft, as long
standing makes them insipid.

PRUNES.--Use only the best selected prunes. Clean by putting them
into warm water; let them stand a few minutes, rubbing them gently
between the hands to make sure that all dust and dirt is removed; rinse,
and if rather dry and hard, put them into three parts of water to one of
prunes; cover closely, and let them simmer for several hours. If the
prunes are quite easily cooked, less water may be used. They will be
tender, with a thick juice. The sweet varieties need no sugar whatever.
Many persons who cannot eat fruit cooked with sugar, can safely partake
of sweet prunes cooked in this way. A slice of lemon added just before
the prunes are done, is thought an improvement.

PRUNE MARMALADE.--Cook sweet California prunes as directed above.
When well done, rub through a colander to remove the skins and stones.
No sugar is necessary. If the pulp is too thin when cold, it may be
covered in an earthen pudding dish and stewed down by placing in a pan
of hot water in a moderate oven.


THE PRESERVATION OF FRUIT.

Fresh fruit is so desirable, while at the same time the season during
which most varieties can be obtained is so transient, that various
methods are resorted to for preserving it in as nearly a natural state
as possible. The old-fashioned plans of pickling in salt, alcohol, or
vinegar, or preserving in equal quantities of sugar, are eminently
unhygienic. Quite as much to be condemned is the more modern process of
keeping fruit by adding to it some preserving agent, like salicylic acid
or other chemicals. Salicylic acid is an antiseptic, and like many other
substances, such as carbolic acid, creosote, etc., has the power of
preventing the decay of organic substances. Salicylic acid holds the
preference over other drugs of this class, because it imparts no
unpleasant flavor to the fruit. It is nevertheless a powerful and
irritating drug, and when taken, even in small doses, produces intense
burning in the stomach, and occasions serious disturbances of the heart
and other organs. Its habitual use produces grave diseases.

What is sold as antifermentive is simply the well-known antiseptic,
salicylate of soda. It should be self-evident to one at all acquainted
with the philosophy of animal existence, that an agent which will
prevent fermentation and decay must be sufficiently powerful in its
influence to prevent digestion also.

The fermentation and decay of fruits as well as that of all other
organic substances, is occasioned by the action of those minute living
organisms which scientists call germs, and which are everywhere present.
These germs are very much less active in a dry, cold atmosphere, and
fruit may be preserved for quite a long period by refrigeration, an
arrangement whereby the external air is excluded, and the surrounding
atmosphere kept at an equal temperature of about 40° F. The most
efficient and wholesome method of preserving fruit, however, is
destruction of the germs and entire exclusion from the air. The germs
are destroyed at a boiling temperature; hence, if fruit be heated to
boiling, and when in this condition sealed in air-tight receptacles, it
will keep for an unlimited period.


CANNING FRUIT.

Canning consists in sealing in air-tight cans or jars, fruit which has
been previously boiled. It is a very simple process, but requires a
thorough understanding of the scientific principles involved, and
careful management, to make it successful. The result of painstaking
effort is so satisfactory, however, it is well worth all the trouble,
and fruit canning need not be a difficult matter if attention is given
to the following details:--

Select self-sealing glass cans of some good variety. Tin cans give more
trouble filling and sealing, are liable to affect the flavor of the
fruit, and unless manufactured from the best of material, to impair its
wholesomeness. Glass cans may be used more than once, and are thus much
more economical. Those with glass covers, or porcelain-lined covers, are
best. Test the cans to see if they are perfect, with good rubbers and
covers that fit closely, by partly filling them with cold water,
screwing on the tops, and placing bottom upward upon the table for some
time before using. If none of the water leaks out, they may be
considered in good condition. If the cans have been previously used,
examine them with special care to see that both cans and covers have
been carefully cleaned, then thoroughly sterilize them, and fit with new
rubbers when necessary.

Cans and covers should be sterilized by boiling in water for half an
hour, or by baking in an oven, at a temperature sufficient to scorch
paper, for two hours. The cans should be placed in the water or oven
when cold, and the temperature allowed to rise gradually, to avoid
breaking. They should be allowed to cool gradually, for the same
purpose.

Select only the best of fruit, such as is perfect in flavor and neither
green nor over-ripe. Fruit which has been shipped from a distance, and
which is consequently not perfectly fresh, contains germs in active
growth, and if the least bit musty, it will be almost sure to spoil,
even though the greatest care may be taken in canning.

Poor fruit will not be improved by canning; over-ripe fruit will be
insipid and mushy; and though cooking will soften hard fruit, it cannot
impart to it the delicate flavors which belong to that which is in its
prime. The larger varieties of fruit should not be quite soft enough for
eating. Choose a dry day for gathering, and put up at once, handling as
little as possible. Try to keep it clean enough to avoid washing. If the
fruit is to be pared, use a silver knife for the purpose, as steel is
apt to discolor the fruit. If the fruit is one needing to be divided or
stoned, it will be less likely to become broken if divided before
paring.

Cook the fruit slowly in a porcelain-lined or granite-ware kettle, using
as little water as possible. It is better to cook only small quantities
at a time in one kettle. Steaming in the cans is preferable to stewing,
where the fruit is at all soft. To do this, carefully fill the cans with
fresh fruit, packing it quite closely, if the fruit is large, and set
the cans in a boiler partly filled with cold water, with something
underneath them to prevent breaking,--muffin rings, straw, or thick
cloth, or anything to keep them from resting on the bottom of the boiler
(a rack made by nailing together strips of lath is very convenient);
screw the covers on the cans so the water cannot boil into them, but not
so tightly as to prevent the escape of steam; heat the water to boiling,
and steam the fruit until tender. Peaches, pears, crab apples, etc., to
be canned with a syrup, may be advantageously cooked by placing on a
napkin dropped into the boiling syrup.

Fruit for canning should be so thoroughly cooked that every portion of
it will have been subjected to a sufficient degree of heat to destroy
all germs within the fruit, but overcooking should be avoided. The
length of time required for cooking fruits for canning, varies with the
kind and quality of fruit and the manner of cooking. Fruit is more
frequently spoiled by being cooked an insufficient length of time, than
by overcooking. Prolonged cooking at a boiling temperature is necessary
for the destruction of certain kinds of germs capable of inducing
fermentation. Fifteen minutes may be considered as the shortest time for
which even the most delicate fruits should be subjected to the
temperature of boiling water, and thirty minutes will be required by
most fruits. Fruits which are not perfectly fresh, or which have been
shipped some distance, should be cooked not less than thirty minutes.
The boiling should be very slow, however, as hard, rapid boiling will
break up the fruit, and much of its fine flavor will be lost in the
steam.

Cooking the sugar with the fruit at the time of canning, is not to be
recommended from an economical standpoint; but fruit thus prepared is
more likely to keep well than when cooked without sugar; not, however,
because of the preservative influence of the sugar, which is too small
in amount to prevent the action of germs, as in the case of preserves,
but because the addition of sugar to the water or fruit juice increases
its specific gravity, and thus raises the boiling point. From
experiments made, I have found that the temperature of the fruit is
ordinarily raised about 5° by the addition of the amount of sugar needed
for sweetening sub-acid fruit. By the aid of this additional degree of
heat, the germs are more certainly destroyed, and the sterilization of
the fruit will be accomplished in a shorter time.

Another advantage gained in cooking sugar with the fruit at the time of
canning, is that the fruit may be cooked for a longer time without
destroying its form, as the sugar abstracts the juice of the fruit, and
thus slightly hardens it and prevents its falling in pieces.

The temperature to which the fruit is subjected may also be increased by
the same method as that elsewhere described for sterilizing milk, the
covers of the cans being screwed down tightly before they are placed in
the sterilizer, or as soon as the boiling point is approached, so that
the steam issues freely from the can. See page 396. If this method is
employed, it must be remembered that the cans should not be removed from
the sterilizer until after they have become cold, or nearly so, by being
allowed to stand over night.

Use the best sugar, two tablespoonfuls to a quart of fruit is
sufficient for most sub-acid fruits, as berries and peaches; plums,
cherries, strawberries, and currants require from five to eight
tablespoonfuls of sugar to a quart. Have the sugar hot, by spreading it
on tins and heating in the oven, stirring occasionally. See that; it
does not scorch. Add it when the fruit is boiling. Pears, peaches,
apples, etc., which contain a much smaller quantity of juice than do
berries, may be canned in a syrup prepared by dissolving a cup of sugar
in two or three cups of water. Perfect fruit, properly canned, will keep
without sugar, and the natural 'flavor of the fruit is more perfectly
retained when the sugar is left out, adding the necessary amount when
opened for use.

If the fruit is to be cooked previous to being put in the cans, the cans
should be heated before the introduction of the fruit, which should be
put in at a boiling temperature. Various methods are employed for this
purpose. Some wrap the can in a towel wrung out of hot water, keeping a
silver spoon inside while it is being filled; others employ dry heat by
keeping the cans in a moderately hot oven while the fruit is cooking.

Another and surer way is to fill a large dishpan nearly full of scalding
(not boiling) water, then gradually introduce each can, previously
baked, into the water, dip it full of water, and set it right side up in
the pan. Repeat the process with other cans until four or five are
ready. Put the covers likewise into boiling water. Have in readiness for
use a granite-ware funnel and dipper, also in boiling water; a cloth for
wiping the outside of the cans, a silver fork or spoon, a dish for
emptyings, and a broad shallow pan on one side of the range, half filled
with boiling water, in which to set the cans while being filled. When
everything is in readiness, the fruit properly cooked, and _at a boiling
temperature,_ turn one of the cans down in the water, roll it over once
or twice, empty it, and set in the shallow pan of hot water; adjust the
funnel, and then place first in the can a quantity of juice, so that
when the fruit is put in, no vacant places will be left for air, which
is sometimes quite troublesome if this precaution is not taken; then
add the fruit. If any bubbles of air chance to be left, work them out
with a fork or spoon handle, which first dip in boiling water, and then
quickly introduce down the sides of the jar and through the fruit in
such a way that not a bubble will remain. Fill the can to overflowing,
remembering that any vacuum invites the air to enter; use boiling water
or syrup when there is not enough juice. Skim all froth from the fruit,
adding more juice if necessary; wipe the juice from the top of the can,
adjust the rubber, put on the top, and screw it down as quickly as
possible. If the fruit is cooked in the cans, as soon as it is
sufficiently heated, fill the can completely full with boiling juice,
syrup, or water; run the handle of a silver spoon around the inside of
the can, to make sure the juice entirely surrounds every portion of
fruit, and that no spaces for air remain, put on the rubbers, wipe off
all juice, and seal quickly.

[Illustration: Canning Utensils.]

As the fruit cools, the cover can be tightened, and this should be
promptly done again and again as the glass contracts, so that no air may
be allowed to enter.

If convenient to fill the cans directly from the stove, the fruit may be
kept at boiling heat by placing the kettle on a lamp stove on the table,
on which the other utensils are in readiness. Many failures in fruit
canning are due to neglect to have the fruit boiling hot when put into
the cans.

When the cans are filled, set them away from currents of air, and not on
a very cold surface, to avoid danger of cracking. A good way is to set
the cans on a wet towel, and cover with a woolen cloth as a protection
from draughts.

After the cans have cooled, and the tops have been screwed down tightly,
place them in a cool place, bottom upward, and watch closely for a few
days. If the juice begins to leak out, or any appearance of fermentation
is seen, it is a sign that the work has failed, and the only thing to do
is to open the can immediately, boil the fruit, and use as quickly as
possible; recanning will not save it unless boiled a long time. If no
signs of spoiling are observed within two or three weeks, the fruit may
be safely stored away in a dark, cool place. If one has no dark
storeroom, it is an advantage to wrap each can in brown paper, to keep
out the light.

Sometimes the fruit will settle so that a little space appears at the
top. If you are perfectly sure that the can is tight, do not open to
refill, as you will be unable to make it quite as tight again, unless
you reheat the fruit, in which case you would be liable to have the same
thing occur again. Air is dangerous because it is likely to contain
germs, though in itself harmless.

If mold is observed upon the top of a can, it should be opened, and the
fruit boiled and used at once, after carefully skimming out all the
moldy portions. If there is evidence of fermentation, the fruit should
be thrown away, as it contains alcohol.

If care be taken to provide good cans, thoroughly sterilized, and with
perfectly fitting covers; to use only fruit in good condition; to have
it thoroughly cooked, and at boiling temperature when put into the can;
to have the cans well baked and heated, filled completely and to
overflowing, and sealed at once while the fruit is still near boiling
temperature, there will be little likelihood of failure.

OPENING CANNED FRUIT.--Canned fruit is best opened a short time
before needed, that is may be will aërated; and if it has been canned
without sugar, it should have the necessary quantity added, so that it
may be well dissolved before using.

Fruit purchased in tin cans should be selected with the utmost care,
since unscrupulous dealers sometimes use cans which render the fruit
wholly--unfit for food.

The following rules which we quote from a popular scientific journal
should be 'carefully observed in selecting canned fruit:--

"Reject every can that does not have the name of the manufacturer or
firm upon it, as well as the name of the company and the town where
manufactured. All 'Standards' have this. When the wholesale dealer is
ashamed to have his name on the goods, be shy of him.

"Reject every article of canned goods which does not show the line of
resin around the edge of the solder of the cap, the same as is seen on
the seam at the side of the can.

"Press up the bottom of the can; if decomposition is beginning, the tin
will rattle the same as the bottom of your sewing-machine oil can does.
If the goods are sound, it will be solid, and there will be no rattle to
the tin.

"Reject every can that show any rust around the cap on the inside of the
head of the can. Old and battered cans should be rejected; as, if they
have been used several times, the contents are liable to contain small
amounts of tin or lead"


_RECIPES._

TO CAN STRAWBERRIES.--These are generally considered more difficult
to can than most other berries. Use none but sound fruit, and put up the
day they are picked, if possible. Heat the fruit slowly to the boiling
point, and cook fifteen minutes or longer, adding the sugar hot, if any
be used, after the fruit is boiling. Strawberries, while cooking, have a
tendency to rise to the top, and unless they are kept poshed down, will
not be cooked uniformly, which is doubtless one reason they sometimes
fail to keep well. The froth should also be kept skimmed off. Fill the
cans as directed on page 197, taking special care to let out every air
bubble, and to remove every particle of froth from the top of the can
before sealing. If the berries are of good size, the may be cooked in
the cans, adding a boiling syrup prepared with one cup of water and one
of sugar for each quart can of fruit.

If after the cans are cold, the fruit rises to the top, as it frequently
does, take the cans and gently shake until the fruit is well saturated
with the juice and falls by its own weight to the bottom, or low enough
to be entirely covered with the liquid.

TO CAN RASPBERRIES, BLACKBERRIES, AND OTHER SMALL FRUITS.--Select
none but good, sound berries; those freshly picked are best; reject any
green, over-ripe, mashed, or worm-eaten fruit. If necessary to wash the
berries, do so by putting a quart at a time in a colander, and dipping
the dish carefully into a pan of clean water, letting it stand for a
moment. If the water is very dirty, repeat the process in a second
water. Drain thoroughly, and if to be cooked previous to putting in the
cans, put into a porcelain kettle with a very small quantity of water,
and heat slowly to boiling. If sugar is to be used, have it hot, but do
not add it until the fruit is boiling; and before doing so, if there is
much juice, dip out the surplus, and leave the berries with only a small
quantity, as the sugar will have a tendency to draw out more juice, thus
furnishing plenty for syrup.

Raspberries are so juicy that they need scarcely more than a pint of
water to two quarts of fruit.

The fruit may be steamed in the cans if preferred. When thoroughly
scalded, if sugar is to be used, fill the can with a boiling syrup made
by dissolving the requisite amount of sugar in water; if to be canned
without sugar, fill up the can with boiling water or juice.

Seal the fruit according to directions previously given.

TO CAN GOOSEBERRIES.--Select such as are smooth and turning red,
but not fully ripe; wash and remove the stems and blossom ends. For
three quarts of fruit allow one quart of water. Heat slowly to boiling;
cook fifteen minutes, add a cupful of sugar which has been heated dry
in the oven: boil two or three minutes longer, and can.

TO CAN PEACHES.--Select fruit which is perfectly ripe and sound,
but not much softened. Free-stone peaches are the best. Put a few at a
time in a wire basket, and dip into boiling water for a moment, and then
into cold water, to cool fruit sufficiently to handle with comfort. The
skins may then be rubbed or peeled off easily, if done quickly, and the
fruit divided into halves; or wipe with a clean cloth to remove all dirt
and the wool, and with a silver knife cut in halves, remove the stone,
and then pare each piece, dropping into cold water at once to prevent
discoloration. Peaches cut before being pared are less likely to break
in pieces while removing the stones. When ready, pour a cupful of water
in the bottom of the kettle, and fill with peaches, scattering sugar
among the layers in the proportion of a heaping tablespoonful to a quart
of fruit. Heat slowly, boil fifteen minutes or longer till a silver fork
can be easily passed through the pieces; can in the usual way and seal;
or, fill the cans with the halved peaches, and place them in a boiler of
warm water with something underneath to avoid breaking; cook until
perfectly tender. Have ready a boiling syrup prepared with one half cup
of sugar and two cups of water, and pour into each can all that it will
hold, remove air bubbles, cover and seal. A few of the pits may be
cooked in the syrup, and removed before adding to the fruit, when their
special flavor is desired.

ANOTHER METHOD.--After paring and halving the fruit, lay a clean napkin
in the bottom of a steamer; fill with fruit. Steam until a fork will
easily penetrate the pieces. Have ready a boiling syrup prepared as
directed above, put a few spoonfuls in the bottom of the hot cans, and
dip each piece of fruit gently in the hot syrup; then as carefully place
it in the jars. Fill with the syrup, and finish in the usual way.

Peaches canned without sugar, retain more nearly their natural flavor.
To prepare in this way, allow one half pint of water to each pound of
fruit. Cook slowly until tender, and can in the usual manner. When
wanted for the table, open an hour before needed, and sprinkle lightly
with sugar.

TO CAN PEARS.--The pears should be perfectly ripened, but not soft.
Pare with a silver knife, halve or quarter, remove the seeds and drop
into a pan of cold water to prevent discoloration. Prepare a syrup,
allowing a cup of sugar and a quart of water to each two quarts of
fruit. When the syrup boils, put the pears into it very carefully, so as
not to bruise or break them, and cook until they look clear and can be
easily pierced with a fork. Have the cans heated, and put in first a
little of the syrup, then pack in the pears very carefully; fill to
overflowing with the scalding syrup, and finish as previously directed.
The tougher and harder varieties of pears must be cooked till nearly
tender in hot water, or steamed over a kettle of boiling water, before
adding to the syrup, and may then be finished as above. If it is
desirable to keep the pears whole, cook only those of a uniform size
together; or if of assorted sizes, put the larger ones into the syrup a
few minutes before the smaller ones. Some prefer boiling the kins of the
pears in the water of which the syrup is to be made, and skimming them
out before putting in the sugar. This is thought to impart a finer
flavor. Pears which are very sweet, or nearly tasteless, may be improved
by using the juice of a large lemon for each quart of syrup. Pears may
be cooked in the cans, if preferred.

TO CAN PLUMS.--Green Gages and Damsons are best for canning. Wipe
clean with a soft cloth. Allow a half cup of water and the same of sugar
to every three quarts of fruit, in preparing a syrup. Pick each plum
with a silver fork to prevent it from bursting, and while the syrup is
heating, turn in the fruit, and boil until thoroughly done. Dip
carefully into hot jars, fill with syrup, and cover immediately.

TO CAN CHERRIES.--These may be put up whole in the same way as
plums, or pitted and treated as directed for berries, allowing about two
quarts of water and a scant pint of sugar to five quarts of solid fruit,
for the tart varieties, and not quite half as much sugar for the sweeter
ones.

TO CAN MIXED FRUIT.--There are some fruits with so little flavor
that when cooked they are apt to taste insipid, and are much improved by
canning with some acid or strongly flavored fruits.

Blackberries put up with equal quantities of blue or red plums, or in
the proportion of one to three of the sour fruit, are much better than
either of these fruits canned separately. Black caps are much better if
canned with currants, in the proportion of one part currants to four of
black caps.

Red and black raspberries, cherries and raspberries, are also excellent
combinations.

QUINCES WITH APPLES.--Pare and cut an equal quantity of firm sweet
apples and quinces. First stew the quinces till they are tender in
sufficient water to cover. Take them out, and cook the apples in the
same water. Lay the apples and quinces in alternate layers in a
porcelain kettle or crock. Have ready a hot syrup made with one part
sugar to two and a half parts water, pour over the fruit, and let it
stand all night. The next day reheat to boiling, and can.

Quinces and sweet apples may be canned in the same way as directed below
for plums and sweet apples, using equal parts of apples and quinces, and
adding sugar when opened.

PLUMS WITH SWEET APPLES.--Prepare the plums, and stew in water
enough to cover. When tender, skim out, add to the juice an equal
quantity of quartered sweet apples, and stew until nearly tender. Add
the plumbs again, boil together for a few minutes, and can. When wanted
for the table, open, sprinkle with sugar if any seems needed, let stand
awhile and serve.

TO CAN GRAPES.--Grapes have so many seeds that they do not form a
very palatable sauce when canned entire. Pick carefully from the stems,
wash in a colander the same as directed for berries, and drain. Remove
the skins, dropping them into one earthen crock and the pulp into
another. Place both crocks in kettles of hot water over the stove, and
heat slowly, stirring the pulp occasionally until the seeds will come
out clean.

Then rub the pulp through a colander, add the skins to it, and a cupful
of sugar for each quart of pulp. Return to the fire, boil twenty minutes
until the skins are tender, and can; or, if preferred, the whole grapes
may be heated, and when well scalded so that the seeds are loosened,
pressed through a colander, thus rejecting both seeds and skins, boiled,
then sweetened if desired, and canned.

TO CAN CRAB APPLES.--These may be cooked whole, and canned the same
way as plums.

TO CAN APPLES.--Prepare and can the same as pears, when fresh and
fine in flavor. If old and rather tasteless, the following is a good
way:--several thin slices of the yellow part of the rind, four cups of
sugar, and three pints of boiling water. Pare and quarter the apples, or
if small, only halve them, and cook gently in a broad-bottomed
closely-covered saucepan, with as little water as possible, till tender,
but not broken; then pour the syrup over them, heat all to boiling, and
can at once. The apples may be cooked by steaming over a kettle of hot
water, if preferred. Care must be taken to cook those of the same degree
of hardness together. The slices of lemon rind should be removed from
the syrup before using.

TO CAN PINEAPPLES.--The writer has had no experience in canning
this fruit, but the following method is given on good authority: Pare
very carefully with a silver knife, remove all the "eyes" and black
specks; then cut the sections in which the "eyes" were, in solid pieces
clear down to the core. By doing this all the valuable part of the fruit
is saved, leaving its hard, woody center. As, however, this contains
considerable juice, it should be taken in the hands and wrung as one
wrings a cloth, till the juice is extracted, then thrown away. Prepare a
syrup with one part sugar and two parts water, using what juice has been
obtained in place of so much water. Let it boil up, skim clean, then add
the fruit. Boil just as little as possible and have the fruit tender, as
pineapples loses its flavor by overcooking more readily than any other
fruit. Put into hot cans, and seal.


FRUIT JELLIES.

The excess of sugar commonly employed in preparing jellies often renders
them the least wholesome of fruit preparations, and we cannot recommend
our readers to spend a great amount of time in putting up a large stock
of such articles.

The juice of some fruits taken at the right stage of maturity may be
evaporated to a jelly without sugar, but the process is a more lengthy
one, and requires a much larger quantity of juice than when sugar is
used.

Success in the preparation of fruit jellies depends chiefly upon the
amount of pectose contained in the fruit. Such fruits as peaches,
cherries, and others containing but a small proportion of pectose,
cannot be made into a firm jelly. All fruit for jelly should, if
possible, be freshly picked, and before it is over-ripe, as it has then
a much better flavor. The pectose, the jelly-producing element,
deteriorates with age, so that jelly made from over-ripe fruit is less
certain to "form." If the fruit is under-ripe, it will be too acid to
give a pleasant flavor. Examine carefully, as for canning, rejecting all
wormy, knotty, unripe, or partially decayed fruit. If necessary to wash,
drain very thoroughly.

Apples, quinces, and similar fruits may require to be first cooked in a
small amount of water. The juice of berries, currants, and grapes, may
be best extracted by putting the fruit in a granite-ware double boiler,
or a covered earthen crock placed inside a kettle of boiling water,
mashing as much as possible with a spoon, and steaming without the
addition of water until the fruit is well scalded and broken.

For straining the juice, have a funnel-shaped bag made of coarse flannel
or strong, coarse linen crash. The bag will be found more handy if a
small hoop of wire is sewn around the top and two tapes attached to hang
it by while the hot juice is draining, or a wooden frame to support the
bag may be easily constructed like the one shown on page 74. A dish to
receive the juice should be placed underneath the bag, which should
first be wrung out of hot water, and the scalded fruit, a small quantity
at a time, turned in; then with two large spoons press the sides of the
bag well, moving the fruit around in the bag to get out all the juice,
and removing the pressed pulp and skins each time before putting in a
fresh supply of the hot fruit. If a very clear jelly is desired, the
juice must be allowed to drain out without pressing or squeezing. The
juice of berries, grapes, and currants may be extracted without the
fruit being first scalded, if preferred, by putting the fruit into an
earthen or granite-ware dish, and mashing well with a wooden potato
masher, then putting into a jelly bag and allowing the juice to drain
off for several hours.

When strained, if the jelly is to be prepared with sugar, measure the
juice and pour it into a granite or porcelain fruit kettle with a very
broad bottom, so that as much surface can be on the stove possible. It
is better to boil the juice in quantities of not more than two or three
quarts at a time, unless one has some utensil in which a larger quantity
can be cooked with no greater depth of liquid than the above quantity
would give in a common fruit kettle. The purpose of the boiling is to
evaporate the water from the juice, and this can best be accomplished
before the sugar is added. The sugar, if boiled with the juice, also
darkens the jelly.

The average length of time required for boiling the juice of most
berries, currants, and grapes, extracted as previously directed, before
adding the sugar, is twenty minutes from the time it begins to bubble
all over its surface. It is well to test the jelly occasionally,
however, by dropping a small quantity on a plate to cool, since the
quantity of juice and the rapidity with which it is boiled, may
necessitate some variation in time. In wet season, fruits of all kinds
absorb more moisture and a little longer boiling may be necessary. The
same is true of the juice of fruits gathered after a heavy rain. Jellies
prepared with sugar are generally made of equal measures of juice,
measured before boiling, and sugar; but a very scant measure of sugar is
sufficient, and a less amount will suffice for many fruits. White
granulated sugar is best for all jellies. While the juice is heating,
spread the sugar evenly on shallow tins, and heat in the oven, stirring
occasionally to keep it from scorching. If portions melt, no great harm
will be done, as the melted portions will form in lumps when turned into
the juice, and can be removed with a spoon. When the juice has boiled
twenty minutes, turn in the sugar, which should be so hot that the hand
cannot be borne in it with comfort, stirring rapidly until it is all
dissolved. Let the syrup boil again for three or four minutes, then take
immediately from the fire. Heat the jelly glasses (those with glass
covers are best), by rolling in hot water, and place them in a shallow
pan partially filled with hot water, or stand them on a wet, folded
towel while filling. If it is desired to have the jelly exceptionally
clear and nice, it may be turned through a bag of cheese cloth,
previously wrung out of hot water, into the jelly glasses. If the covers
of the glasses are not tight fitting, a piece of firm paper should be
fitted over the top before putting on the cover, to make it air tight.
Pint self-sealing fruit cans are excellent for storing jelly, and if it
is sealed in them in the same manner as canned fruit, will keep
perfectly, and obviate any supposed necessity for the use of brandied
paper as a preservative measure. Label each variety, and keep in some
cool, dry place. If the jelly is not sufficiently firm when first made,
set the glasses in the sunshine for several days, until the jelly
becomes more firm. This is better than reheating and boiling again, as
it destroys less of the flavor of the fruit.


_RECIPES._

APPLE JELLY.--Cut nice tart apples in quarters, but unless wormy,
do not peel or core. Put into a porcelain kettle with a cup of water for
each six pounds of fruit, and simmer very slowly until the apples are
thoroughly cooked. Turn into a jelly-bag, and drain off the juice. If
very tart, allow three fourths of a pound of sugar to each pint of
juice. If sub-acid, one half pound will be sufficient. Put the sugar
into the oven to heat. Clean the kettle, and boil the juice therein
twenty minutes after it begins to boil thoroughly. Add the sugar,
stirring until well dissolved, let it boil up once again, and remove
from the fire. The juice of one lemon may be used with the apples, and a
few bits of lemon rind, the yellow portion only, cooked with them to
give them a flavor, if liked. One third cranberry juice makes a pleasing
combination.

APPLE JELLY WITHOUT SUGAR.--Select juicy, white fleshed, sub-acid
fruit, perfectly sound and mature but not mellow. The snow apple is one
of the best varieties for this purpose. Wash well, slice, and core
without removing the skins, and cook as directed in the preceding
recipe. Drain off the juice, and if a very clear jelly is desired,
filter it through a piece of cheese cloth previously wrung out of hot
water. Boil the juice,--rapidly at first, but more gently as it becomes
thickened,--until of the desired consistency. The time required will
vary with the quantity of juice, the shallowness of the dish in which it
is boiled, and the heat employed. One hour at least, will be required
for one or two quarts of juice. When the juice has become considerably
evaporated, test it frequently by dipping a few drops on a plate to
cool; and when it jellies sufficiently, remove at once from the fire. A
much larger quantity of juice will be needed for jelly prepared in this
manner than when sugar is used, about two quarts of juice being required
for one half pint of jelly. Such jelly, however, has a most delicious
flavor, and is excellent served with grains. Diluted with water, it
forms a most pleasing beverage.

BERRY AND CURRANT JELLIES.--Express the juice according to the
directions already given. For strawberries, red raspberries, and
currants, allow three fourths of a pound of sugar to a pint of juice.
Black raspberries, if used alone, need less sugar. Strawberry and black
raspberry juice make better jelly if a little lemon juice is used. The
juice of one lemon to each pint of fruit juice will be needed for black
raspberries. Two parts red or black raspberries with one part currants,
make a better jelly than either alone. Boil the juice of strawberries,
red raspberries, and currants twenty minutes, add the sugar, and finish,
as previously directed. Black raspberry juice is much thicker, and
requires less boiling.

CHERRY JELLY.--Jelly may be prepared from cherries by using with
the juice of cherries an equal amount of apple juice, which gives an
additional amount of pectose to the juice and does not perceptibly
change the flavor.

CRAB APPLE JELLY.--Choose the best Siberian crab apples; cut into
pieces, but do not pare or remove seeds. Place in a porcelain-lined or
granite-ware double boiler, with a cup of water for each six pounds of
fruit, and let them remain on the back of the range, with the water
slowly boiling, seven or eight hours. Leave in the boiler or turn into a
large china bowl, and keep well covered, all night. In the morning drain
off the juice and proceed as for apple jelly, using from one half to
three fourths of a pound of sugar to one of juice.

CRANBERRY JELLY.--Scald the berries and express the juice for other
jellies. Measure the juice, and allow three fourths of a pound of sugar
to one of juice. Boil twenty minutes, add the sugar hot, and finish as
directed for other jellies.

GRAPE JELLY.--Jelly from ripe grapes may be prepared in the same
manner as that made from the juice of berries. Jelly from green grapes
needs one half measure more of sugar.

ORANGE JELLY.--Express the juice of rather tart oranges, and use
with it an equal quantity of the juice of sub-acid apples, prepared in
the manner directed for apple jelly. For each pint of the mixed juice,
use one half pound of sugar and proceed as for other jellies.

PEACH JELLY.--Stone, pare, and slice the peaches, and steam them in
a double boiler. Express the juice, and add for each pint of peach juice
the juice of one lemon. Measure the juice and sugar, using three fourths
of a pound of sugar for each pint of juice, and proceed as already
directed. Jelly prepared from peaches will not be so firm as many fruit
jellies, owing to the small amount of pectose contained in their
composition.

A mixture of apples and peaches, in the proportion of one third of the
former to two thirds of the latter, makes a firmer jelly than peaches
alone. The apples should be pared and cored, so that their flavor will
not interfere with that of the peaches.

QUINCE JELLY.--Clean thoroughly good sound fruit, and slice thin.
Put into a double boiler with one cup of water for each five pounds of
fruit, and cook until softened. Express the juice, and proceed as with
other jellies, allowing three fourths of a pound of sugar to each pint
of juice. Tart or sweet apples may be used with quinces, in equal
proportions, and make a jelly of more pleasant flavor than quinces used
alone. The seeds of quinces contain considerable gelatinous substance,
and should be cooked with the quince for jelly making.

PLUM JELLY.--Use Damsons or Green Gages. Stone, and make in the
same way as for berry and other small fruit jellies.

FRUIT IN JELLY.--Prepare some apple jelly without sugar. When
boiled sufficiently to form, add to it, as it begins to cool, some nice,
stoned dates or seeded raisins. Orange jelly may be used instead of the
apple jelly, if preferred.

FRUIT JUICES.


As sauces for desserts and for summer beverages for sick or well, the
pure juices of fruits are most wholesome and delicious. So useful are
they and so little trouble to prepare, that no housewife should allow
the fruit season to pass by without putting up a full stock.
Strawberries, raspberries, blackberries, currants, grapes, and cherries
are especially desirable. In preparing them, select only the best fruit,
ripe, but not over-ripe. Extract the juice by mashing the fruit and
slowly heating in the inner cup of a double boiler, till the fruit is
well scalded; too long heating will injure its color. Strain through a
jelly bag and let it drain slowly for a long time, but do not squeeze,
else some of the pulp will be forced through. Reheat slowly to boiling
and can the same as fruit. It may be put up with or without sugar. If
sugar is to be used, add it hot as for jelly, after the juice is
strained and reheated to boiling. For strawberries and currants,
raspberries and cherries, use one cup of sugar to a quart of juice.
Black raspberries and grapes require less sugar, while blueberries and
blackberries require none at all, or not more than a tablespoonful to
the quart. A mixed juice, of one part currants and two parts red or
black raspberries, has a very superior flavor.


_RECIPES._

GRAPE JUICE, OR UNFERMENTED WINE.--Take twenty-five pounds of some
well ripened very juicy variety of grapes, like the Concord. Pick them
from the stems, wash thoroughly, and scald without the addition of
water, in double boilers until the grapes burst open; cool, turn into
stout jelly bags, and drain off the juice without squeezing. Let the
juice stand and settle; turn off the top, leaving any sediment there may
be. Add to the juice about four pounds of best granulated sugar, reheat
to boiling, skim carefully, and can the same as fruit. Keep in a cool,
dark place. The wine, if to be sealed in bottles, will require a corker,
and the corks should first be boiled in hot water and the bottles well
sterilized.

GRAPE JUICE NO. 2.--Take grapes of the best quality, picked fresh
from the vines. Wash well after stripping from the stems, rejecting any
imperfect fruit. Put them in a porcelain or granite fruit kettle with
one pint of water to every three quarts of grapes, heat to boiling, and
cook slowly for fifteen minutes or longer, skimming as needed. Turn off
the juice and carefully filter it through a jelly bag, putting the seeds
and skins into a separate bag to drain, as the juice from them will be
less clear. Heat again to boiling, add one cupful of hot sugar to each
quart of juice, and seal in sterilized cans or bottles. The juice from
the skins and seeds should be canned separately.

ANOTHER METHOD.--Wash the grapes, and express the juice without
scalding the fruit. Strain the juice three or four times through muslin
or cheese cloth, allowing it to stand and settle for some time between
each filtering. To every three pints of juice add one of water and two
cupfuls of sugar. Heat to boiling, and keep at that temperature for
fifteen minutes, skim carefully, and bottle while at boiling heat. Set
away in a cool, dark place.

FRUIT SYRUP.--Prepare the juice expressed from strawberries,
raspberries, currants, or grapes, as directed above for fruit juices.
After it has come to a boil, add one pound of sugar to every quart of
juice. Seal in pint cans. It may be diluted with water to form a
pleasing beverage, and is especially useful in flavoring puddings and
sauces.

CURRANT SYRUP.--Boil together a pint of pure currant juice and one
half pound of best white sugar for ten minutes, and can or bottle while
at boiling temperature. One or two spoonfuls of the syrup in a glass of
water makes a most refreshing drink. Two parts currants and one of red
raspberries may be used in place of all currants, if preferred.

ORANGE SYRUP.--Select ripe and thin-skinned fruit. To every pint of
the juice add one pound of sugar, the juice of one lemon, and a little
of the grated rind. Boil for fifteen minutes, removing all scum as it
rises. If the syrup is not clear, strain through a piece of cheese
cloth, and reheat. Can and seal while boiling hot.

LEMON SYRUP.--Grate the yellow portion of the rind of six lemons,
and mix with three pounds of best granulated white sugar. Add one quart
of water and boil until it thickens. Strain, add the juice of the six
lemons, carefully leaving out the pulp and seeds; boil ten minutes, and
bottle. Diluted with two thirds cold water, it forms a delicious and
quickly prepared lemonade.

LEMON SYRUP NO. 2.--To every pint of lemon juice add one pound of
sugar; boil, skim, and seal in cans like fruit.

BLACKBERRY SYRUP.--Crush fresh, well-ripened blackberries, and add
to them one fourth as much boiling water as berries; let them stand for
twenty-four hours, stirring frequently. Strain, add a cup of sugar to
each quart of juice, boil slowly for fifteen minutes, and can.

FRUIT ICES.--Express the juice from a pint of stoned red cherries,
add the juice of two lemons, one cup of sugar and a quart of cold water.
Stir well for five minutes, an freeze in an ice cream freezer. Equal
parts currant and red raspberry juice may be used instead of cherry, if
preferred.


DRYING FRUIT.

This method of preserving fruit, except in large establishments where it
is dried by steam, is but little used, since canning is quicker and
superior in every way. Success in drying fruits is dependent upon the
quickness with which, they can be dried, without subjecting them to so
violent a heat as to burn them or injure their flavor.

Pulpy fruits, such as berries, cherries, plums, etc., should be spread
on some convenient flat surface without contact with each other, and
dried in the sun under glass, or in a moderate oven. They should be
turned daily. They will dry more quickly if first scalded in a hot oven.
Cherries should be first stoned and cooked until well heated through and
tender, then spread on plates, and the juice (boiled down to a syrup)
poured over them. When dried, they will be moist. Pack in jars. Large
fruit, such as apples, pears, and peaches, should be pared, divided, and
the seeds or stones removed. If one has but a small quantity, the best
plan is to dry by mean of artificial heat; setting it first in a hot
oven until heated through, which process starts the juice and forms a
film or crust over the cut surfaces, thus holding the remaining:
quantity of juice inside until it becomes absorbed in the tissues. The
drying process may be finished in a warming oven or some place about the
range where the fruit will get only moderate heat. If a larger quantity
of fruit is to be dried, after being heated in the oven, it may be
placed in the hot sun out of doors, under fine wire screens, to keep off
the flies; or may be suspended for the ceiling in some way, or placed
upon a frame made to stand directly over the stove. As the drying
proceeds, the fruit should be turned occasionally, and when dry enough,
it should be thoroughly heated before it is packed away, to prevent it
from getting wormy.


NUTS.

The nuts, or shell fruits, as they are sometimes termed, form a class of
food differing greatly from the succulent fruits. They are more properly
seeds, containing, in general, no starch, but are rich in fat and
nitrogenous elements in the form of vegetable albumen and casein. In
composition, the nuts rank high in nutritive value, but owing to the
oily matter which they contain, are difficult of digestion, unless
reduced to a very minutely divided state before or during mastication.
The fat of nuts is similar in character to cream, and needs to be
reduced to the consistency of cream to be easily digested. Those nuts,
such as almonds, filberts, and pecans, which do not contain an excess of
fat, are the most wholesome. Nuts should be eaten, in moderation, at the
regular mealtime, and not partaken of as a tidbit between meals. It is
likewise well to eat them in connection with some hard food, to insure
their thorough mastication. Almonds and cream crisps thus used make a
pleasing combination.

Most of the edible nuts have long been known and used as food. The
_Almond_ was highly esteemed by the ancient nations of the East, its
native habitat, and is frequently referred to in sacred history. It is
grown extensively in the warm, temperate regions of the Old World. There
are two varieties, known as the bitter and the sweet almond. The kernel
of the almond yields a fixed oil; that produced from the bitter almond
is much esteemed for flavoring purposes, but it is by no means a safe
article to use, at it possesses marked poisonous qualities. Fresh, sweet
almonds are a nutritive, and, when properly eaten, wholesome food. The
outer brown skin of the kernel is somewhat bitter, rough, and irritating
to the stomach but it can be easily removed by blanching.

Blanched almonds, if baked for a short time, become quite brittle, and
may be easily pulverized, and are then more easily digested. Bread made
from almonds thus baked and pulverized, is considered an excellent food
for persons suffering with diabetes.

_Brazil Nuts_ are the seeds of a gigantic tree which grows wild in the
valleys of the Amazon, and throughout tropical America. The case
containing these seeds is a hard, woody shell, globular in form, and
about the size of a man's head. It is divided into four cells, in each
of which are closely packed the seeds which constitute the so-called
nuts, of commerce. These seeds are exceedingly rich in oil, one pound of
them producing about nine ounces of oil.

The _Cocoanut_ is perhaps the most important of all the shell fruits, if
we may judge by the variety of uses to which the nut and the tree which
bears it can be put. It has been said that nature seldom produces a tree
so variously useful to man as the cocoanut palm. In tropical countries,
where it grows abundantly, its leaves are employed for thatching, its
fibers for manufacturing many useful articles, while its ashes produce
potash in abundance. The fruit is eaten raw, and in many ways is
prepared for food; it also yields an oil which forms an important
article of commerce. The milk of the fruit is a cooling beverage, and
the woody shell of the nut answers very well for a cup from which to
drink it. The saccharine juice of the tree also affords an excellent
drink; and from the fresh young stems is prepared a farinaceous
substance similar to sago.

The cocoanuts grow in clusters drooping from the tuft of long, fringed
leaves which crown the branchless trunk of the stately palm. The
cocoanut as found in commerce is the nut divested of its outer sheath,
and is much smaller in size than when seen upon the tree. Picked fresh
from the tree, the cocoanut consists first of a green outer covering;
next of a fibrous coat, which, if the nut is mature, is hairy-like in
appearance; and then of the woody shell, inside of which is the meat and
milk. For household purposes the nuts are gathered while green, and
before the inner shell has become solidified; the flesh is then soft
like custard, and can be easily eaten with a teaspoon, while a large
quantity of delicious, milk-like fluid is obtainable from each nut.

As found in our Northern markets, the cocoanut is difficult of
digestion, as is likewise the prepared or desiccated cocoanut. The
cocoanut contains about seventy per cent of oil.

The _Chestnut_ is an exception to most nuts in its composition. It
contains starch, and about fifteen per cent of sugar. No oil can be
extracted from the chestnut. In Italy, and other parts of Southern
Europe, the chestnut forms an important article of food. It is sometimes
dried and ground into flour, from which bread is prepared. The chestnut
is a nutritious food, but owing to the starch it contains, is more
digestible when cooked. The same is true of the _Acorn_, which is
similar in character to the chestnut. In the early ages, acorns were
largely used for food, and are still used as a substitute for bread in
some countries.

The _Hazelnut_, with the _Filbert_ and _Cobnut_, varieties of the same
nut obtained by cultivation, are among the most desirable nuts for
general consumption.

The _Walnut_, probably a native of Persia, where in ancient times it was
so highly valued as to be considered suited only for the table of the
king, is now found very commonly with other species of the same family,
the _Butternut_ and _Hickory nut_, in most temperate climates.

The _Pecan_, a nut allied to the hickory nut, and grown extensively in
the Mississippi Valley and Texas, is one of the most easily digested
nuts.

The _Peanut_ or _Groundnut_ is the seed of an annual, cultivated
extensively in most tropical and sub-tropical countries. After the plant
has blossomed, the stalk which produced the flower has the peculiarity
of bending down and forcing itself under ground so that the seeds mature
some depth beneath the surface. When ripened, the pods containing the
seeds are dug up and dried. In tropical countries the fresh nuts are
largely consumed, and are thought greatly to resemble almonds in flavor.
In this country they are more commonly roasted. They are less easily
digested than many other nuts because of the large amount of oily matter
which they contain.


_RECIPES._

TO BLANCH ALMONDS.--Shell fresh, sweet almonds, and pour boiling
water over them; let them stand for two or three minutes, skim out, and
drop into cold water. Press between the thumb and finger, and the
kernels will readily slip out of the brown covering. Dry between clean
towels. Blanched almonds served with raisins make an excellent dessert.

BOILED CHESTNUTS.--The large variety, knows as the Italian
chestnut, is best for this purpose. Remove the shells, drop into boiling
water, and boil for ten minutes, take out, drop into cold water, and rub
off the brown skin. Have some clean water boiling, turn the blanched
nuts into it, and cook until they can be pierced with a fork. Drain
thoroughly, put into a hot dish, dry in the oven for a few minutes, and
serve. A cream sauce or tomato sauce may be served with them if liked.

MASHED CHESTNUTS.--Prepare and boil the chestnuts as in the
preceding recipe. When tender, mash through a colander with a potato
masher. Season with cream and salt if desired. Serve hot.

TO KEEP NUTS FRESH.--Chestnuts and other thin-shelled nuts may be
kept from becoming too dry by mixing with an equal bulk of dry sand and
storing in a box or barrel in some cool place.




TABLE TOPICS.

    Who lives to eat, will die by eating.--_Sel._

    Fruit bears the closest relation to light. The sun pours a
    continuous flood of light into the fruits, and they furnish the best
    portion of food a human being requires for the sustenance of mind
    and body.--_Alcott._

    The famous Dr. John Hunter, one of the most eminent physicians of
    his time, and himself a sufferer from gout, found in apples a remedy
    for this very obstinate and distressing malady. He insisted that all
    of his patients should discard wine and roast beef, and make a free
    use of apples.

    Do not too much for your stomach, or it will abandon you.--_Sel._

    The purest food is fruit, next the cereals, then the vegetables. All
    pure poets have abstained almost entirely from animal food.
    Especially should a minister take less meat when he has to write a
    sermon. The less meat the better sermon.--_A. Bronson Alcott._

    There is much false economy: those who are too poor to have
    seasonable fruits and vegetables, will yet have pie and pickles all
    the year. They cannot afford oranges, yet can afford tea and coffee
    daily.--_Health Calendar._

     What plant we in the apple tree?
     Fruits that shall dwell in sunny June,
     And redden in the August moon,
     And drop, when gentle airs come by,
     That fan the blue September sky,
     While children come, with cries of glee,
     And seek there when the fragrant grass
     Betrays their bed to those who pass
     At the foot of the apple tree.

    --_Bryant._




LEGUMES

The legumes, to which belong peas, beans, and lentils, are usually
classed among vegetables; but in composition they differ greatly from
all other vegetable foods, being characterized by a very large
percentage of the nitrogenous elements, by virtue of which they possess
the highest nutritive value. Indeed, when mature, they contain a larger
proportion of nitrogenous matter than any other food, either animal or
vegetable. In their immature state, they more nearly resemble the
vegetables. On account of the excess of nitrogenous elements in their
composition, the mature legumes are well adapted to serve as a
substitute for animal foods, and for use in association with articles in
which starch or other non-nitrogenous elements are predominant; as, for
example, beans or lentils with rice, which combinations constitute the
staple food of large populations in India.

The nitrogenous matter of legumes is termed _legumin_, or vegetable
casein, and its resemblance to the animal casein of milk is very marked.
The Chinese make use of this fact, and manufacture cheese from peas and
beans. The legumes were largely used as food by the ancient nations of
the East. They were the "pulse" upon which the Hebrew children grew so
fair and strong. According to Josephus, legumes also formed the chief
diet of the builders of the pyramids. They are particularly valuable as
strength producers, and frequently form a considerable portion of the
diet of persons in training as athletes, at the present day. Being foods
possessed of such high nutritive value, the legumes are deserving of a
more extended use than is generally accorded them in this country. In
their mature state they are, with the exception of beans, seldom found
upon the ordinary bill of fare, and beans are too generally served in a
form quite difficult of digestion, being combined with large quantities
of fat, or otherwise improperly prepared. Peas and lentils are in some
respects superior to beans, being less liable to disagree with persons
of weak digestion, and for this reason better suited to form a staple
article of diet.

All the legumes are covered with a tough skin, which is in itself
indigestible, and which if not broken by the cooking process or by
thorough mastication afterward, renders the entire seed liable to pass
through the digestive tract undigested, since the digestive fluids
cannot act upon the hard skin. Even when the skins are broken, if served
with the pulp, much of the nutritive material of the legume is wasted,
because it is impossible for the digestive processes to free it from the
cellulose material of which the skins are composed. If, then, it be
desirable to obtain from the legumes the largest amount of nutriment and
in the most digestible form, they must be prepared in some manner so as
to reject the skins. Persons unable to use the legumes when cooked in
the ordinary way, usually experience no difficulty whatever in digesting
them when divested of their skins. The hindrance which even the
partially broken skins are to the complete digestion of the legume, is
well illustrated by the personal experiments of Prof. Strümpell, a
German scientist, who found that of beans boiled with the skins on he
was able to digest only 60 per cent of the nitrogenous material they
contained. When, however, he reduced the same quantity of beans to a
fine powder previous to cooking, he was enabled to digest 91.8 per cent
of it.

The fact that the mature legumes are more digestible when prepared in
some manner in which the skins are rejected, was doubtless understood in
early times, for we find in a recipe of the fourteenth century,
directions given "to dry legumes in an oven and remove the skins away
before using them."

The green legumes which are more like a succulent vegetable are easily
digested with the skins on, if the hulls are broken before being
swallowed. There are also some kinds of beans which, in their mature
state, from having thinner skins, are more readily digested, as the
Haricot variety.

SUGGESTIONS FOR COOKING.--The legumes are best cooked by stewing or
boiling, and when mature, require prolonged cooking to render them
tender and digestible. Slow cooking, when practicable, is preferable.
Dry beans and peas are more readily softened by cooking if first soaked
for a time in cold water. The soaking also has a tendency to loosen the
skins, so that when boiled or stewed, a considerable portion of them
slip off whole, and being lighter, rise to the top during the cooking,
and can be removed with a spoon; it likewise aids in removing the strong
flavor characteristic of these foods, which is considered objectionable
by some persons. The length of time required for soaking will depend
upon the age of the seed, those from the last harvest needing only a few
hours, while such as have been kept for two or more years require to be
soaked twelve or twenty-four hours. For cooking, soft water is best. The
mineral elements in hard water have a tendency to harden the casein, of
which the legumes a largely composed, thus rendering it often very
difficult to soften them.

The dry, unsoaked legumes are generally best put to cook in cold water,
and after the boiling point is reached, allowed to simmer gently until
done. Boiling water may be used for legumes which have been previously
soaked. The amount of water required will vary somewhat with the heat
employed and the age and condition of the legume, as will also the time
required for cooking, but as a general rule two quarts of soft water
for one pint of seeds will be quite sufficient. Salt should not be added
until the seeds are nearly done, as it hinders the cooking process.


PEAS.

DESCRIPTION.--The common garden pea is probably a native of
countries bordering on the Black Sea. A variety known as the gray pea
(_pois chiche_) has been used since a very remote period. The common
people of Greece and Rome, in ancient times made it an ordinary article
of diet. It is said that peas were considered such a delicacy by the
Romans that those who coveted public favor distributed them gratuitously
to the people in order to buy votes.

Peas were introduced into England from Holland in the time of Elizabeth,
and were then considered a great delicacy. History tells us that when
the queen was released from her confinement in the tower, May 19, 1554,
she went to Staining to perform her devotions in the church of
Allhallows, after which she dined at a neighboring inn upon a meal of
which the principal dish was boiled peas. A dinner of the same kind,
commemorative of the event, was for a long time given annually at the
same tavern.

Peas, when young, are tender and sweet, containing a considerable
quantity of sugar. The nitrogenous matter entering into their
composition, although less in quantity when unripe, is much more easily
digested than when the seeds are mature.

When quite ripe, like other leguminous seeds, they require long cooking.
When very old, no amount of boiling will soften them. When green, peas
are usually cooked and served as a vegetable; in their dried state, they
are put to almost every variety of use in the different countries where
they are cultivated.

In the southeast of Scotland, a favorite food is made of ground peas
prepared in thick cakes and called peas-bainocks.

In India and southern Europe, a variety of the pea is eaten parched or
lightly roasted, or made into cakes, puddings, and sweetmeats. In
Germany, in combination with other ingredients, peas are compounded into
sausages, which, during the Franco-Prussian war, served as rations for
the soldiers.

Dried peas for culinary use are obtainable in two forms; the split peas,
which have had the tough envelope of the seed removed, and the green or
Scotch peas.

The time required for cooking will vary from five to eight hours,
depending upon the age of the seed and the length of time it has been
soaked previous to cooking.


_RECIPES._

STEWED SPLIT PEAS.--Carefully examine and wash the peas, rejecting
any imperfect or worm-eaten ones. Put into cold water and let them come
to a boil; then place the stewpan back on the range and simmer gently
until tender, but not mushy. Season with salt and a little cream if
desired.

PEAS PUREE.--Soak a quart of Scotch peas in cold water over night.
In the morning, drain and put them to cook in boiling water. Cook slowly
until perfectly tender, allowing them to simmer very gently toward the
last until they become as dry as possible. Put through a colander to
render them homogeneous and remove the skins. Many of the skins will be
loosened and rise to the top during the cooking, and it is well to
remove these with a spoon so as to make the process of rubbing through
the colander less laborious. Season with salt if desired, and a cup of
thin cream. Serve hot.

MASHED PEAS.--Soak and cook a quart of peas as for Peas _Puree_
When well done, if the Scotch peas, rub through a colander to remove the
skins. If the split peas are used, mash perfectly smooth with a potato
masher. Season with a teaspoonful of salt and a half cup of sweet cream,
if desired. Beat well together, turn into an earthen or granite-ware
pudding dish, smooth the top, and bake in a moderate oven until dry and
mealy throughout, and nicely browned on top. Serve hot like mashed
potato, or with a tomato sauce prepared as follows: Heat a pint of
strained, stewed tomato, season lightly with salt, and when boiling,
thicken with a tablespoonful of flour rubbed smooth in a little cold
water.

PEAS CAKES.--Cut cold mashed peas in slices half an inch in
thickness, brush lightly with cream, place on perforated tins, and brown
in the oven. If the peas crumble too much to slice, form them into small
cakes with a spoon or knife, and brown as directed. Serve hot with or
without a tomato sauce. A celery sauce prepared as directed in the
chapter on Sauces, is also excellent.

DRIED GREEN PEAS.--Gather peas while young and tender and carefully
dry them. When needed for use, rinse well, and put to cook in cold
water. Let them simmer until tender. Season with cream the same as fresh
green peas.


BEANS.

DESCRIPTION.--Some variety of the bean family has been cultivated
and used for culinary purposes from time immemorial. It is frequently
mentioned in Scripture; King David considered it worthy of a place in
his dietary, and the prophet Ezekiel was instructed to mix it with the
various grains and seeds of which he made his bread.

Among some ancient nations the bean was regarded as a type of death, and
the priests of Jupiter were forbidden to eat it, touch it, or even
pronounce its name. The believer in the doctrine of transmigration of
souls carefully avoided this article of food, in the fear of submitting
beloved friends to the ordeal of mastication.

At the present day there is scarcely a country in hot or temperate
climates where the bean is not cultivated and universally appreciated,
both as a green vegetable and when mature and dried.

The time required to digest boiled beans is two and one half hours, and
upwards.

In their immature state, beans are prepared and cooked like other green
vegetables. Dry beans may be either boiled, stewed, or baked, but
whatever the method employed, it must be very slow and prolonged. Beans
to be baked should first be parboiled until tender. We mention this as a
precautionary measure lest some amateur cook, misled by the term "bake,"
should repeat the experiment of the little English maid whom we employed
as cook while living in London, a few years ago. In ordering our dinner,
we had quite overlooked the fact that baked beans are almost wholly an
American dish, and failed to give any suggestions as to the best manner
of preparing it. Left to her own resources, the poor girl did the best
she knew how, but her face was full of perplexity as she placed the
beans upon the table at dinner, with, "Well, ma'am, here are the beans,
but I don't see how you are going to eat them." Nor did we, for she had
actually baked the dry beans, and they lay there in the dish, as brown
as roasted coffee berries, and as hard as bullets.

Beans to be boiled or stewed do not need parboiling, although many cooks
prefer to parboil them, to lessen the strong flavor which to some
persons is quite objectionable.

From one to eight hours are required to cook beans, varying with the age
and variety of the seed, whether it has been soaked, and the rapidity of
the cooking process.


_RECIPES._

BAKED BEANS.--Pick over a quart of best white beans and soak in
cold water over night. Put them to cook in fresh water, and simmer
gently till they are tender, but not broken. Let them be quite juicy
when taken from the kettle. Season with salt and a teaspoonful of
molasses. Put them in a deep crock in a slow oven. Let them bake two or
three hours, or until they assume a reddish brown tinge, adding boiling
water occasionally to prevent their becoming dry. Turn, into a shallow
dish, and brown nicely before sending to the table.

BOILED BEANS.--Pick over some fresh, dry beans carefully, and wash
thoroughly. Put into boiling water and cook gently and slowly until
tender, but not broken. They should be moderately juicy when done. Serve
with lemon juice, or season with salt and a little cream as preferred.

The colored varieties, which are usually quite strong in flavor, are
made less so by parboiling for fifteen or twenty minutes and then
pouring the water off, adding more of boiling temperature, and cooking
slowly until tender.

BEANS BOILED IN A BAG.--Soak a pint of white beans over night. When
ready to cook, put them into a clean bag, tie up tightly, as the beans
have already swelled, and if given space to move about with the boiling
of the water will become broken and mushy. Boil three or four hours.
Serve hot.

SCALLOPED BEANS.--Soak a pint of white beans over night in cold
water. When ready to cook, put into an earthen baking dish, cover well
with new milk, and bake in a slow oven for eight or nine hours;
refilling the dish with milk as it boils away, and taking care that the
beans do not at any time get dry enough to brown over the top till they
are tender. When nearly done, add salt to taste, and a half cup of
cream. They may be allowed to bake till the milk is quite absorbed, and
the beans dry, or may be served when rich with juice, according to
taste. The beans may be parboiled in water for a half hour before
beginning to bake, and the length of time thereby lessened. They should
be well drained before adding the milk, however.

STEWED BEANS.--Soak a quart of white beans in water over night. In
the morning drain, turn hot water over them an inch deep or more, cover,
and place on the range where they will only just simmer, adding boiling
water if needed. When nearly tender, add salt to taste, a tablespoonful
of sugar if desired, and half a cup of good sweet cream. Cook slowly an
hour or more longer, but let them be full of juice when taken up, never
cooked down dry and mealy.

MASHED BEANS.--Soak over night in cold water, a quart of nice white
beans. When ready to cook, drain, put into boiling water, and boil till
perfectly tender, and the water nearly evaporated. Take up, rub through
a colander to remove the skins, season with salt and a half cup of
cream, put in a shallow pudding dish, smooth the top with a spoon, and
brown in the oven.

STEWED LIMA BEANS.--Put the beans into boiling water, and cook till
tender, but not till they fall to pieces. Fresh beans should cook an
hour or more, and dry ones require from two to three hours unless
previously soaked. They are much better to simmer slowly than to boil
hard. They should be cooked nearly dry. Season with salt, and a cup of
thin cream, to each pint of beans. Simmer for a few minutes after the
cream is turned in. Should it happen that the beans become tender before
the water is sufficiently evaporated, do not drain off the water, but
add a little thicker cream, and thicken the whole with a little flour. A
little flour stirred in with the cream, even when the water is nearly
evaporated may be preferred by some.

SUCCOTASH.--Boil one part Lima beans and two parts sweet corn
separately until both are nearly tender. Put them together, and simmer
gently till done. Season with salt and sweet cream. Fresh corn and beans
may be combined in the same proportions, but as the beans will be likely
to require the most time for cooking, they should be put to boil first,
and the corn added when the beans are about half done, unless it is
exceptionally hard, in which case it must be added sooner.

PULP SUCCOTASH.--Score the kernels of some fresh green corn with a
sharp knife blade, then with the back of a knife scrape out all the
pulp, leaving the hulls on the cob. Boil the pulp in milk ten or fifteen
minutes, or until well done. Cook some fresh shelled beans until tender,
and rub them through a colander. Put together an equal quantity of the
beans thus prepared and the cooked corn pulp, season with salt and
sweet cream, boil together for a few minutes, and serve. Kornlet and
dried Lima beans may be made into succotash in a similar manner.


_LENTILS._

DESCRIPTION.--Several varieties of the lentil are cultivated for
food, but all are nearly alike in composition and nutritive value. They
have long been esteemed as an article of diet. That they were in
ordinary use among the Hebrews is shown by the frequent mention of them
in Scripture. It is thought that the red pottage of Esau was made from
the red variety of this legume.

The ancient Egyptians believed that a diet of lentils would tend to make
their children good tempered, cheerful, and wise, and for this reason
constituted it their principal food. A gravy made of lentils is largely
used with their rice by the natives of India, at the present day.

The meal which lentils yield is of great richness, and generally
contains more casein than either beans or peas. The skin, however, is
tough and indigestible, and being much smaller than peas, when served
without rejecting the skins, they appear to be almost wholly of tough,
fibrous material; hence they are of little value except for soups,
_purees_, toasts, and other such dishes as require the rejection of the
skin. Lentils have a stronger flavor than any of the other legumes, and
their taste is not so generally liked until one has become accustomed to
it.

Lentils are prepared and cooked in the same manner as dried peas, though
they require somewhat less time for cooking.

The large dark variety is better soaked for a time previous to cooking,
or parboiled for a half hour and then put into new water, to make them
less strong in flavor and less dark in color.


_RECIPES._

LENTIL PUREE.--Cook the lentils and rub through a colander as for
peas _puree_. Season, and serve in the same manner.

LENTILS MASHED WITH BEANS.--Lentils may be cooked and prepared in
the same manner as directed for mashed peas, but they are less strong in
flavor if about one third to one half cooked white beans are used with
them.

LENTIL GRAVY WITH RICE.--Rub a cupful of cooked lentils through a
colander to remove the skins, add one cup of rich milk, part cream if it
can be afforded, and salt if desired. Heat to boiling, and thicken with
a teaspoonful of flour rubbed smooth in a little cold milk. Serve hot on
nicely steamed or boiled rice, or with well cooked macaroni.




TABLE TOPICS.

    The men who kept alive the flame of learning and piety in the Middle
    Ages were mainly vegetarians.--_Sir William Axon._

    According to Xenophon, Cyrus, king of Persia, was brought up on a
    diet of water, bread, and cresses, till his fifteenth year, when
    honey and raisins were added; and the family names of Fabii and
    Lentuli were derived from their customary diet.

    Thomson, in his poem, "The Seasons," written one hundred and sixty
    years ago, pays the following tribute to a diet composed of seeds
    and vegetable
products:--#/

    "With such a liberal hand has Nature flung
    These seeds abroad, blown them about in winds-- ...
    But who their virtues can declare? who pierce,
    With vision pure, into those secret stores
    Of health and life and joy--the food of man,
    While yet he lived in innocence and told
    A length of golden years, unfleshed in blood?
    A stranger to the savage arts of life--
    Death, rapine, carnage, surfeit, and disease--
    The _lord_, and not the _tyrant_ of the world."

    Most assuredly I do believe that body and mind are much influenced
    by the kind of food habitually depended upon. I can never stray
    among the village people of our windy capes without now and then
    coming upon a human being who looks as if he had been split, salted,
    and dried, like the salt fish which has built up his arid organism.
    If the body is modified by the food which nourishes it, the mind and
    character very certainly will be modified by it also. We know enough
    of their close connection with each other to be sure of what without
    any statistical observation to prove it.--_Oliver Wendell Holmes._

    The thoughts and feelings which the food we partake of provokes, are
    not remarked in common life, but they, nevertheless, have their
    significance. A man who daily sees cows and calves slaughtered, or
    who kills them himself, hogs "stuck," hens "plucked," etc., cannot
    possibly retain any true feeling for the sufferings of his own
    species....Doubtless, the majority of flesh-eaters do not reflect
    upon the manner in which this food comes to them, but this
    thoughtlessness, far from being a virtue, is the parent of many
    vices....How very different are the thoughts and sentiments produced
    by the non-flesh diet!--_Gustav Von Struve._

    That the popular idea that beef is necessary for strength is not a
    correct one, is well illustrated by Xenophon's description of the
    outfit of a Spartan soldier, whose dietary consisted of the very
    plainest and simplest vegetable fare. The complete accoutrements of
    the Spartan soldier, in what we would call heavy marching order,
    weighed seventy-five pounds, exclusive of the camp, mining, and
    bridge-building tools and the rations of bread and dried fruit which
    were issued in weekly installments, and increased the burden of the
    infantry soldier to ninety, ninety-five, or even to a full hundred
    pounds. This load was often carried at the rate of four miles an
    hour for twelve hours _per diem_, day after day, and only when in
    the burning deserts of southern Syria did the commander of the
    Grecian auxiliaries think prudent to shorten the usual length of the
    day's march.

    DIET OF TRAINERS.--The following are a few of the restrictions and
    rules laid down by experienced trainers:--

    Little salt. No course vegetables. No pork or veal. Two meals a day;
    breakfast at eight and dinner at two. No fat meat is allowed, no
    butter or cheese, pies or pastry.




VEGETABLES

Vegetables used for culinary purposes comprise roots and tubers, as
potatoes, turnips, etc.; shoots and stems, as asparagus and sea-kale;
leaves and inflorescence, as spinach and cabbage; immature seeds,
grains, and seed receptacles, as green peas, corn, and string-beans; and
a few of the fruity products, as the tomato and the squash. Of these the
tubers rank the highest in nutritive value.

Vegetables are by no means the most nutritious diet, as water enters
largely into their composition; but food to supply perfectly the needs
of the vital economy, must contain water and indigestible as well as
nutritive elements. Thus they are dietetically of great value, since
they furnish a large quantity of organic fluids. Vegetables are rich in
mineral elements, and are also of service in giving bulk to food. An
exclusive diet of vegetables, however, would give too great bulk, and at
the same time fail to supply the proper amount of food elements. To
furnish the requisite amount of nitrogenous material for one day, if
potatoes alone were depended upon as food, a person would need to
consume about nine pounds; of turnips, sixteen pounds; of parsnips,
eighteen pounds; of cabbage, twenty-two pounds. Hence it is wise to use
them in combination with other articles of diet--grains, whole-wheat
bread, etc.--that supplement the qualities lacking in the vegetables.

TO SELECT VEGETABLES.--All roots and tubers should be plump, free
from decay, bruises, and disease, and with fresh, unshriveled skins.
They are good from the time of maturing until they begin to germinate.
Sprouted vegetables are unfit for food. Potato sprouts contain a poison
allied to belladonna. All vegetables beginning to decay are unfit for
food.

Green vegetables to be wholesome should be freshly gathered, crisp, and
juicy; those which have lain long in the market are very questionable
food. In Paris, a law forbids a market-man to offer for sale any green
vegetable kept more than one day. The use of stale vegetables is known
to have been the cause of serious illness.

KEEPING VEGETABLES.--If necessary to keep green vegetables for any
length of time, do not put them in water, as that will dissolve and
destroy some of their juices; but lay them in a cool, dark place,--on a
stone floor is best,--and do not remove their outer leaves until needed.
They should be cooked the day they are gathered, if possible. The best
way to freshen those with the stems when withered is to cut off a bit of
the stem or stem-end, and set only the cut part in water. The vegetables
will then absorb enough water to replace what has been lost by
evaporation.

Peas and beans should not be shelled until wanted. If, however, they are
not used as soon as shelled, cover them with pods and put in a cool
place.

Winter vegetables can be best kept wholesome by storing in a cool, dry
place of even temperature, and where neither warmth, moisture, nor light
is present to induce decay or germination. They should be well sorted,
the bruised or decayed, rejected, and the rest put into clean bins or
boxes; and should be dry and clean when stored. Vegetables soon absorb
bad flavors if left near anything odorous or decomposing, and are thus
rendered unwholesome. They should be looked over often, and decayed ones
removed. Vegetables, to be kept fit for food, should on no account be
stored in a cellar with barrels of fermenting pickle brine, soft soap,
heaps of decomposing rubbish, and other similar things frequently found
in the dark, damp vegetable cellars of modern houses.

PREPARATION AND COOKING.--Most vegetables need thorough washing
before cooking. Roots and tubers should be well cleaned before paring. A
vegetable brush or a small whisk broom is especially serviceable for
this purpose. If necessary to wash shelled beans and peas, it can best
be accomplished by putting them in a colander and dipping in and out of
large pans of water until clean. Spinach, lettuce, and other leaves may
be cleaned the same way.

Vegetables admit of much variety in preparation for the table, and are
commonly held to require the least culinary skill of any article of
diet. This is a mistake. Though the usual processes employed to make
vegetables palatable are simple, yet many cooks, from carelessness or
lack of knowledge of their nature and composition, convert some of the
most nutritious vegetables into dishes almost worthless as food or
almost impossible of digestion. It requires no little care and skill to
cook vegetables so that they will neither be underdone nor overdone, and
so that they will retain their natural flavors.

A general rule, applicable to all vegetables to be boiled or stewed, is
to cook them in as little water as may be without burning. The salts and
nutrient juices are largely lost in the water; and if this needs to be
drained off, much of the nutriment is apt to be wasted. Many cooks throw
away the true richness, while they serve the "husks" only. Condiments
and seasonings may cover insipid taste, but they cannot restore lost
elements. Vegetables contain so much water in their composition that it
is not necessary to add large quantities for cooking, as in the case of
the grains and legumes, which have lost nearly all their moisture in the
ripening process. Some vegetables are much better cooked without the
addition of water.

Vegetables to be cooked by boiling should be put into boiling water; and
since water loses its goodness by boiling, vegetables should be put in
as soon as the boiling begins. The process of cooking should be
continuous, and in general gentle heat is best. Remember that when water
is boiling, the temperature is not increased by violent bubbling. Keep
the cooking utensil closely covered. If water is added, let it also be
boiling hot.

Vegetables not of uniform size should be so assorted that those of the
same size may be cooked together, or large ones may be divided. Green
vegetables retain their color best if cook rapidly. Soda is sometimes
added to the water in which the vegetables are cooked, for the purpose
of preserving their colors, but this practice is very harmful.

Vegetables should be cooked until they are perfectly tender but not
overdone. Many cooks spoil their vegetables by cooking them too long,
while quite as many more serve them in an underdone state to preserve
their form. Either plan makes them less palatable, and likely to be
indigestible.

Steaming or baking is preferable for most vegetables, because their
finer flavors are more easily retained, and their food value suffers
less diminution. Particularly is this true of tubers.

The time required for cooking depends much upon the age and freshness of
the vegetables, as well as the method of cooking employed. Wilted
vegetables require a longer time for cooking than fresh ones.

TIME REQUIRED FOR COOKING.--The following is the approximate length
of time required for cooking some of the more commonly used
vegetables:--

Potatoes, baked, 30 to 45 minutes.

Potatoes, steamed, 20 to 40 minutes.

Potatoes, boiled (in jackets), 20 to 25 minutes after the water is
fairly boiling.

Potatoes, pared, about 20 minutes if of medium size; if very large, they
will require from 25 to 45 minutes.

Green corn, young, from 15 to 20 minutes.

Peas, 25 to 30 minutes.

Asparagus, 15 to 20 minutes, young; 30 to 50 if old.

Tomatoes, 1 to 2 hours.

String beans and shelled beans, 45 to 60 minutes or longer.

Beets, boiled, 1 hour if young; old, 3 to 5 hours.

Beets, baked, 3 to 6 hours. Carrots, 1 to 2 hours.

Parsnips, 45 minutes, young; old, 1 to 2 hours.

Turnips, young, 45 minutes; old, 1-1/2 to 2 hours.

Winter squash, 1 hour. Cabbage, young, 1 hour; old, 2 to 3 hours.

Vegetable oysters, 1 to 2 hours.

Celery, 20 to 30 minutes.

Spinach, 20 to 60 minutes or more.

Cauliflower, 20 to 40 minutes.

Summer squash, 20 to 60 minutes.


If vegetables after being cooked cannot be served at once, dish them up
as soon as done, and place the dishes in a _bain marie_ or in pans of
hot water, where they will keep of even temperature, but not boil.
Vegetables are never so good after standing, but they spoil less kept in
this way than any other. The water in the pans should be of equal depth
with the food in the dishes. Stewed vegetables and others prepared with
a sauce, may, when cold, be reheated in a similar manner.

[Illustration: Bain Marie.]

If salt is to be used to season, one third of a teaspoonful for each
pint of cooked vegetables is an ample quantity.


THE IRISH POTATO.

DESCRIPTION.--The potato, a plant of the order _Solanaceae_, is
supposed to be indigenous to South America. Probably it was introduced
into Europe by the Spaniards early in the sixteenth century, but
cultivated only as a curiosity. To Sir Walter Raleigh, however, is
usually given the credit of its introduction as a food, he having
imported it from Virginia to Ireland in 1586, where its valuable
nutritive qualities were first appreciated. The potato has so long
constituted the staple article of diet in Ireland, that it has come to
be commonly, though incorrectly, known as the Irish potato.

The edible portion of the plant is the tuber, a thick, fleshy mass or
enlarged portion of an underground stem, having upon its surface a
number of little buds, or "eyes," each capable of independent growth.
The tuber is made up of little cells filled with starch granules,
surrounded and permeated with a watery fluid containing a small
percentage of the albuminous or nitrogenous elements. In cooking, heat
coagulates the albumen within and between the cells, while the starch
granules absorb the watery portion, swell, and distend the cells. The
cohesion between these is also destroyed, and they easily separate. When
these changes are complete, the potato becomes a loose, farinaceous
mass, or "mealy." When, however, the liquid portion is not wholly
absorbed, and the cells are but imperfectly separated, the potato
appears waxen, watery, or soggy. In a mealy state the potato is easily
digested; but when waxy or water-soaked, it is exceedingly trying to the
digestive powers.

It is obvious, then, that the great _desideratum_ in cooking the potato,
is to promote the expansion and separation of its cells; in other words,
to render it mealy. Young potatoes are always waxy, and consequently
less wholesome than ripe ones. Potatoes which have been frozen and
allowed to thaw quickly are much sweeter and more watery, because in
thawing the starch changes into sugar. Frozen potatoes should be thawed
in cold water and cooked at once, or kept frozen until ready for use.

PREPARATION AND COOKING.--Always pare potatoes very thin. Much of
the most nutritious part of the tuber lies next its outer covering; so
care should be taken to waste as little as possible. Potatoes cooked
with the skins on are undoubtedly better than those pared. The chief
mineral element contained in the potato is potash, an important
constituent of the blood. Potash salts are freely soluble in water, and
when the skin is removed, there is nothing to prevent these salts from
escaping into the water in which the potato is boiled. If the potato is
cooked in its "jacket," the skin, which does not in general burst open
until the potato is nearly done, serves to keep this valuable element
largely inside the potato while cooking. For the same reason it is
better not to pare potatoes and put them in water to soak over night, as
many cooks are in the habit of doing, to have them in readiness for
cooking for breakfast.

Potatoes to be pared should be first washed and dried. It is a good plan
to wash quite a quantity at one time, to be used as needed. After
paring, drop at once into cold water and rinse them thoroughly. It is a
careless habit to allow pared potatoes to fall among the skins, as in
this way they become stained, and appear black and discolored after
cooking. Scrubbing with a vegetable brush is by far the best means for
cleaning potatoes to be cooked with the skins on.

When boiled in their skins, the waste, according to Letheby, is about
three per cent, while without them it is not less than fourteen per
cent, or more than two ounces in every pound. Potatoes boiled without
skins should be cooked very gently.

Steaming, roasting, and baking are much better methods for cooking
potatoes than boiling, for reasons already given. Very old potatoes are
best stewed or mashed. When withered or wilted, they are freshened by
standing in cold water for an hour or so before cooking. If diseased or
badly sprouted, potatoes are wholly unfit for food.


_RECIPES._

BOILED POTATOES (IN JACKETS).--Choose potatoes of uniform size,
free from specks. Wash and scrub them well with a coarse cloth or brush;
dig out all eyes and rinse in cold water; cook in just enough water to
prevent burning, till easily pierced with a fork, not till they have
burst the skin and fallen in pieces. Drain thoroughly, take out the
potatoes, and place them in the oven for five minutes, or place the
kettle back on the range; remove the skins, and cover with a cloth to
absorb all moisture, and let them steam three or four minutes. By either
method they will be dry and mealy. In removing the skins, draw them off
without cutting the potatoes.

BOILED POTATOES (WITHOUT SKINS).--Pare very thin, and wash clean.
If not of an equal size, cut the larger potatoes in two. Cook in only
sufficient water to prevent burning until a fork will easily pierce
their center; drain thoroughly, place the kettle back on the range,
cover with a cloth to absorb the moisture, and let them dry four or five
minutes. Shake the kettle several times while they are drying, to make
them floury.

STEAMED POTATOES.--Potatoes may be steamed either with or without
the skin. Only mature potatoes can be steamed. Prepare as for boiling;
place in a steamer, over boiling water, and steam until tender. If water
is needed to replenish, let it always be boiling hot, and not allow the
potatoes to stop steaming, or they will be watery. When done, uncover,
remove the potatoes to the oven, and let them dry a few minutes. If
peeled before steaming, shake the steamer occasionally, to make them
floury.

ROASTED POTATOES.--Potatoes are much more rich and mealy roasted
than cooked in any other way. Wash them very carefully, dry with a
cloth, and wrap in tissue paper; bury in ashes not too hot, then cover
with coals and roast until tender. The coals will need renewing
occasionally, unless the roasting is done very close to the main fire.

BAKED POTATOES.--Choose large, smooth potatoes as near the same
size as possible; wash and scrub with a brush until perfectly clean; dry
with a cloth, and bake in a moderately hot oven until a fork will easily
pierce them, or until they yield to pressure between the fingers. They
are better turned about occasionally. In a slow oven the skins become
hardened and thickened, and much of the most nutritious portion is
wasted. When done, press each one till it bursts slightly, as that will
allow the steam to escape, and prevent the potatoes from becoming soggy.
They should be served at once, in a folded napkin placed in a hot dish.
Cold baked potatoes may be warmed over by rebaking, if of good quality
and not overdone the first time.

STUFFED POTATO.--Prepare and bake large potatoes of equal size, as
directed in the preceding recipe. When done, cut them evenly three
fourths of an inch from the end, and scrape out the inside, taking care
not to break the skins. Season the potato with salt and a little thick
sweet cream, being careful not to have it too moist, and beat thoroughly
with a fork until light; refill the skins with the seasoned potato, fit
the broken portions together, and reheat in the oven. When hot
throughout, wrap the potatoes in squares of white tissue paper fringed
at both ends. Twist the ends of the paper lightly together above the
fringe, and stand the potatoes in a vegetable dish with the cut end
uppermost. When served, the potatoes are held in the hand, one end of
the paper untwisted, the top of the potato removed, and the contents
eaten with a fork or spoon.

STUFFED POTATOES NO. 2.--Prepare large, smooth potatoes, bake until
tender, and cut them in halves; scrape out the inside carefully, so as
not to break the skins; mash smoothly, mix thoroughly with one third
freshly prepared cottage cheese; season with nice sweet cream, and salt
if desired. Fill the shells with the mixture, place cut side uppermost,
in a pudding dish, and brown in the oven.

MASHED POTATOES.--Peel and slice potatoes enough to make two
quarts; put into boiling water and cook until perfectly tender, but not
much broken; drain, add salt to taste; turn into a hot earthen dish, and
set in the oven for a few moments to dry. Break up the potatoes with a
silver fork; add nearly a cup of cream, and beat hard at least five
minutes till light and creamy; serve at once, or they will become heavy.
If preferred, the potatoes may be rubbed through a hot sieve into a hot
plate, or mashed with a potato beetle, but they are less light and flaky
when mashed with a beetle. If cream for seasoning is not obtainable, a
well-beaten egg makes a very good substitute. Use in the proportion of
one egg to about five potatoes. For mashed potatoes, if all utensils and
ingredients are first heated, the result will be much better.

NEW POTATOES.--When potatoes are young and freshly gathered, the
skins are easiest removed by taking each one in a coarse cloth and
rubbing it; a little coarse salt used in the cloth will be found
serviceable for this purpose. If almost ripe, scrape with a blunt knife,
wash very clean, and rinse in cold water. Boiling is the best method of
cooking; new potatoes are not good steamed. Use only sufficient water to
cover, and boil till tender. Drain thoroughly, cover closely with a
clean cloth, and dry before serving.

CRACKED POTATOES.--Prepare and boil new potatoes as in the
preceding recipe, and when ready to serve, crack each by pressing
lightly upon it with the back of a spoon, lay them in a hot dish, salt
to taste, and pour over them a cup of hot thin cream or rich milk.

CREAMED POTATOES.--Take rather small, new potatoes and wash well;
rub off all the skins; cut in halves, or if quite large, quarter them.
Put a pint of divided potatoes into a broad-bottomed, shallow saucepan;
pour over them a cup of thin sweet cream, add salt if desired; heat just
to the boiling point, then allow them to simmer gently till perfectly
tender, tossing them occasionally in the stewpan to prevent their
burning on the bottom. Serve hot.

SCALLOPED POTATOES.--Pare the potatoes and slice thin; put them in
layers in an earthen pudding dish, dredge each layer lightly with flour,
and salt, and pour over all enough good, rich milk to cover well. Cover,
and bake rather slowly till tender, removing the cover just long enough
before the potatoes are done, to brown nicely. If preferred, a little
less milk may be used, and a cup of thin cream added when the potatoes
are nearly done.

STEWED POTATO.--Pare the potatoes and slice rather thin. Put into
boiling water, and cook until nearly tender, but not broken. Have some
rich milk boiling in the inner dish of a double boiler, add to it a
little salt, then stir in for each pint of milk a heaping teaspoonful of
corn starch or rice flour, rubbed smooth in a little cold milk. Stir
until it thickens. Drain the potatoes, turn them into the hot sauce, put
the dish in the outer boiler, and cook for a half hour or longer. Cold
boiled potatoes may be sliced and used in the same way. Cold baked
potatoes sliced and stewed thus for an hour or more, make a particularly
appetizing dish.

POTATOES STEWED WITH CELERY.--Pare and slice the potatoes, and put
them into a stewpan with two or three tablespoonfuls of minced celery.
Use only the white part of the celery and mince it finely. Cover the
whole with milk sufficient to cook and prevent burning, and stew until
tender. Season with cream and salt.

POTATO SNOWBALLS.--Cut largo potatoes into quarters; if small,
leave them undivided; boil in just enough water to cover. When tender,
drain and dry in the usual way. Take up two or three pieces at a time in
a strong, clean cloth, and press them compactly together in the shape of
balls. Serve in a folded napkin on a hot dish.

POTATO CAKES.--Make nicely seasoned, cold mashed potato into small
round cakes about one half an inch thick. Put them on a baking tin,
brush them over with sweet cream, and bake in a hot oven till golden
brown.

POTATO CAKES WITH EGG.--Bake nice potatoes till perfectly tender;
peel, mash thoroughly, and to each pint allow the yolks of two eggs
which have been boiled until mealy, then rubbed perfectly smooth through
a fine wire sieve, and one half cup of rich milk. Add salt to taste, mix
all well together, form the potato into small cakes, place them on oiled
tins, and brown ten or fifteen minutes in the oven.

POTATO PUFF.--Mix a pint of mashed potato (cold is just as good if
free from lumps) with a half cup of cream and the well-beaten yolk of an
egg; salt to taste and beat till smooth; lastly, stir in the white of
the egg beaten to a stiff froth. Pile up in a rocky form on a bright tin
dish, and bake in a quick oven until heated throughout and lightly
browned. Serve at once.

BROWNED POTATOES.--Slice cold potatoes evenly, place them on an
oiled tin, and brown in a very quick oven; or slice lengthwise and lay
on a wire broiler or bread-toaster, and brown over hot coals. Sprinkle
with a little salt if desired, and serve hot with sweet cream as
dressing.

ORNAMENTAL POTATOES.--No vegetable can be made palatable in so many
ways as the potato, and few can be arranged in such pretty shapes.
Mashed potatoes made moist with cream, can easily be made into cones,
pyramids, or mounds. Cold mashed potatoes may be cut into many fancy
shapes with a cookie-cutter, wet with a little cold water, and browned
in the oven.

Mounds of potatoes are very pretty smoothed and strewn with well-cooked
vermicelli broken into small bits, and then lightly browned in the oven.

Scoring the top of a dish of mashed potato deeply in triangles, stars,
and crosses, with the back of a carving knife, and then browning
lightly, gives a very pretty effect.

BROILED POTATO.--Mashed potatoes, if packed firmly while warm into
a sheet-iron bread tin which has been dipped in cold water, may be cut
into slices when cold, brushed with cream, and browned on a broiler over
hot coals.

WARMED-OVER POTATOES.--Cut cold boiled potatoes into very thin
slices; heat a little cream to boiling in a saucepan; add the potato,
season lightly with salt if desired, and cook until the cream is
absorbed, stirring occasionally so as to prevent scorching or breaking
the slices.

VEGETABLE HASH.--With one quart finely sliced potato, chop one
carrot, one red beet, one white turnip, all boiled, also one or two
stalks of celery. Put all together in a stewpan, cover closely, and set
in the oven; when hot, pour over them a cup of boiling cream, stir well
together, and serve hot.


THE SWEET POTATO.

DESCRIPTION.--The sweet potato is a native of the Malayan
Archipelago, where it formerly grew wild; thence it was taken to Spain,
and from Spain to England and other parts of the globe. It was largely
used in Europe as a delicacy on the tables of the rich before the
introduction of the common potato, which has now taken its place and
likewise its name. The sweet potato is the article referred as potato by
Shakespeare and other English writers, previous to the middle of the
seventeenth century.

PREPARATION AND COOKING.--What has been said in reference to the
common potato, is generally applicable to the sweet potato; it may be
prepared and cooked in nearly all the ways of the Irish potato.

In selecting sweet potatoes, choose firm, plump roots, free from any
sprouts; if sprouted they will have a poor flavor, and are likely to be
watery.

The sweet potato is best cooked with the skin on; but all discolored
portions and the dry portion at each end, together with all branchlets,
should be carefully removed, and the potato well washed, and if to be
baked or roasted, well dried with a cloth before placing in the oven.

The average time required for boiling is about fifty minutes; baking,
one hour; steaming, about one hour; roasting, one and one half hours.


_RECIPES._

BAKED SWEET POTATOES.--Select those of uniform size, wash clean,
cutting out any imperfect spots, wipe dry, put into moderately hot oven,
and bake about one hour, or until the largest will yield to gentle
pressure between the fingers. Serve at once without peeling. Small
potatoes are best steamed, since if baked, the skins will take up nearly
the whole potato.

BAKED SWEET POTATO NO. 2.--Select potatoes of medium size, wash and
trim but do not pare, and put on the upper grate of the oven. For a peek
of potatoes, put in the lower part of the oven in a large shallow pan a
half pint of hot water. The water may be turned directly upon the oven
bottom if preferred. Bake slowly, turning once when half done. Serve in
their skins, or peel, slice, and return to the oven until nicely
browned.

BOILED SWEET POTATOES.--Choose potatoes of equal size; do not pare,
but after cleaning them well and removing any imperfect spots, put into
cold water and boll until they can be easily pierced with a fork; drain
thoroughly, and lay them on the top grate in the oven to dry for five or
ten minutes. Peel as soon as dry, and send at once to the table, in a
hot dish covered with a folded napkin. Sweet potatoes are much better
baked than boiled.

STEAMED SWEET POTATOES.--Wash the potatoes well, cut out any
discolored portions, and steam over a kettle of boiling water until they
can be easily pierced with a fork, not allowing the water in the pot to
cease boiling for a moment. Steam only sufficient to cook them, else
they will be watery.

BROWNED SWEET POTATOES.--Slice cold, cooked sweet potatoes evenly,
place on slightly oiled tins in a hot oven, and brown.

MASHED SWEET POTATOES.--Either bake or steam nice sweet potatoes,
and when tender, peel, mash them well, and season with cream and salt to
taste. They may be served at once, or made into patties and browned in
the oven.

POTATO HASH.--Take equal parts of cold Irish and sweet potatoes;
chop fine and mix thoroughly; season with salt if desired, and add
sufficient thin cream to moisten well. Turn into a stewpan, and heat
gently until boiling, tossing continually, that all parts become heated
alike, and serve at once.

ROASTED SWEET POTATOES.--Wash clean and wipe dry, potatoes of
uniform size, wrap with tissue paper, cover with hot ashes, and then
with coals from a hardwood fire; unless near the main fire, the coals
will need renewing a few times. This will require a longer time than by
any other method, but they are much nicer. The slow, continuous heat
promotes their mealiness. When tender, brush the ashes off with a broom,
and wipe with a dry cloth. Send to the table in their jackets.

TO DRY SWEET POTATOES.--Carefully clean and drop them into boiling
water. Let them remain until the skins can be easily slipped off; then
cut into slices and spread on racks to dry. To prepare for cooking, soak
over night, and boil the next day.


TURNIPS.

DESCRIPTION.--The turnip belongs to the order _Cruciferæ_,
signifying "cross flowers," so called because their four petals are
arranged in the form of a cross. It is a native of Europe and the
temperate portions of Asia, growing wild in borders of fields and waste
places. The ancient Roman gastronomists considered the turnip, when
prepared in the following manner, a dish fit for epicures: "After
boiling, extract the water from them, and season with cummin, rue or
benzoin, pounded in a mortar; afterward add honey, vinegar, gravy, and
boiled grapes. Allow the whole to simmer, and serve."

Under cultivation, the turnip forms an agreeable culinary esculent; but
on account of the large proportion of water entering into its
composition, its nutritive value is exceedingly low. The Swedish, or
Rutabaga, variety is rather more nutritive than the white, but its
stronger flavor renders it less palatable. Unlike the potato, the turnip
contains no starch, but instead, a gelatinous substance called pectose,
which during the boiling process is changed into a vegetable jelly
called pectine. The white lining just inside the skin is usually bitter;
hence the tuber should be peeled sufficiently deep to remove it. When
well cooked, turnips are quite easily digested.

PREPARATION AND COOKING.--Turnips are good for culinary purposes
only from the time of their ripening till they begin to sprout. The
process of germination changes their proximate elements, and renders
them less fit for food. Select turnips which are plump and free from
disease. A turnip that is wilted, or that appears spongy, pithy, or
cork-like when cut, is not fit for food.

Prepare turnips for cooking by thoroughly washing and scraping, if young
and tender, or by paring if more mature. If small, they may be cooked
whole; if large, they should be cut across the grain into slices a half
inch in thickness. If cooked whole, care must be taken to select those
of uniform size; and if sliced, the slices must be of equal thickness.


_RECIPES._

BOILED TURNIPS.--Turnips, like other vegetables, should be boiled
in as small an amount of water as possible. Great care must be taken,
however, that the kettle does not get dry, as scorched turnip is
spoiled. An excellent precaution, in order to keep them from scorching
in case the water becomes low, is to place an inverted saucer or
sauce-dish in the bottom of the kettle before putting in the turnips.
Put into boiling water, cook rapidly until sufficiently tender to pierce
easily with a fork; too much cooking discolors and renders them strong
in flavor. Boiled turnips should be drained very thoroughly, and all
water pressed out before preparing for the table. The age, size, and
variety of the turnip will greatly vary the time necessary for its
cooking. The safest rule is to allow plenty of time, and test with a
fork. Young turnips will cook in about forty-five minutes; old turnips,
sliced, require from one and a quarter to two hours. If whole or cut in
halves, they require a proportionate length of time. White turnips
require much, less cooking than yellow ones.

BAKED TURNIPS.--Select turnips of uniform size; wash and wipe, but
do not pare; place on the top grate of a moderately hot oven; bake two
or more hours or until perfectly tender; peel and serve at once, either
mashed or with cream sauce. Turnips are much sweeter baked than when
cooked in any other way.

CREAMED TURNIPS.--Pare, but do not cut, young sweet white turnips;
boil till tender in a small quantity of water; drain and dry well. Cook
a tablespoonful of flour in a pint of rich milk or part cream; arrange
the turnips in a baking dish, pour the sauce over them, add salt if
desired, sprinkle the top with grated bread crumbs, and brown in a quick
oven.

CHOPPED TURNIPS.--Chop well-boiled white turnips very fine, add
salt to taste and sufficient lemon juice to moisten. Turn into a
saucepan and heat till hot, gently lifting and stirring constantly. Cold
boiled turnip may be used advantageously in this way.

MASHED TURNIPS.--Wash the turnips, pare, and drop into boiling
water. Cook until perfectly tender; turn into a colander and press out
the water with a plate or large spoon; mash until free from lumps,
season with a little sweet cream, and salt if desired. If the turnips
are especially watery, one or two hot, mealy potatoes mashed with them
will be an improvement.

SCALLOPED TURNIPS.--Prepare and boil whole white turnips until
nearly tender; cut into thin slices, lay in an earthen pudding dish,
pour over them a white sauce sufficient to cover, made by cooking a
tablespoonful of flour in a pint of milk, part cream if preferred, until
thickened. Season with salt, sprinkle the top lightly with grated bread
crumbs, and bake in a quick oven until a rich brown. Place the baking
dish on a clean plate, and serve. Rich milk or cream may be used instead
of white sauce, if preferred.

STEAMED TURNIPS.--Select turnips of uniform size, wash, pare, and
steam rapidly till they can be easily pierced with a fork; mash, or
serve with lemon juice or cream sauce, as desired.

STEWED TURNIPS.--Prepare and slice some young, fresh white turnips,
boil or steam about twenty minutes, drain thoroughly, turn into a
saucepan with a cup of new milk for each quart of turnips; simmer gently
until tender, season with salt if desired, and serve.

TURNIPS IN JUICE.--Wash young white turnips, peel, and boil whole
in sufficient water to keep them from burning. Cover closely and cook
gently until tender, by which time the water in the kettle should be
reduced to the consistency of syrup. Serve at once.

TURNIPS WITH CREAM SAUCE.--Wash and pare the turnips, cut them
into half-inch dice, and cook in boiling water until tender. Meanwhile
prepare a cream sauce as directed for Scalloped Turnips, using thin
cream in place of milk. Drain the turnips, pour the cream sauce over
them, let them boil up once, and serve.


PARSNIPS.

DESCRIPTION.--The common garden parsnip is derived by cultivation
from the wild parsnip, indigenous to many parts of Europe and the north
of Asia, and cultivated since Roman times. It is not only used for
culinary purposes, but a wine is made from it. In the north of Ireland a
table beer is brewed from its fermented product and hops.

The percentage of nutritive elements contained in the parsnip is very
small; so small, indeed, that one pound of parsnips affords hardly one
fifth of an ounce of nitrogenous or muscle-forming material. The time
required for its digestion, varies from two and one half to three and
one half hours.

PREPARATION AND COOKING.--Wash and trim off any rough portions:
scrape well with a knife to remove the skins, and drop at once into cold
water to prevent discoloration. If the parsnips are smooth-skinned,
fresh, and too small to need dividing, they need only be washed
thoroughly before cooking, as the skins can be easily removed by rubbing
with a clean towel. Reject those that are wilted, pithy, coarse, or
stringy. Large parsnips should be divided, for if cooked whole, the
outside is likely to become soft before the center is tender. They may
be either split lengthwise or sliced. Parsnips may be boiled, baked, or
steamed; but like all other vegetables containing a large percentage of
water, are preferable steamed or baked.

The time required for cooking young parsnips, is about forty-five
minutes; when old, they require from one to two hours.


_RECIPES._

BAKED PARSNIPS.--Wash, thoroughly, but do not scrape the roots;
bake the same as potatoes. When tender, remove the skins, slice, and
serve with cream or an egg sauce prepared as directed for Parsnips with
Egg Sauce. They are also very nice mashed and seasoned with cream. Baked
and steamed parsnips are far sweeter than boiled ones.

BAKED PARSNIPS NO. 2.--Wash, scrape, and divide; drop into boiling
water, a little more than sufficient to cook them, and boil gently till
thoroughly tender. There should remain about one half pint of the liquor
when the parsnips are done. Arrange on an earthen plate or shallow
pudding dish, not more than one layer deep; cover with the juice, and
bake, basting frequently until the juice is all absorbed, and the
parsnips delicately browned. Serve at once.

BOILED PARSNIPS.--Clean, scrape, drop into a small quantity of
boiling water, and cook until they can be easily pierced, with a fork.
Drain thoroughly, cut the parsnips in slices, and mash or serve with a
white sauce, to which a little lemon juice may be added if desired.

BROWNED PARSNIPS.--Slice cold parsnips into rather thick pieces,
and brown as directed for browned potatoes.

CREAMED PARSNIPS.--Bake or steam the parsnips until tender; slice,
add salt if desired, and a cup of thin sweet cream. Let them stew slowly
until nearly dry, or if preferred, just boil up once and serve.

MASHED PARSNIPS.--Wash and scrape, dropping at once into cold water
to prevent discoloration. Slice thinly and steam, or bake whole until
perfectly tender. When done, mash until free from lumps, removing all
hard or stringy portions; add salt to taste and a few spoonfuls of thick
sweet cream, and serve.

PARSNIPS WITH CREAM SAUCE.--Bake as previously directed. When
tender, slice, cut into cubes, and pour over them a cream sauce prepared
as for Turnips with Cream Sauce. Boil up together once, and serve.

PARSNIPS WITH EGG SAUCE.--Scrape, wash, and slice thinly, enough
parsnips to make three pints; steam, bake, or boil them until very
tender. If boiled, turn into a colander and drain well. Have ready an
egg sauce, for preparing which heat a pint of rich milk or very thin
cream to boiling, stir into it a level tablespoonful of flour rubbed
smooth with a little milk. Let this boil a few minutes, stirring
constantly until the flour is well cooked and the sauce thickened; then
add slowly the well-beaten yolk of one egg, stirring rapidly so that it
shall be well mingled with the whole; add salt to taste; let it boil up
once, pour over the parsnips, and serve. The sauce should be of the
consistency of thick cream.

PARSNIPS WITH POTATOES.--Wash, scrape, and slice enough parsnips
to make two and a half quarts. Pare and slice enough potatoes to make
one pint. Cook together in a small quantity of water. When tender, mash
smoothly, add salt, the yolks of two eggs well beaten, and a cup of rich
milk. Beat well together, put into an earthen or china dish, and brown
lightly in the oven.

STEWED PARSNIPS.--Prepare and boil for a half hour; drain, cover
with rich milk, add salt if desired, and stew gently till tender.

STEWED PARSNIPS WITH CELERY.--Prepare and steam or boil some nice
ones until about half done. If boiled, drain thoroughly; add salt if
desired, and a tablespoonful of minced celery. Turn rich boiling milk
over them, cover, and stew fifteen or twenty minutes, or till perfectly
tender.


CARROTS.

DESCRIPTION.--The garden carrot is a cultivated variety of a plant
belonging to the _Umbettiferæ_, and grows wild in many portions of
Europe. The root has long been used for food. By the ancient Greeks and
Romans it was much esteemed as a salad. The carrot is said to have been
introduced into England by Flemish refugees during the reigns of
Elizabeth and James I. Its feathery leaves were used by the ladies as an
adornment for their headdresses, in place of plumes. Carrots contain
sugar enough for making a syrup from them; they also yield by
fermentation and distillation a spirituous liquor. In Germany they are
sometimes cut into small pieces, and roasted as a substitute for coffee.

Starch does not enter into the composition of carrots, but a small
portion of pectose is found instead. Carrots contain more water than
parsnips, and both much cellulose and little nutritive material. Carrots
when well cooked form a wholesome food, but one not adapted to weak
stomachs, as they are rather hard to digest and tend to flatulence.

PREPARATION AND COOKING.--The suggestions given for the preparation
of parsnips are also applicable to carrots; and they may be boiled,
steamed, or browned in the same manner. From one to two hours time will
be required, according to age, size, variety, and method of cooking.


_RECIPES._

BOILED CARROTS.--Clean, scrape, drop into boiling water, and cook
till tender; drain thoroughly, slice, and serve with a cream sauce.
Varieties with strong flavor are better parboiled for fifteen or twenty
minutes, and put into fresh boiling water to finish.

CARROTS WITH EGG SAUCE.--Wash and scrape well; slice and throw into
boiling water, or else steam. When tender, drain thoroughly, and pour
over them a sauce prepared the same as for parsnips (page 244), with the
addition of a tablespoonful of sugar. Let them boil up once, and serve.

STEWED CARROTS.--Prepare young and tender carrots, drop into
boiling water, and cook for fifteen or twenty minutes. Drain, slice, and
put into a stewpan with rich milk or cream nearly to cover; simmer
gently until tender; season with salt and a little chopped parsley.


BEETS.

DESCRIPTION.--The beet is a native of the coasts of the
Mediterranean, and is said to owe its botanical name, _beta_, to a
fancied resemblance to the Greek letter B. Two varieties are in common
use as food, the white and the red beet; while a sub-variety, the sugar
beet, is largely cultivated in France, in connection with the beet-sugar
industry in that country. The same industry has recently been introduced
into this country. It is grown extensively in Germany and Russia, for
the same pose, and is also used there in the manufacture of alcohol.

The beet root is characterized by its unusual amount of sugar. It is
considered more nutritive than any other esculent tuber except the
potato, but the time required for its digestion exceeds that of most
vegetables, being three and three fourths hours.

PREPARATION AND COOKING.--Beets, like other tubers, should be
fresh, unshriveled, and healthy. Wash carefully, scrubbing with a soft
brush to remove all particles of dirt; but avoid scraping, cutting, or
breaking, lest the sweet juices escape. In handling for storage, be
careful not to bruise or break the skins; and in purchasing from the
market, select only such as are perfect.

Beets may be boiled, baked, or steamed. In boiling, if the skin is cut
or broken, the juice will escape in the water, and the flavor will be
injured; for this reason, beets should not be punctured with a fork to
find if done. When tender, the thickest part will yield readily to
pressure of the fingers. Beets should be boiled in just as little water
as possible, and they will be much better if it has all evaporated by
the time they are cooked.

Young beets will boil in one hour, while old beets require from three to
five hours; if tough, wilted, and stringy, they cannot be boiled tender.
Baked beets require from three to six hours.


_RECIPES._

BAKED BEETS.--Beets are far better baked than boiled, though it
takes a longer time to cook properly. French cooks bake them slowly six
hours in a covered dish, the bottom of which is lined with
well-moistened rye straw; however, they may be baked on the oven grate,
like potatoes. Wipe dry after washing, and bake slowly. They are very
nice served with a sauce made of equal quantities of lemon juice and
whipped cream, with a little salt.

BAKED BEETS NO. 2.--Wash young and tender beets, and place in an
earthen baking dish with a very little water; as it evaporates, add
more, which must be of boiling temperature. Set into a moderate oven,
and according to size of the beets, bake slowly from two to three hours.
When tender, remove the skins and dress with lemon juice or cream sauce.

BEETS AND POTATOES.--Boil newly matured potatoes and young beets
separately till tender; then peel and slice. Put thorn in alternate
layers in a vegetable dish, with salt to taste, and enough sweet cream
nearly to cover. Brown in the oven, and serve at once.

BEET HASH.--Chop quite finely an equal quantity of cold boiled or
baked beets and boiled or baked potatoes. Put into a shallow saucepan,
add salt and sufficient hot cream to moisten. Toss frequently, and cook
until well heated throughout. Serve hot.

BEET GREENS.--Take young, tender beets, clean thoroughly without
separating the tops and roots. Examine the leaves carefully, and pick
off inferior ones. Put into boiling water, and cook for nearly an hour.
Drain, press out all water, and chop quite fine. Serve with a dressing
of lemon juice or cream, as preferred.

BEET SALAD, OR CHOPPED BEETS.--Cold boiled or baked beets, chopped
quite fine, but not minced, make a nice salad when served with a
dressing of lemon juice and whipped cream in the proportion of three
tablespoonfuls of lemon juice to one half cup of whipped cream, and salt
if desired.

BEET SALAD NO. 2.--Chop equal parts of boiled beets and fresh young
cabbage. Mix thoroughly, add salt to taste, a few tablespoonfuls of
sugar, and cover with diluted lemon juice. Equal quantities of cold
boiled beets and cold boiled potatoes, chopped fine, thoroughly mixed,
and served with a dressing of lemon juice and whipped cream, make a
palatable salad. Care should be taken in the preparation of these and
the preceding salad, not to chop the vegetables so fine as to admit of
their being eaten without mastication.

BOILED BEETS.--Wash carefully, drop into boiling water, and cook
until tender. When done, drop into cold water for a minute, when the
skins can be easily rubbed off with the hand. Slice, and serve hot with
lemon juice or with a cream sauce.

STEWED BEETS.--Bake beets according to recipe No. 2. Peel, cut in
slices, turn into a saucepan, nearly cover with thin cream, simmer for
ten or fifteen minutes, add salt if desired, and thicken the gravy with
a little corn starch or flour.


CABBAGE.

DESCRIPTION.--The common white garden cabbage is one of the oldest
of cultivated vegetables. A variety of the plant known as red cabbage
was the delight of ancient gourmands more than eighteen centuries ago.
The Egyptians adored it, erected altars to it, and made it the first
dish at their repasts. In this they were imitated by the Greeks and
Romans.

Hippocrates, the Father of Medicine, considered the cabbage one of the
most valuable of remedies, and often prescribed a dish of boiled cabbage
to be eaten with salt for patients suffering with violent colic.
Erasistratus looked upon it as a sovereign remedy against paralysis,
while Cato in his writings affirmed it to be a panacea for all diseases,
and believed the use the Romans made of it to have been the means
whereby they were able, during six hundred years, to do without the
assistance of physicians, whom they had expelled from their territory.
The learned philosopher, Pythagoras, composed books in which he lauded
its wonderful virtues.

The Germans are so fond of cabbage that it enters into the composition
of a majority of their culinary products. The cabbage was first raised
in England about 1640, by Sir Anthony Ashley. That this epoch, important
to the English horticultural and culinary world, may never be forgotten,
a cabbage is represented upon Sir Anthony's monument.

The nutritive value of the cabbage is not high, nearly ninety per cent
being water; but it forms an agreeable variety in the list of vegetable
foods, and is said to possess marked antiscorbutic virtue. It is,
however, difficult of digestion, and therefore not suited to weak
stomachs. It would be impossible to sustain life for a lengthened period
upon cabbage, since to supply the body with sufficient food elements,
the quantity would exceed the rate of digestion and the capacity of the
stomach.

M. Chevreul, a French scientist, has ascertained that the peculiar odor
given off during the boiling of cabbage is due to the disengagement of
sulphureted hydrogen. Cabbage is said to be more easily digested raw
than cooked.

PREPARATION AND COOKING.--A good cabbage should have a
well-developed, firm head, with fresh, crisp leaves, free from
worm-holes and decayed portions. To prepare for cooking, stalk, shake
well to free from dirt, and if there are any signs of insects, lay in
cold salted water for an hour or so to drive them out. Rinse away the
salt water, and if to be boiled, drop into a small quantity of boiling
water. Cover closely and boil vigorously until tender. If cooked slowly,
it will be watery and stringy, while overdone cabbage is especially
insipid and flavorless. If too much water has been used, remove the
cover, that evaporation may go on more rapidly; if too little, replenish
with boiling water. Cabbage should be cooked in a porcelain-lined or
granite-ware sauce pan or a very clean iron kettle. Cabbage may also be
steamed, but care must be taken to have the process as rapid as
possible. Fresh young cabbage will cook in about one hour; old cabbage
requires from two to three hours.


_RECIPES._

BAKED CABBAGE.--Prepare and chop a firm head of young white
cabbage, boil until tender, drain, and set aside until nearly cold. Then
add two well-beaten eggs, salt to taste, and a half cup of thin cream or
rich milk. Mix and bake in a pudding dish until lightly browned.

BOILED CABBAGE.--Carefully clean a nice head of cabbage, divide
into halves, and with a sharp knife slice very thin, cutting from the
center of the head outward. Put into boiling water, cover closely, and
cook rapidly until tender; then turn into a colander and drain, pressing
gently with the back of a plate. Return to the kettle, add salt to
taste, and sufficient sweet cream to moisten well, heat through if at
all cooled, dish, and serve at once. If preferred, the cream may be
omitted, and the cabbage served with tomato sauce or lemon juice as a
dressing.

CABBAGE AND TOMATOES.--Boil finely chopped cabbage in as little
water as possible. When tender, add half the quantity of hot stewed
tomatoes, boil together for a few minutes, being careful to avoid
burning, season with salt if desired, and serve. If preferred, a little
sweet cream may be added just before serving.

CABBAGE CELERY.--A firm, crisp head of cabbage cut in slices half
an inch or an inch thick, and then again into pieces four or five inches
long and two or three inches wide, makes a quite appetizing substitute
for celery.

CABBAGE HASH.--Chop fine, equal parts of cold boiled potatoes and
boiled cabbage, and season with salt. To each quart of the mixture add
one half or three fourths of a cup of thin cream; mix well and boil till
well heated.

CHOPPED CABBAGE OR CABBAGE SALAD.--Take one pint of finely chopped
cabbage; pour over it a dressing made of three tablespoonfuls of lemon
juice, two tablespoonfuls of sugar, and a half cup of whipped cream,
thoroughly beaten together in the order named; or serve with sugar and
diluted lemon juice.

MASHED CABBAGE.--Cut a fine head of cabbage into quarters, and cook
until tender. A half hour before it is done, drop in three good-sized
potatoes. When done, take all up in a colander together, press out the
water, and mash very fine. Season with cream, and salt if desired.

STEWED CABBAGE. Chop nice cabbage quite fine, and put it into
boiling water, letting it boil twenty minutes. Turn into a colander and
drain thoroughly; return to the kettle, cover with milk, and let it boil
till perfectly tender; season with salt and cream to taste. The beaten
yolk of an egg, stirred in with the cream, is considered an improvement
by some.


CAULIFLOWER AND BROCCOLI.

DESCRIPTION.--These vegetables are botanically allied to the
cabbage, and are similar in composition. They are entirely the product
of cultivation, and constitute the inflorescence of the plant, which
horticultural art has made to grow into a compact head of white color in
the cauliflower, and of varying shades of buff, green, and purple in the
broccoli. There is very little difference between the two aside from the
color, and they are treated alike for culinary purposes. They were known
to the Greeks and Romans, and highly appreciated by connoisseurs. They
are not as nutritious as the cabbage, but have a more delicate and
agreeable flavor.

PREPARATION AND COOKING.--The leaves should be green and fresh, and
the heads of cauliflower creamy white; when there are dark spots, it is
wilted. The color of broccoli will depend upon the variety, but the head
should be firm, with no discolorations. To prepare, pick off the outside
leaves, cut the stalk squarely across, about two inches below the
flower, and if very thick, split and wash thoroughly in several waters;
or better still, hold it under the faucet, flower downward, and allow a
constant stream of water to fall over it for several minutes; then place
top downward in a pan of lukewarm salted water, to drive out any insects
which may be hidden in it; examine carefully for worms just the color of
the stalk; tie in a net (mosquito netting, say) to prevent breaking, or
place the cauliflower on a plate in a steamer, and boil, or steam, as is
most convenient. The time required for cooking will vary from twenty to
forty minutes.


_RECIPES._

(The recipes given are applicable to both broccoli and cauliflower.)

BOILED CAULIFLOWER.--Prepare, divide into neat branches, and tie
securely in a net. Put into boiling milk and water, equal quantities,
and cook until the main stalks are tender. Boil rapidly the first five
minutes, afterward more moderately, to prevent the flower from becoming
done before the stalks. Serve on a hot dish with cream sauce or diluted
lemon juice.

BROWNED CAULIFLOWER.--Beat together two eggs, a little salt, four
tablespoonfuls of sweet cream, and a small quantity of grated bread
crumbs well moistened with a little milk, till of the consistency of
batter. Steam the cauliflower until tender, separate it into small
bunches, dip each top in the mixture, and place in nice order in a
pudding dish; put in the oven and brown.

CAULIFLOWER WITH EGG SAUCE.--Steam the cauliflower until tender,
separate into small portions, dish, and serve with an egg sauce prepared
as directed for parsnips on page 244.

CAULIFLOWER WITH TOMATO SAUCE.--Boil or steam the cauliflower until
tender. In another dish prepare a sauce with a pint of strained stewed
smooth in a little water, and salted to taste. When the cauliflower is
tender, dish, and pour over it the hot tomato sauce. If preferred, a
tablespoonful of thick sweet cream may be added to the sauce before
using.

STEWED CAULIFLOWER.--Boil in as little water as possible, or steam
until tender; separate into small portions, add milk, cream and salt to
taste; stew together for a few minutes, and serve.

SCOLLOPED CAULIFLOWER.--Prepare the cauliflower, and steam or boil
until tender. If boiled, use equal quantities of milk and water.
Separate into bunches of equal size, place in a pudding dish, cover with
a white or cream sauce, sprinkle with grated bread crumbs, and brown in
the oven.


SPINACH.

DESCRIPTION.--This plant is supposed to be a native of western
Arabia. There are several varieties which are prepared and served as
"greens." Spinach is largely composed of water. It is considered a
wholesome vegetable, with slightly laxative properties.

PREPARATION AND COOKING.--Use only tender plants or the tender
leaves of the older stalks, and be sure to have enough, as spinach
shrinks greatly. A peck is not too much for a family of four or five.
Pick it over very carefully, trim off the roots and decayed leaves, and
all tough, stringy stalks, and the coarse fibers of the leaves, as those
will not cook tender until the leaves are overdone. Wash in several
waters, lifting grit. Shake each bunch well. Spinach is best cooked in
its own juices; this may be best accomplished by cooking it in a double
boiler, or if placed in a pot and slowly heated, it will however, be
stirred frequently at first, to prevent burning; cover closely and cook
until tender. The time required will vary from twenty minutes to half an
hour or more. If water is used in the cooking, have a half kettleful
boiling when the spinach is put in, and continue to boil rapidly until
the leaves are perfectly tender; then drain in a colander, press with
the back of a plate to extract all water, chop very fine, and either
serve with lemon juice as a dressing, or add a half cup of sweet cream
with or without a teaspoonful of sugar. Boil up once, stirring
constantly, and serve very hot. A garnish of sliced boiled eggs is often
employed with this vegetable.


CELERY.

DESCRIPTION.--The common celery is a native of Great Britain. In
its wild state it has a strong, disagreeable taste and smell, and is
known as _smallage_. By cultivation it becomes more mild and sweet. It
is usually eaten uncooked as a salad herb, or introduced into soups as a
flavouring. In its raw state, it is difficult of digestion.

Celery from the market may be kept fresh for some time by wrapping the
bunches in brown paper, sprinkling them with water, then wrapping in a
damp cloth and putting in some cool, dark place.


_RECIPES_

CELERY SALAD.--Break the stems apart, cut off all green portions,
and after washing well put in cold water for an hour or so before
serving.

STEWED CELERY.--Cut the tender inner parts of celery heads into
pieces about a finger long. The outer and more fibrous stalks may be
saved to season soups. Put in a stewpan, and add sufficient water to
cover; then cover the pan closely, and set it where it will just simmer
for an hour, or until the celery is perfectly tender. When cooked, add a
pint of rich milk, part cream if you have it, salt to taste, and when
boiling, stir in a tablespoon of flour rubbed smooth in a little milk.
Boil up once and serve.

STEWED CELERY NO. 2.--Cut the white part of fine heads of celery
into small pieces, blanch in boiling water, turn into a colander, and
drain. Heat a cup and a half of milk to boiling in a stewpan; add the
celery, and stew gently until tender. Remove the celery with a skimmer,
and stir into the milk the beaten yolks of two eggs and one half cup of
cream. Cook until thickened; pour over the celery, and serve.

CELERY WITH TOMATO SAUCE.--Prepare the celery as in the preceding
recipe, and cook until tender in a small quantity of boiling water.
Drain in a colander, and for three cups of stewed celery prepare a sauce
with a pint of strained stewed tomato, heated to boiling and thickened
with a tablespoonful of flour rubbed smooth in a little cold water. If
desired, add a half cup of thin cream. Turn over the celery, and serve
hot.

CELERY AND POTATO HASH.--To three cups of cold boiled or baked
potato, chopped rather fine, add one cup of cooked celery, minced. Put
season. Heat to boiling, tossing and stirring so that the whole will be
heated throughout, and serve hot.


ASPARAGUS.

DESCRIPTION.--The asparagus is a native of Europe, and in its wild
state is a sea-coast plant. The young shoots form the edible portion.
The plant was known to the ancient Greeks and Romans, who not only used
it as a table delicacy but considered it very useful in the treatment of
internal diseases. Roman cooks provided themselves with a supply of the
vegetable for winter use by cutting fine heads and drying them. When
wanted, they were put into hot water and gently cooked.

The asparagus is remarkable as containing a crystalline alkaloid called
_asparagin_, which is thought to possess diuretic properties.

PREPARATION AND COOKING.--Select fresh and tender asparagus. Those
versed in its cultivation, assert that it should be cut at least three
times a week, and barely to the ground. If it is necessary to keep the
bunches for some time before cooking, stand them, tops uppermost, in
water about one half inch deep, in the cellar or other cool place. Clean
each stalk separately by swashing back and forth in a pan of cold water
till perfectly free from sand, then break off all the tough portions,
cut in equal lengths, tie in bunches of half a dozen or more with soft
tape, drop into boiling water barely sufficient to cover, and simmer
gently until perfectly tender.

If the asparagus is to be stewed, break: (not cut) into small pieces;
when it will not snap off quickly, the stalk is too tough for use.

Asparagus must be taken from the water just as soon as tender, while yet
firm in appearance. If boiled soft, it loses its flavor and is
uninviting. It is a good plan when it is to be divided before cooking,
if the stalks are not perfectly tender, to boil the hardest portions
first. Asparagus cooked in bunches is well done, if, when held by the
thick end in a horizontal position between the fingers, it only bends
lightly and does not fall heavily down.

The time required for boiling asparagus depends upon its freshness and
age. Fresh, tender asparagus cooks in a very few minutes, so quickly,
indeed, that the Roman emperor Augustus, intimating that any affair must
be concluded without delay, was accustomed to say, "Let that be done
quicker than you can cook asparagus." Fifteen or twenty minutes will
suffice if young and fresh; if old, from thirty to fifty minutes will be
required.


_RECIPES._

ASPARAGUS AND PEAS.--Asparagus and green peas make a nice dish
served together, and if of proportionate age, require the same length of
time to cook. Wash the asparagus, shell and look over the peas, put
together into boiling water, cook, and serve as directed for stewed
asparagus.

ASPARAGUS POINTS.--Cut of enough heads in two-inch lengths to make
three pints. Put into boiling water just sufficient to cover. When
tender, drain off the water, add a half cup of cream, and salt if
desired. Serve at once.

ASPARAGUS ON TOAST.--Cook the asparagus in bunches, and when
tender, drain and place on slices of nicely browned toast moistened in
the asparagus liquor. Pour over all a cream sauce prepared as directed
below.

ASPARAGUS WITH CREAM SAUCE.--Thoroughly wash, tie in small bunches,
and put into boiling water; boil till perfectly tender. Drain
thoroughly, untie the bunches, place the stalks all the same way upon a
hot plate, with a dressing prepared as follows: Let a pint of sweet
cream (about six hours old is best) come to the boiling point, and stir
into it salt to taste and a level tablespoonful of flour rubbed smooth
with a little cold cream.

ASPARAGUS WITH EGG SAUCE.--Prepare and cook asparagus as directed
above. When tender, drain thoroughly, and serve on a hot dish or on
slices of nicely browned toast, with an egg sauce prepared in the
following manner: Heat a half cup of rich milk to boiling, add salt, and
turn into it very slowly the well-beaten yolk of an egg, stirring
constantly at the same time. Let the whole just thicken, and remove from
the fire at once.

STEWED ASPARAGUS.--Wash, break into inch pieces, simmer till tender
in water just to cover, add sufficient rich milk, part cream if
convenient, to make a gravy, thicken slightly with flour, a teaspoonful
to a pint of milk; add salt if desired, boil up together once, and
serve.


SEA-KALE.

DESCRIPTION.--This plant, a native of Britain, and much esteemed as
a vegetable in England and on the Continent, is also in its wild state a
sea-coast plant. When properly cooked, it is nutritious and easy of
digestion. In appearance and flavor it greatly resembles asparagus, and
the suggestions for cooking and recipes given for that vegetable are
applicable to sea-kale.


LETTUCE AND RADISH.

DESCRIPTION.--These two vegetables, although wholly different, the
one being the leaf of a plant, the other the root, are both so commonly
served as relishes that we will speak of them together. Both have long
been known and used. Wild lettuce is said to be the bitter herb which
the Hebrews ate with the Paschal lamb. The ancient Greek and Roman
epicures valued lettuce highly, and bestowed great care upon its
cultivation, in some instances watering the plants with sweet wine
instead of water, in order to communicate to them a delicate perfume and
flavor. The common garden lettuce of the present day is a hardy plant,
which supplies an agreeable, digestible, and, when served with a
wholesome dressing, unobjectionable salad.

The common radish is supposed to be indigenous to China. Ancient writers
on foods mention the radish as used by the early Greeks and Romans, who
fancied that at the end of three years its seed would produce cabbages.
They had also the singular custom of making the radish the ignominious
projectile with which in times of tumult the mob pursued persons whose
political opinions had made them obnoxious. When quiet was restored, the
disgraced vegetable was boiled and eaten with oil and vinegar. Common
garden radishes are of different shapes and of various colors on the
outside, there being black, violet, red, and white radishes. The inside
portion of all, however, is white. They are sometimes cooked, but more
commonly served raw. A dish of crisp, coral radishes adds beauty to the
appearance of the table, but they are not possessed of a high nutritive
value, being very similar to the turnip in composition, and unless very
young, tender, and when eaten thoroughly masticated, are quite difficult
of digestion.


_RECIPES._

LETTUCE.--Wash well, put into cold water, and set on ice or on the
cellar bottom for an hour or more before using. Dry the leaves with a
soft towel and use whole or tear into convenient pieces with a silver
fork; never cut with a knife. Serve with a dressing prepared of equal
quantities of lemon juice and sugar, diluted with a little ice water;
or, with a dressing of cream and sugar, in the proportion of three or
four tablespoonfuls of thin cream to a teaspoonful of sugar. The
dressing may be prepared, and after the sugar is dissolved, a very
little lemon juice (just enough to thicken the cream slightly, but not
sufficient to curdle it) may be added if desired.

RADISHES.--Wash thoroughly young and tender radishes, and arrange
in a glass dish with the taper ends meeting. Scatter bits of cracked ice
among them. An inch of the stem, if left on, serve as a convenience in
handling.


CYMLING, SUMMER SQUASH, OR VEGETABLE MARROW.

DESCRIPTION.--The vegetable marrow (sometimes called cymling) is
thought to be a variety of the common gourd, from which also the pumpkin
and winter squash appear to have been derived. It is easily digested,
but on account of the abundance of water in its composition, its
nutritive value is very low.

PREPARATION AND COOKING.--When very young, most varieties need no
preparation for cooking, aside from washing thoroughly. After cooking,
the skin can be easily rubbed off and the seeds removed. If more mature,
pare thinly, and if large, divide into halves or quarters and scoop out
the seeds. Summer squashes are better steamed than boiled. If boiled,
they should be cooked in so little water that it will be quite
evaporated when they are tender. From twenty to sixty minutes will be
required for cooking.


_RECIPES._

MASHED SQUASH.--Wash, peel, remove seeds, and steam until tender.
Place the squash in a clean cloth, mash thoroughly, squeeze until the
squash is quite dry, or rub through a fine colander and afterward simmer
until neatly dry; season with cream, and a little salt if desired, and
heat again before serving. A teaspoonful of sugar may be added with the
cream, if desired.

SQUASH WITH EGG SAUCE.--Prepare, steam till tender, cut into
pieces, and serve with an egg sauce made the same as directed for
asparagus, page 256.

STEWED SQUASH.--Prepare, cut into pieces, and stew until tender in
a small quantity of boiling water; drain, pressing out all the water;
serve on toast with cream or white sauce. Or, divide in quarters, remove
the seeds, cook in a double boiler, in its own juices, which when done
may be thickened with a little flour. Season with salt if desired, and
serve hot.


WINTER SQUASHES.

The winter squash and pumpkin are allied in nature to the summer squash.

PREPARATION AND COOKING.--Select squashes of a firm texture, wash,
break in pieces with a hatchet if hard-shell, or if the shell is soft,
divide with a knife; remove all seeds, and boil, stew, steam, or bake,
as preferred.

To boil or steam, from thirty minutes to one hour's time will be needed;
to bake, one to two hours.


_RECIPES._

BAKED SQUASH..--The hard-shell varieties are best for baking. Wash,
divide, and lay, shells downward, on the top grate of the oven, or place
in a shallow baking dish with a little boiling water. Boil until tender,
serve in the shell, or scrape out the soft part, mash and serve with two
largo tablespoonful of cream to a pint of squash. If preferred, the
skins may be removed before baking, and the squash served the same as
sweet potato, for which it makes a good substitute.

STEAMED SQUASH.--Prepare the squash, and steam until tender. Mash
and season as for baked squash.


THE PUMPKIN.

DESCRIPTION.--When our forefathers came to this country, they found
the pumpkin growing in the Indian cornfields, and at once made use of
it. Although as food it did not supply what its handsome exterior
promised, yet in the absence of other fruits and relishes, of which the
exigencies of a new country deprived them, they soon found the pumpkin
quite palatable; and the taste, cultivated through necessity, has been
handed down through generations, until the pumpkin stewed and baked in
pies, has become an established favorite.


_RECIPES._

BAKED PUMPKIN.--Wash the pumpkin well on the outside, divide into
quarters if small, into sixths or eighths if large; remove the seeds but
not the rind. Bake as directed for squash. Serve in the rind, dishing it
out by spoonfuls.

STEWED PUMPKIN.--Select a good, ripe pumpkin, and cut in halves;
remove the seeds, slice halfway around, pare, cut into inch pieces, put
over the fire in a kettle containing a small quantity of boiling water,
and stew gently, stirring frequently until it breaks to pieces. Cool,
rub through a colander, and place where it will just simmer, but not
burn, until the water is all evaporated and the pumpkin dry. Pumpkin for
pies is much richer baked like squash, and rubbed through a colander
after the skin has been removed.

DRIED PUMPKIN.--Pumpkin may be dried and kept for future use. The
best way is first to cut and stew the pumpkin, then spread on plates,
and dry quickly in the oven. Dried in this manner, it is easily
softened, when needed, by soaking in a small quantity of water, and is
considered nearly as good as that freshly stewed.


TOMATO.

DESCRIPTION.--The tomato, or "love apple," as it was called in the
early part of the century, is a native of South America and Mexico. It
was formerly regarded as poisonous, and though often planted and prized
as a curiosity in the flower garden, it has only within the last half
century come to be considered as a wholesome article of diet.
Botanically, it is allied to the potato. It is an acid fruit, largely
composed of water, and hence of low nutritive value; but it is justly
esteemed as a relish, and is very serviceable to the cook in the
preparation of soups and various mixed dishes.

PREPARATION AND COOKING.--Tomatoes to be served in an uncooked
state should be perfectly ripe and fresh. The medium-sized, smooth ones
are the best. To peel, pour scalding water over them; let them remain
for half a minute, plunge into cold water, allow them to cool, when the
skins can be easily rubbed off. Tomatoes should always be cooked in
porcelain or granite ware; iron makes them look dark, and being
slightly acid in character, they are not wholesome cooked in tin
vessels.

Tomatoes require cooking a long time; one hour is needed, and two are
better.


_RECIPES._

BAKED TOMATOES.--Fill a pudding dish two thirds full of stewed
tomatoes; season with salt, and sprinkle grated crumbs of good
whole-wheat or Graham bread over it until the top looks dry. Brown in
the oven, and serve with a cream dressing.

BAKED TOMATOES NO. 2. Wash and wipe a quantity of smooth,
even-sized tomatoes; remove the stems with a sharp-pointed knife.
Arrange on an earthen pudding or pie dish, and bake whole in a moderate
oven. Serve with cream.

SCALLOPED TOMATOES.--Take a pint of stewed tomatoes, which have
been rubbed through a colander, thicken with one and one fourth cups of
lightly picked crumbs of Graham or whole-wheat bread, or a sufficient
quantity to make it quite thick, add salt if desired, and a half cup of
sweet cream, mix well, and bake for twenty minutes. Or, fill a pudding
dish with alternate layers of peeled and sliced tomatoes and bread
crumbs, letting the topmost layer be of tomatoes. Cover, and bake in a
moderate oven for an hour or longer, according to depth. Uncover, and
brown for ten or fifteen minutes.

STEWED CORN AND TOMATOES.--Boil dried or fresh corn until perfectly
tender, add to each cup of corn two cups of stewed, strained tomatoes,
either canned or freshly cooked. Salt to taste, boil together for five
or ten minutes, and serve plain or with a little cream added.

TOMATO GRAVY.--Heat to boiling one pint of strained stewed
tomatoes, either canned or fresh, and thicken with a tablespoonful of
flour rubbed smooth in a little water; add salt and when thickened, if
desired, a half cup of hot cream. Boil together for a minute or two and
serve at once.

TOMATO SALAD.--Select perfectly ripe tomatoes, and peel at least an
hour before using. Slice, and place on ice or in a cool place. Serve
plain or with lemon juice or sugar as preferred.

TOMATO SALAD NO. 2.--Use one half small yellow tomatoes and one
half red. Slice evenly and lay in the dish in alternate layers. Powder
lightly with sugar, and turn over them a cupful of orange juice to a
pint of tomato, or if preferred, the juice of lemons may be used
instead. Set on ice and cool before serving.

BROILED TOMATOES.--Choose perfectly ripened but firm tomatoes of
equal size. Place them on a wire broiler, and broil over glowing coals,
from three to eight minutes, according to size, then turn and cook on
the other side. Broil the stem end first. Serve hot with salt to season,
and a little cream.

TOMATO PUDDING.--Fill an earthen pudding dish with alternate layers
of stale bread and fresh tomatoes, peeled, sliced, and sprinkled lightly
with sugar. Cover the dish and bake.

STEWED TOMATOES.--Peel and slice the tomatoes. Put them into a
double boiler, without the addition of water, and stew for an hour or
longer. When done, serve plain with a little sugar added, or season with
salt and a tablespoonful of rather thick sweet cream to each pint of
tomatoes. If the tomatoes are thin and very juicy, they may be thickened
with a little flour rubbed smooth in a little cold water. They are much
better, however, to stew a longer time until the water they contain is
sufficiently evaporated to make them of the desired consistency. The
stew may also be thickened, if desired, by the addition of bread crumbs,
rice, or macaroni.

TOMATO WITH OKRA.--Wash the okra, cut off the stem and nibs, and
slice thin. For a quart of sliced okra, peel and slice three large
tomatoes. Stew the tomatoes for half an hour, then add the okra, and
simmer together for half an hour longer. Season with salt and a little
cream.


EGG PLANT.

DESCRIPTION.--The egg plant, a vegetable indigenous to the East
Indies, is somewhat allied in character to the tomato. In shape, it
resembles an egg, from which fact it doubtless derives its name. It
ranks low in nutritive value. When fresh, the plant is firm and has a
smooth skin.


_RECIPES._

SCALLOPED EGG PLANT.--Pare a fresh egg plant. If large, divide in
quarters, if small, in halves, and put to cook in boiling water. Cook
until it can be easily pierced with a straw, and drain in a colander.
Turn into a hot dish, and beat with a silver fork until finely broken.
Measure the egg plant, and add to it an equal quantity of graded bread
crumbs, a little salt, and a tablespoonful of thick sweet cream. Lastly,
add one well beaten egg. Put in an earthen pudding dish, and brown in
the oven until the egg is set, and the whole is heated throughout but
not dry.

BAKED EGG PLANT.--Wash and cook whole in boiling water until
tender. Divide in halves, remove the inside with a spoon, taking care
not to break the skin. Beat the egg plant smooth with a fork. Season
with salt and cream, and if desired, a stalk of celery or a small slice
of onion very finely minced, for flavor. Put back in the skin, sprinkle
the top with bread crumbs, and brown the outside uppermost in the oven.


CUCUMBER.

DESCRIPTION.--The cucumber is a native of Southern Asia, although
it is quite commonly cultivated in most civilized countries. It formed a
part of the dietary of the Israelites when in Egypt, where it grew very
plentifully. The ancient Greeks held the cucumber in high esteem, and
attributed to it wonderful properties.

The cucumber is not a nutritious vegetable, and when served in its raw
state, as it so generally is, dressed with salt, vinegar, pepper, and
similar condiments, it is an exceedingly indigestible article. If it is
to be eaten at all, it should first be cooked. It may be pared, divided
in quarters, the seeds removed, and cooked in a small quantity of water
until perfectly tender, and served on toast with an egg sauce or a cream
sauce; or it may be prepared the same as directed for Escalloped Egg
Plant.


SALSIFY, OR VEGETABLE OYSTER.

DESCRIPTION.--The vegetable oyster plant, sometimes called purple
goat's-beard, or salsify, is indigenous to some portions of Great
Britain. The long, slender root becomes fleshy and tender under
cultivation, with a flavor, when cooked, somewhat resembling that of the
mollusk for which it is named. On this account, it is much esteemed for
soups. A variety of the plant grows near the line of perpetual snow, and
forms the principal article of fresh vegetable food in the dietary of
Kurdistan.

PREPARATION AND COOKING.--Select fresh and unshriveled roots, wash
and scrape well, dropping into cold water as soon as cleaned, to prevent
discoloration. If the roots are covered with cold water for a half hour
or more before scraping, they can be cleaned much easier. Use a
porcelain-lined kettle, for cooking, as an iron one will discolor it
and injure its flavor. From twenty minutes to one hour, according to
age, is required to cook it tender.


_RECIPES._

SCALLOPED VEGETABLE OYSTERS.--Boil two quarts of sliced vegetable
oysters in about two quarts of water until very tender. Skim them out,
and fill a pudding dish with alternate layers of crumbs and oysters,
having a layer of crumbs for the top. To the water in which they were
boiled, add a pint and a half of thin cream, salt to taste, boil up, and
thicken with a heaping tablespoonful or two of flour rubbed smooth in a
little cold cream. Pour this over the oysters and crumbs, and bake a
half hour. If this is not enough to cover well, add more cream or milk.
Stewed tomatoes are a nice accompaniment for escalloped vegetable
oysters.

STEWED VEGETABLE OYSTERS.--Wash, scrape, and cut into slices not
more than one half inch in thickness. Put into a small quantity of
boiling water and cook until tender. If a large quantity of water is
used, the savory juices escape, and leave the roots very insipid. When
tender, pour in a cup of rich milk and simmer for five or ten minutes;
add a little flour rubbed smooth in milk, and salt if desired; boil up
once, and serve as a vegetable or on slices of nicely browned toast. If
preferred, a well-beaten egg may be used in the place of flour.


GREEN CORN, PEAS, AND BEANS.

DESCRIPTION.--Corn, peas, and beans in their immature state are so
nearly allied to vegetables, that we give in this connection recipes for
cooking green corn, green beans, and green peas. A general rule
applicable to all is that they should, when possible, be cooked and
eaten the day they are gathered, as otherwise they lose much of their
sweetness and flavor. For corn, select young, tender, well-filled ears,
from which the milk will spurt when the grain is broken with the finger
nail. Beans and peas are fresh only when the pods are green, plump, snap
crisply when broken, and have unshriveled stems. If the pods bend and
appear wilted, they are stale. Corn, peas, and beans are wholesome and
nutritious foods when thoroughly cooked and sufficiently masticated, but
they are almost indigestible unless the hull, or skin, of each pea,
bean, or grain of corn, be broken before being swallowed.


_RECIPES FOR CORN._

BAKED CORN.--Select nice fresh ears of tender corn of as nearly
equal size as possible. Open the husks and remove all the silk from the
corn; replace and tie the husks around the ears with a thread. Put the
corn in a hot oven, and bake thirty minutes or until tender. Remove the
husks before serving.

BAKED CORN NO. 2.--Scrape enough corn from the cob (as directed
below for Corn Pulp) to make one and a half quarts. Put into a baking
dish, season with salt if desired, add enough milk, part cream if
convenient, barely to cover the corn, and bake in a hot oven twenty-five
or thirty minutes.

BOILED GREEN CORN.--Remove the husks and every thread of the silk
fiber. Place in a kettle, the larger ears at the bottom, with sufficient
boiling water nearly to cover. Cover with the clean inner husks, and
cook from twenty to thirty minutes, according to the age of the corn;
too much cooking hardens it and detracts from its flavor. Try a kernel,
and when the milk has thickened, and a raw taste is no longer apparent,
it is sufficiently cooked. Green corn is said to be sweeter, boiled with
the inner husks on. For cooking in this way, strip off all outer husks,
and remove the silk, tying the inner husk around the ear with a bit of
thread, and boil. Remove from the kettle, place in a heated dish, cover
with a napkin and serve at once on the cob. Some recommend scoring or
splitting the corn by drawing a sharp knife through each row lengthwise.
This is a wise precaution against insufficient mastication.

STEWED CORN PULP.--Take six ears of green corn or enough to make a
pint of raw pulp; with a sharp knife cut a thin shaving from each row of
kernels or score each kernel, and with the back of the knife scrape out
the pulp, taking care to leave the hulls on the cob. Heat a cup and a
half of rich milk--part cream if it can be afforded--to boiling, add the
corn, cook twenty or thirty minutes; season with salt and a teaspoonful
of sugar if desired.

CORN CAKES.--To a pint of corn pulp add two well-beaten eggs and
two tablespoonfuls of flour; season with salt if desired, and brown on a
griddle. Canned corn finely chopped can be used, but two tablespoonfuls
of milk should be added, as the corn is less moist.

CORN PUDDING.--One quart of corn pulp prepared as for stewing, one
quart of milk, three eggs, and a little salt. Mix the corn with a pint
of the milk, and heat it to boiling. Break the eggs into the remainder
of the milk, and add it to the corn, turn all into an oiled pudding
dish, and bake slowly until the custard is well set.

ROASTED GREEN CORN.--Remove the husks and silk, and place the corn
before an open grate or in a wire broiler over hot coals until the
kernels burst open, or bury in hot ashes without removing the husks.
Score the grains, and serve from the cob.

STEWED GREEN CORN.--Cut the corn from the cob and with the back of
the knife scrape off all the pulp, being careful to leave the hull on
the cob. Put into a stewpan with half as much water as corn, cover
closely and stew gently until thoroughly cooked, stirring frequently to
prevent the corn from sticking to the pan; add cream or milk to make the
requisite amount of juice, and season with salt if desired. A
teaspoonful of white sugar may be added if desired.

Cold boiled corn cut from the cob and stewed a few minutes in a little
milk, makes a very palatable dish.

SUMMER SUCCOTASH.--This maybe made by cooking equal quantities of
shelled beans and corn cut from the cob, separately until tender, and
then mixing them; or the beans may be cooked until nearly soft, an equal
quantity of shaved corn added, and the whole cooked fifteen or twenty
minutes or longer. Season with cream, and salt if desired.

DRIED CORN.--The sweet varieties of corn taken when young and
tender and properly dried, furnish an excellent material for nearly all
purposes to which green corn is put. Take green corn, just right for
eating, have it free from silk; cut the fleshy portion from the cob with
a sharp knife, then with the back of the knife gently press the
remaining pulp from the cob. Spread thinly on plates and put into an
oven hot enough to scald, not scorch it. Watch closely for a half hour
or more, turning and stirring frequently with a fork. When thus
thoroughly scalded, the corn may be left without further attention if
placed in a moderate oven, save an occasional stirring to prevent its
sticking to the plate, until the drying is complete, which ought to be
in about forty-eight hours; however, if one can spend the time to watch
closely and stir very frequently, the drying may be completed in a
single afternoon in a rather hot oven. Be careful that it does not
scorch.

When needed for use, soak over night and cook in accordance with recipes
for Stewed Corn, Succotash, etc., pages 265, 234, only remembering to
allow a longer time.


_RECIPES FOR PEAS._

STEWED PEAS.--If from the garden, pick and shell the peas with
clean hands; if from the market, wash the pods before shelling, so that
the peas will not require washing, as they are much better without. When
shelled, put into a colander and sift out the fine particles and
undeveloped blossoms. If not of equal growth, sort the peas and put the
older ones to cook ten minutes before the others. Use a porcelain
kettle, with one half pint of boiling water for each quart of peas, if
young and tender; older ones, which require longer stewing, need more.
Cover closely, and simmer gently till tender. The time required for
young peas is from twenty-five to thirty minutes; older ones require
forty to fifty minutes. Serve without draining, season with salt and
enough sweet cream to make them as juicy as desired. If preferred, the
juice may be thickened with a little flour.

The peas may be purposely stewed in a larger quantity of water, and
served in their own juices thickened with a little flour and seasoned
with salt.


_RECIPES FOR BEANS._

LIMA BEANS.--Lima beans are not good until they are full grown and
have turned white. Shell, wash, cover with boiling water, and cook about
one hour or until tender. Let the water nearly evaporate, and add milk
or cream thickened with a little flour. Season with salt to taste, boil
up once, and serve.

SHELLED BEANS.--Shell, wash, drop into boiling water sufficient to
cover, and cook until tender. Let the water boil nearly away, and serve
without draining. Season with thin cream, and salt if desired.

STRING BEANS.--Wash well in cold water. Remove the strong fiber, or
strings, as they are called, by paring both edges with a sharp knife;
few cooks do this thoroughly. Break off stems and points, carefully
rejecting any imperfect or diseased pods. Lay a handful evenly on a
board and cut them all at once into inch lengths. Put in a porcelain
kettle, cover with boiling water, and cook from one to three hours,
according to age and variety, testing frequently, as they should be
removed from the kettle just as soon as done. When very young and
tender, only water sufficient to keep them from burning will be needed.
When done, add a half cup of thin cream, and salt to taste. If the
quantity of juice is considerable, thicken with a little flour.


THE ONION.

The onion belongs to a class of foods containing an acrid oil of a
strongly irritating character, on which account it cannot be considered
a wholesome food when eaten raw, as it so generally is. The essential
oil is, however, quite volatile, so that when cooked, after being first
parboiled in two or three waters, its irritating properties are largely
removed. The varieties grown in warm climates are much milder and
sweeter than those grown in colder countries. The onion is valuable for
flavoring purposes. It may also be boiled and served whole with a cream
sauce, or cut in quarters and prepared as directed for Scalloped
Turnips, page 242.


CANNING VEGETABLES.

Most housekeepers experience more difficulty in canning and keeping
vegetables than fruit. This is frequently owing to lack of care to
secure perfect cans, covers, and rubbers, and to cook the vegetables
thoroughly. Whatever is to be canned must be cooked sufficiently to be
eaten, and must be boiling at the time it is put into the cans. Care as
to the cleanliness of the cans and their sterilization is also
important, and after the canning process is completed, all vegetables
put up in glass should be kept in a cool, dark place. The general
directions given for canning fruits should be followed in canning
vegetables.


_RECIPES._

CANNED CORN.--Select corn just ripe enough for table use, and
prepare as directed for stewed corn. It will require from twelve to
fifteen ears to fill sufficiently each quart can. To insure success, the
cans should be so full that when the corn is shrunken by the cooking,
the can will still be well filled. Pack the corn in the cans, working it
down closely by means of the small end of a potato masher, so the milk
will cover the corn and completely fill the can; heap a little more corn
loosely on the top, and screw the covers on sufficiently tight to
prevent water from getting into the can. Place the cans in a boiler, on
the bottom of which has been placed some straw or a rack; also take care
not to let the cans come in contact with each other, by wrapping each in
a cloth or by placing a chip between them. A double layer of cans may be
placed in the boiler, one on top of the other, if desirable, provided
there is some intervening substance. Fill the boiler with cold water so
as completely to cover the cans; place over the fire, bring gradually to
a boil, and keep boiling steadily for four hours. Remove the boiler from
the fire, and allow the cans to cool gradually, tightening the covers
frequently as they cool.

If the corn in the can shrinks, do not open to refill. If cooked
thoroughly, and due care is taken in other particulars, there need be no
failure. Wrap closely in brown paper, and put away in a dark, cool, dry
place.

CANNED CORN AND TOMATOES.--Use about one third corn and two thirds
tomatoes, or in equal portions if preferred. Cook the tomatoes in a
double boiler for an hour and a half or longer; and in another double
boiler, when the tomatoes are nearly done, cook the corn in its own
juices until thoroughly done. Turn them together, heat to boiling, and
can at once.

CANNED PEAS.--Select peas which are fresh, young, and tender.
Shell, pack into perfect cans, shaking and filling as full as possible,
add sufficient cold water to fill them to overflowing, screw on the
covers, and cook and seal the same as directed for canning corn.

CANNED TOMATOES.--Tomatoes for canning should be freshly gathered,
ripe, but not at all softened.

As they are best cooked in their own juices, peel, slice, put into a
double boiler or a porcelain fruit-kettle set inside a dish filled with
boiling water, and cook from one to two hours. Cooked in the ordinary
way, great care will be required to keep the fruit from burning. When
thoroughly cooked--simple scalding will not do--put into cans, and be
sure that all air bubbles are expelled before sealing. Wrap in dark
brown paper, and put in a cool, dry, dark place.

CANNED TOMATOES NO. 2.--Cut the fruit into thick slices, let it
stand and drain until a large portion of the juice has drained off; then
pack solid in new or perfect cans. Allow them to stand a little time,
then again drain off the juice; fill up a second time with sliced
tomatoes, and screw on the top of the cans without the rubbers. Pack
into a wash boiler as directed for canning corn, and boil for two hours,
then put on the rubbers and seal. When cold, tighten the covers and put
away.

STRING BEANS.--Select young and tender beans, string them, and cut
into pieces about one half inch in length. Pack the cans as full as
possible, and fill with water until every crevice between the beans is
full. Screw on the covers and can in the same manner as corn.

Shelled beans may be canned in the same way.

CANNED PUMPKIN AND SQUASH.--These fruits when canned are quite as
desirable for pies as the fresh material. The same general rules should
be followed as in canning other vegetables and fruits.




TABLE TOPICS.

    The word "vegetarian" is not derived from "vegetable," but from the
    Latin, _homo vegetus_, meaning among the Romans a strong, robust,
    thoroughly healthy man.

    AN INTELLECTUAL FEAST.--Professor Louis Agassiz in his early manhood
    visited Germany to consult Oken, the transcendentalist in zoölogical
    classification. "After I had delivered to him my letter of
    introduction," he once said to a friend, "Oken asked me to dine with
    him, and you may suppose with what joy I accepted the invitation.
    The dinner consisted only of potatoes, boiled and roasted; but it
    was the best dinner I ever ate; for there was Oken. Never before
    were such potatoes grown on this planet; for the mind of the man
    seemed to enter into what we ate sociably together, and I devoured
    his intellect while munching his potatoes."

    Dr. Abernethy's recipe for using cucumbers: "Peel the cucumber,
    slice it, pepper it, put vinegar to it, then throw it out the
    window."

    A green son of the Emerald Isle was eating sweet corn from the cob
    for the first time. He handed the cob to the waiter, and asked,
    "Will you plaze put some more beans on my shtick?"

    A French physician styles spinach, _le balai de l'estomac_ (broom of
    the stomach).

    An ox is satisfied with the pasture of an acre or two; one wood
    suffices for several elephants. Man alone supports himself by the
    pillage of the whole earth and sea. What? Has Nature indeed given us
    so insatiable a stomach, while she has given us so insignificant
    bodies? No; it is not the hunger of our stomachs, but insatiable
    covetousness which costs so much.--_Seneca._

    The oftener we go to the vegetable world for our food, the oftener
    we go to the first and therefore the cheapest source of supply. The
    tendencies of all advanced scholars in thrift should be to find out
    plans for feeding all the community, as far as possible, direct from
    the lap of earth; to impress science into our service so that she
    may prepare the choicest viands minus the necessity of making a
    lower animal the living laboratory for the sake of what is just a
    little higher than cannibal propensities.


    _--Dr. B.W. Richardson._


A VOICE FROM THE CORN.

     I was made to be eaten, not to be drank,
     To be husked in a barn, not soaked in a tank;
     I come as a blessing when put in a mill,
     As a blight and a curse when run through a still.
     Make me up into loaves, and your children are fed;
     But made into drink, I will starve them instead.
     In bread I'm a servant the eater shall rule,
     In drink I'm a master, the drinker a fool.
     Then remember my warning; my strength I'll employ,
     If eaten, to strengthen, if drunk, to destroy.

    --_Sel._




SOUPS

Soup is an easily made, economical, and when properly prepared from
healthful and nutritious material, very wholesome article of diet,
deserving of much more general use than is commonly accorded it.

In general, when soup is mentioned, some preparation of meat and bones
is supposed to be meant; but we shall treat in this chapter of a quite
different class of soups, viz., those prepared from the grains, legumes,
and vegetables, without the previous preparation of a "stock." Soups of
this character are in every way equal, and in many points superior to
those made from meat and bones. If we compare the two, we shall find
that soups made from the grains and legumes rank much higher in
nutritive value than do meat soups. For the preparation of the latter,
one pound of meat and bones, in about equal proportion, is required for
each quart of soup. In the bone, there is little or no nourishment, it
being valuable simply for the gelatine it contains, which gives
consistency to the soup; so in reality there is only one half pound of
material containing nutriment, for the quart of soup. Suppose, in
comparison we take a pea soup. One half pound of peas will be amply
enough for a quart. As we take an equal amount of material as basis for
each soup, we can easily determine their relative value by comparing the
amount of nutritive material contained in peas with that of beef, the
most commonly used material for meat soups. As will be seen by reference
to the table of food analyses on page 486, peas contain 87.3 parts
nutritive material, while lean beef contains only 28 parts in one
hundred. Thus the pea soup contains more than three times as much
nourishment as does the beef soup.

Soups prepared from grains and legumes are no more expensive than meat
soups, and many kinds cost much less, while they have the added
advantage of requiring less time and no more labor to prepare.

The greater bulk of all meat soups is water, holding in solution the
essence of meat, the nutritive value of which is of very doubtful
character.

When properly prepared, the solid matter which enters into the
composition of vegetable soups, is so broken up in the process of
cooking, that it is more easily digested than in any other form.

Taken hot at the beginning of a meal, soup stimulates the flow of the
digestive juices, and on account of the bulk, brings a sense of satiety
before an excessive quantity of food has been taken.

In preparing soups from grains, legumes, and vegetables, the material
should be first cooked in the ordinary manner, using as small an amount
of water as practicable, so as the more thoroughly to disintegrate or
break it up. If the material be legumes or grains, the cooking should be
slow and prolonged. The purpose to be attained in the cooking of all
foods is the partial digestion of the food elements; and in general,
with these foods, the more slowly (if continuous) the cooking is done,
the more completely will this be brought about.

When the material is cooked, the next step is to make it homogeneous
throughout, and to remove any skins or cellulose material it may
contain. To do this, it should be put through a colander. The kind of
colander depends upon the material. Peas and beans require a fine
colander, since the skins, of which we are seeking to rid them, would
easily go through a coarse one. To aid in this sifting process, if the
material be at all dry, a small quantity of liquid may be added from
time to time. When the colander process is complete, a sufficient amount
of milk or other liquid may be added to make the whole of the
consistency of rather thick cream.

[Illustration: Chinese Soup Strainer.]

If the material is now cold, it must be reheated, and the salt, if any
is to be used, added. The quantity of salt will depend somewhat upon the
taste of the consumer; but in general, one half teaspoonful to the pint
of soup will be an ample supply. If any particular flavor, as of onion
or celery, is desired, it may be imparted to the soup by adding to it a
slice of onion or a few stalks of celery, allowing them to remain during
the reheating. By the time the soup is well heated, it will be
delicately flavored, and the pieces of onion or celery may be removed
with a fork or a skimmer. It is better, in general, to cook the soup all
that is needed before flavoring, since if allowed to boil, all delicate
flavors are apt to be lost by evaporation. When reheated, add to the
soup a quantity of cream as seasoning, in the proportion of one cup of
thin cream for every quart or three pints of soup.

To avoid the possibility of any lumps or fragments in the soup, pour it
again through a colander or a Chinese soup strainer into the soup
tureen, and serve. It is well to take the precaution first to heat the
strainer and tureen, that the soup be not cooled during the process.

If it is desired to have the soup especially light and nice, beat or
whip the cream before adding, or beat the hot soup with an egg beater
for a few minutes after adding the cream. The well-beaten yolk of an egg
for every quart or three pints of soup, will answer as a very fair
substitute for cream in potato, rice, and similar soups. It should not
be added to the body of the soup, but a cupful of the hot soup may be
turned slowly onto the egg, stirring all the time, in order to mix it
well without curdling, and then the cupful stirred into the whole. Soups
made from legumes are excellent without cream.

The consistency of the soup when done should be about that of single
cream, and equal throughout, containing no lumps or fragments of
material. If it is too thick, it may be easily diluted with hot milk or
water; if too thin, it will require the addition of more material, or
may be thickened with a little flour or cornstarch rubbed to a cream
with a small quantity of milk, used in the proportion of one
tablespoonful for a quart of soup,--heaping, if flour; scant, if
cornstarch,--and remembering always to boil the soup five or ten minutes
after the flour is added, that there may be no raw taste.

The addition of the flour or cornstarch gives a smoothness to their
consistency which is especially desirable for some soups. A few
spoonfuls of cooked oatmeal or cracked wheat, added and rubbed through
the colander with the other material, is valuable for the same purpose.
Browned flour prepared by spreading a cupful thinly on shallow tins, and
placing in a moderately hot oven, stirring frequently until lightly and
evenly browned, is excellent to use both for thickening and flavoring
certain soups.

If whole grains, macaroni, vermicelli, or shredded vegetables are to be
used in the soup, cook them separately, and add to the soup just before
serving.

The nutritive value of soup depends of course upon its ingredients, and
these should be so chosen and combined as to produce the best possible
food from the material employed. Milk is a valuable factor in the
preparation of soups. With such vegetables as potatoes, parsnips, and
others of the class composed largely of starch, and containing but a
small proportion of the nitrogenous food elements, its use is especially
important as an addition to their food value, as also to their
palatableness. Very good soups may, however, be made from legumes, if
carefully cooked with water only.

Soups offer a most economical way of making use of the "left-over"
fragments which might otherwise be consigned to the refuse bucket. A
pint of cold mashed potatoes, a cupful of stewed beans, a spoonful or
two of boiled rice, stewed tomatoes, or other bits of vegetables and
grains, are quite as good for soup purposes as fresh material, provided
they have been preserved fresh and sweet. To insure this it is always
best to put them away in clean dishes; if retained in the dish from
which they were served, the thin smears and small crumbs on the sides
which spoil much sooner than the larger portion, will help to spoil the
rest. One may find some difficulty in rubbing them through the colander
unless they are first moistened. Measure the cold food, and then
determine how much liquid will be needed, and add a part of this before
attempting to put through the colander.

It is difficult to give specific directions for making soups of
fragments, as the remnants to be utilized will vary so much in character
as to make such inapplicable, but the recipes given for combination
soups will perhaps serve as an aid in this direction. Where a sufficient
amount of one kind of food is left over to form the basis of a soup or
to serve as a seasoning, it can be used in every way the same as fresh
material. When, however, there is but a little of various odds and ends,
the general rule to be observed is to combine only such materials as
harmonize in taste.

Soups prepared from the grains, legumes, and vegetables, are so largely
composed of food material that it is important that they be retained in
the mouth long enough for proper insalivation; and in order to insure
this, it is well to serve with the soup _croutons_, prepared by cutting
stale bread into small squares or cubes, and browning thoroughly in a
moderate oven. Put a spoonful or two of the _croutons_ in each plate,
and turn the hot soup over them. This plan also serves another
purpose,--that of providing a means whereby the left-over bits of stale
bread may be utilized to advantage.


_RECIPES._

ASPARAGUS SOUP.--Wash two bunches of fresh asparagus carefully, and
cut into small pieces. Put to cook in a quart of boiling water, and
simmer gently till perfectly tender, when there should remain about a
pint of the liquor. Turn into a colander, and rub all through except the
hard portion. To a pint of asparagus mixture add salt and one cup of
thin cream and a pint of milk; boil up for a few minutes, and serve.

BAKED BEAN SOUP.--Soak a half pint of white beans over night. In
the morning turn off the water, and place them in an earthen dish with
two or two and one half quarts of boiling water; cover and let them
simmer in a moderate oven four or five hours. Also soak over night a
tablespoonful of pearl tapioca in sufficient water to cover. When the
beans are soft, rub through a colander, after which add the soaked
tapioca, and salt if desired; also as much powdered thyme as can be
taken on the point of a penknife and sufficient water to make the soup
of proper consistency if the water has mostly evaporated. Return to the
oven, and cook one half hour longer. A little cream may be added just
before serving.

BEAN AND CORN SOUP.--Cold boiled or stewed corn and cold baked
beans form the basis of this soup. Take one pint of each, rub through a
colander, add a slice of onion, three cups of boiling water or milk, and
boil for ten minutes. Turn through the colander a second time to remove
the onion and any lumps or skins which may remain. Season with salt and
a half cup of cream. If preferred, the onion may be omitted.

BEAN AND HOMINY SOUP.--Soak separately in cold water over night a
cupful each of dry beans and hominy. In the morning, boil them together
till both are perfectly tender and broken to pieces. Rub through a
colander, and add sufficient milk to make three pints. Season with salt,
and stir in a cup of whipped cream just before serving. Cold beans and
hominy may be utilized for this soup.

BEAN AND POTATO SOUP.--Soak a half pint of dry white beans over
night; in the morning drain and put to cook in boiling water. When
tender, rub through a colander. Prepare sliced potato sufficient to make
one quart, cook in as small a quantity of water as possible, rub
through a colander, and add to the beans. Add milk or water sufficient
to make two quarts, and as much prepared thyme as can be taken on the
point of a penknife, with salt to season. Boil for a few minutes, add a
teacup of thin cream, and serve.

BEAN AND TOMATO SOUP.--Take one pint of boiled or a little less of
mashed beans, one pint of stewed tomatoes, and rub together through a
colander. Add salt, a cup of thin cream, one half a cup of nicely
steamed rice, and sufficient boiling water to make a soup of the proper
consistency. Reheat and serve.

BLACK BEAN SOUP.--Soak a pint of black beans over night in cold
water. When ready to cook, put into two and one half quarts of fresh
water, which should be boiling, and simmer until completely dissolved,
adding more boiling water from time to time if needed. There should be
about two quarts of all when done. Rub through a colander, add salt, a
half cup of cream, and reheat. When hot, turn through a soup strainer,
add two or more teaspoonfuls of lemon juice, and serve.

BLACK BEAN SOUP NO. 2.--Soak a pint of black beans in water over
night. Cook in boiling water until tender, then rub through a colander.
Add sufficient boiling water to make about two quarts in all. Add salt,
and one half a small onion cut in slices to flavor. Turn into a double
boiler and reheat. When sufficiently flavored, remove the onion with a
skimmer, thicken the soup with two teaspoonfuls of browned flour, turn
through the soup strainer and serve. If desired, a half cup of cream may
be added, and the onion flavor omitted.

BRAN STOCK.--For every quart of stock desired, boil a cup of good
wheat bran in three pints of water for two or three hours or until
reduced one third. This stock may be made the base of a variety of
palatable and nutritious soups by flavoring with different vegetables
and seasoning with salt and cream. An excellent soup may be prepared by
flavoring the stock with celery, or by the addition of a quantity of
strained stewed tomato sufficient to disguise the taste of the stock. It
is also valuable in giving consistence to soups, in the preparation of
some of which it may be advantageously used in place of other liquid.

BROWN SOUP.--Simmer together two pints of sliced potatoes and one
third as much of the thin brown shavings (not thicker than a silver
dime) from the top of a loaf of whole-wheat bread, in one quart of
water. The crust must not be burned or blackened, and must not include
any of the soft portion of the loaf. When the potatoes are tender, mash
all through a colander. Flavor with a cup of strained, stewed tomatoes,
a little salt, and return to the fire; when hot, add a half cup of
cream, and boiling water to make the soup of proper consistency, and
serve at once. If care has been taken to prepare the crust as directed,
this soup will have a brown color and a fine, pungent flavor exceedingly
pleasant to the taste.

CANNED GREEN PEA SOUP.--Rub a can of green peas through a colander
to remove the skins. Add a pint of milk and heat to boiling. If too
thin, thicken with a little flour rubbed smooth in a very little cold
milk. Season with salt and a half cup of cream. A small teaspoonful of
white sugar may be added if desired.

Green peas, instead of canned, may be used when procurable. When they
have become a little too hard to serve alone, they can be used for soup,
if thoroughly cooked.

CANNED CORN SOUP.--Open a can of green corn, turn it into a
granite-ware dish, and thoroughly mash with a potato-masher until each
kernel is broken, then rub through a colander to remove the skins. Add
sufficient rich milk to make the soup of the desired consistency, about
one half pint for each pint can of corn will be needed. Season with
salt, reheat, and serve. If preferred, a larger quantity of milk and
some cream may be used, and the soup, when reheated, thickened with a
little corn starch or flour. It may be turned through the colander a
second time or not, as preferred.

CARROT SOUP.--For a quart of soup, slice one large carrot and boil
in a small quantity of water for two hours or longer, then rub it
through a colander, add a quart of rich milk, and salt to season.
Reheat, and when boiling, thicken with two teaspoonfuls of flour rubbed
smooth in a little cold milk.

CELERY SOUP.--Chop quite fine enough fresh, crisp celery to make a
pint, and cook it until tender in a very little boiling water. When
done, heat three cupfuls of rich milk, part cream if it can be afforded,
to boiling, add the celery, salt to season, and thicken the whole with a
tablespoonful of flour rubbed smooth in a little cold milk; or add to
the milk before heating a cupful of mashed potato, turn through a
colander to remove lumps, reheat, add salt and the celery, and serve.

CELERY SOUP NO. 2.--Cook in a double boiler a cupful of cracked
wheat in three pints of water for three or four hours. Rub the wheat
through a colander, add a cup of rich milk, and if needed, a little
boiling water, and a small head of celery cut in finger lengths. Boil
all together for fifteen or twenty minutes, until well flavored, remove
the celery with a fork, add salt, and serve with or without the
hard-boiled yolk of an egg in each soup plate.

CHESTNUT SOUP.--Shell and blanch a pint of Italian chestnuts, as
directed on page 215, and cook in boiling milk until tender. Rub the
nuts through a colander, add salt and sufficient milk and cream to make
a soup of the proper consistency, reheat and serve.

COMBINATION SOUP.--This soup is prepared from material already
cooked, and requires two cups of cracked wheat, one and one half cups of
Lima beans, one half cup of black beans, and one cup of stewed tomato.
Rub the material together through a colander, adding, if needed, a
little hot water to facilitate the sifting. Add boiling water to thin to
the proper consistency, season with salt and if it can be afforded a
little sweet cream,--the soup is, however, very palatable without the
cream.

COMBINATION SOUP NO. 2.--Take three and one half cups of mashed
(Scotch) peas, one cup each of cooked rice, oatmeal, and hominy, and two
cups of stewed tomato. Rub the material through a colander, add boiling
water to thin to the proper consistency, season with salt, reheat, and
add, just before serving, two cups of cooked macaroni. If preferred, a
cup of cream may be used in place of the tomato, or both may be omitted.

ANOTHER.--One half cup of cold mashed potato, one cup each of
cooked pearl wheat, barley and dried peas. Rub all through a colander,
add boiling milk to thin to the proper consistency, season with salt and
a half cup of cream.

ANOTHER.--Take three cups of cooked oatmeal, two of mashed white
beans, and one of stewed tomato. Rub the ingredients through a colander,
add boiling milk to thin to the proper consistency, season with salt and
a little cream.

CREAM PEA SOUP.--Soak three fourths of a pint of dried Scotch peas
over night in a quart of water. In the morning put to cook in boiling
water, cover closely and let them simmer gently four or five hours, or
until the peas are very tender and well disintegrated; then rub through
a colander to remove the skins. If the peas are very dry, add a little
water or milk occasionally, to moisten them and facilitate the sifting.
Just before the peas are done, prepare potatoes enough to make a pint
and a half, after being cut in thin slices. Cook the potatoes until
tender in a small amount of water, and rub them through a colander. Add
the potatoes thus prepared to the sifted peas, and milk enough to make
three and one half pints in all. Return to the fire, and add a small
head of celery cut finger lengths, and let the whole simmer together ten
or fifteen minutes, until flavored. Remove the celery with a fork, add
salt and a cup of thin cream. This should make about two quarts of soup.
If preferred, the peas may be cooked without soaking. It will, however,
require a little longer time.

CREAM BARLEY SOUP.--Wash a cup of pearl barley, drain and simmer
slowly in two quarts of water for four or five hours, adding boiling
water from time to time as needed. When the barley is tender, strain off
the liquor, of which there should be about three pints; add to it a
portion of the cooked barley grains, salt, and a cup of whipped cream,
and serve. If preferred, the beaten yolk of an egg may be used instead
of cream.

GREEN CORN SOUP.--Take six well-filled ears of tender green corn.
Run a sharp knife down the rows and split each grain; then with the back
of a knife, scraping from the large to the small end of the ear, press
out the pulp, leaving the hulls on the cob. Break the cobs if long, put
them in cold water sufficient to cover, and boil half an hour. Strain
off the water, of which there should be at least one pint. Put the corn
water on again, and when boiling add the corn pulp, and cook fifteen
minutes, or until the raw taste is destroyed. Rub through a rather
coarse colander, add salt and a pint of hot unskimmed milk; if too thin,
thicken with a little cornstarch or flour, boil up, and serve. If
preferred, a teaspoonful of sugar may be added to the soup. A small
quantity of cooked macaroni, cut in rings, makes a very pretty and
palatable addition to the soup. The soup is also excellent flavored with
celery.

GREEN PEA SOUP.--Gently simmer two quarts of shelled peas in
sufficient water to cook, leaving almost no juice when tender. Rub
through a colander, moistening if necessary with a little cold milk. Add
to the sifted peas an equal quantity of rich milk and a small onion cut
in halves. Boil all together five or ten minutes until the soup is
delicately flavored, then remove the onion with a skimmer; add salt if
desired, and serve. If preferred, a half cup of thin cream may be added
just before serving. Celery may be used in place of the onion, or both
may be omitted.

GREEN BEAN SOUP.--Prepare a quart of fresh string beans by pulling
off ends and strings and breaking into small pieces. Boil in a small
quantity of water. If the beans are fresh and young, three pints will be
sufficient; if wilted or quite old, more will be needed, as they will
require longer cooking. There should be about a teacupful and a half of
liquid left when the beans are perfectly tender and boiled in pieces.
Rub through a colander, return to the kettle, and for each cup of the
bean pulp add salt, a cup and a half of unskimmed milk; boil together
for a few minutes, thicken with a little flour, and serve. The quart of
beans should be sufficient for three pints of soup.

KORNLET SOUP.--Kornlet or canned green corn pulp, may be made into
a most appetizing soup in a few minutes by adding to a pint of kornlet
an equal quantity of rich milk, heating to boiling, and thickening it
with a teaspoonful of flour rubbed smooth in a little cold milk.

KORNLET AND TOMATO SOUP.--Put together equal quantities of kornlet
and strained stewed tomato, season with salt and heat to boiling; add
for each quart one fourth to one half cup of hot thin cream, thicken
with a tablespoonful of flour rubbed smooth in a little water, and
serve. Cooked corn rubbed through a colander may also be used for this
soup.

LENTIL SOUP.--Simmer a pint of lentils in water until tender. If
desired to have the soup less dark in color and less strong in flavor,
the lentils may be first parboiled for a half hour, and then drained and
put into fresh boiling water. Much valuable nutriment is thus lost,
however. When perfectly tender, mash through a colander to remove all
skins; add salt and a cup of thin cream, and it too thick, sufficient
boiling milk or water to thin to the proper consistency, heat again to
boiling, and serve. If preferred, an additional quantity of liquid may
be added and the soup slightly thickened with browned flour.

LENTIL AND PARSNIP SOUP.--Cook together one pint of lentils and one
half a small parsnip, sliced, until tender in a small quantity of
boiling water. When done, rub through a colander, and add boiling water
to make a soup of the proper consistency. Season with salt and if
desired a little cream.

LIMA BEAN SOUP.--Simmer a pint of Lima beans gently in just
sufficient water to cook and not burn, until they have fallen to pieces.
Add more boiling water as needed. When done, rub the beans through a
colander. Add rich milk or water to make of the proper consistency, and
salt to season; reheat and serve. White beans may be used in place of
Lima beans, but they require more prolonged cooking. A heaping
tablespoonful of pearl tapioca or sago previously soaked in cold water,
may be added to the soup when it is reheated, if liked, and the whole
cooked until the sago is transparent.

MACARONI SOUP.--Heat a quart of milk, to which has been added a
tablespoonful of finely grated bread crust (the brown part only, from
the top of the loaf) and a slice of onion to flavor, in a double boiler.
When the milk is well flavored, remove the onion, turn through a
colander, add salt, and thicken with two teaspoonfuls of flour rubbed
smooth in a little cold milk. Lastly add one cupful of cooked macaroni,
and serve.

OATMEAL SOUP.--Put two heaping tablespoonfuls of oatmeal into a
quart of boiling water, and cook in a double boiler for two hours or
longer. Strain as for gruel, add salt if desired, and two or three
stalks of celery broken into finger lengths, and cook again until the
whole is well flavored with the celery, which may then be removed with a
fork; add a half cup of cream, and the soup is ready to serve. Cold
oatmeal mush may be thinned with milk, reheated, strained, flavored, and
made into soup the same as fresh material. A slice or two of onion may
be used with the celery for flavoring the soup if desired, or a cup of
strained stewed tomato may be added.

PARSNIP SOUP.--Take a quart of well scraped, thinly sliced
parsnips, one cup of bread crust shavings (prepared as for Brown Soup),
one head of celery, one small onion, and one pint of sliced potatoes.
The parsnips used should be young and tender, so that they will cook in
about the same length of time as the other vegetables. Use only
sufficient water to cook them. When done, rub through a colander and add
salt and sufficient rich milk, part cream if desired, to make of the
proper consistency. Reheat and serve.

PARSNIP SOUP NO. 2.--Wash, pare, and slice equal quantities of
parsnips and potatoes. Cook, closely covered, in a small quantity of
water until soft. If the parsnips are not young and tender, they must be
put to cook first, and the potatoes added when they are half done. Mash
through a colander. Add salt, and milk to make of the proper
consistency, season with cream, reheat and serve.

PEA AND TOMATO SOUP.--Soak one pint of Scotch peas over night. When
ready to cook, put into a quart of boiling water and simmer slowly until
quite dry and well disintegrated. Rub through a colander to remove the
skins. Add a pint of hot water, one cup of mashed potato, two cups of
strained stewed tomato, and one cup of twelve-hour cream. Turn into a
double-boiler and cook together for a half hour or longer; turn a second
time through a colander or soup strainer and serve. The proportions
given are quite sufficient for two quarts of soup. There may need to be
some variation in the quantity of tomato to be used, depending upon its
thickness. If very thin, a larger quantity and less water will be
needed. The soup should be a rich reddish brown in color when done. The
peas may be cooked without being first soaked, if preferred.

PLAIN RICE SOUP.--Wash and pick over four tablespoonfuls of rice,
put it in an earthen dish with a quart of water, and place in a moderate
oven. When the water is all absorbed, add a quart of rich milk, and salt
if desired; turn into a granite kettle and boil ten minutes, or till the
rice is done. Add a half cup of sweet cream and serve. A slice of onion
or stalk of celery can be boiled with the soup after putting in the
kettle, and removed before serving, if desired to flavor.


POTATO AND RICE SOUP.--Cook a quart of sliced potatoes in as little
water as possible. When done, rub through a colander. Add salt, a quart
of rich milk, and reheat. If desired, season with a slice of onion, a
stalk of celery, or a little parsley. Just before serving, add a half
cup of cream and a cup and a half of well-cooked rice with unbroken
grains. Stir gently and serve at once.

POTATO SOUP.--For each quart of soup required, cook a pint of
sliced potatoes in sufficient water to cover them. When tender, rub
through a colander. Return to the fire, and add enough rich, sweet milk,
part cream if it can be afforded to make a quart in all, and a little
salt. Let the soup come to a boil, and add a teaspoonful of flour or
corn starch, rubbed to a paste with a little water; boil a few minutes
and serve. A cup and a half of cold mashed potato or a pint of sliced
baked potato can be used instead of fresh material; in which case add
the milk and heat before rubbing through the colander. A slice of onion
or a stalk of celery may be simmered in the soup for a few minutes to
flavor, and then removed with a skimmer or a spoon. A good mixed potato
soup is made by using one third sweet and two thirds Irish potatoes, in
the same manner as above.

POTATO AND VERMICELLI SOUP.--Breakup a cupful of vermicelli and
drop into boiling water. Let it cook for ten or fifteen minutes, and
then turn into a colander to drain. Have ready a potato soup prepared
the same as in the proceeding; stir the vermicelli lightly into it just
before serving.

SAGO AND POTATO SOUP.--Prepare the soup as directed for Potato
Soup, from fresh or cold mashed potato, using a little larger quantity
of milk or cream, as the sago adds thickness to the soap. When seasoned
and ready to reheat, turn a second time through the colander, and add
for each quart of soup, one heaping tablespoonful of sago which has been
soaked for twenty minutes in just enough water to cover. Boil together
five or ten minutes, or until the sago is transparent, and serve.

SCOTCH BROTH.--Soak over night two tablespoonfuls of pearl barley
and one of coarse oatmeal, in water sufficient to cover them. In the
morning, put the grains, together with the water in which they were
soaked, into two quarts of water and simmer for several hours, adding
boiling water as needed. About an hour before the soup is required, add
a turnip cut into small dice, a grated carrot, and one half cup of fine
pieces of the brown portion of the crust of a loaf of whole-wheat bread.
Rub all through a colander, and add salt, a cup of milk, and a half cup
of thin cream. This should make about three pints of soup.

SPLIT PEA SOUP.--For each quart of soup desired, simmer a cupful of
split peas very slowly in three pints of boiling water for six hours, or
until thoroughly dissolved. When done, rub through a colander, add salt
and season with one half cup of thin cream. Reheat, and when boiling,
stir into it two teaspoonfuls of flour rubbed smooth in a little cold
water. Boil up until thickened, and serve. If preferred, the cream may
be omitted and the soup flavored with a little celery or onion.

SWEET POTATO SOUP.--To a pint of cold mashed sweet potato add a
pint and a half of strained stewed tomato, rub together through a
colander, add salt to season, and half a cup of cream. Reheat and serve.

SWISS POTATO SOUP.--Pare and cut up into small pieces, enough white
turnips to fill a pint cup, and cook in a small quantity of water. When
tender, add three pints of sliced potatoes, and let them boil together
until of the consistency of mush. Add hot water if it has boiled away so
that there is not sufficient to cook the potatoes. When done, drain,
rub through a colander, add a pint and a half of milk and a cup of thin
cream, salt if desired, and if too thick, a little more milk or a
sufficient quantity of hot water to make it of the proper consistency.
This should be sufficient for two and a half quarts of soup.

SWISS LENTIL SOUP.--Cook a pint of brown lentils in a small
quantity of boiling water. Add to the lentils when about half done, one
medium sized onion cut in halves or quarters. When the lentils are
tender, remove the onion with a fork, and rub the lentils through a
colander. Add sufficient boiling water to make three pints in all.
Season with salt, reheat to boiling, and thicken the whole with four
table spoonfuls of browned flour, rubbed to a cream in a little cold
water.

TOMATO AND MACARONI SOUP.--Break a half dozen sticks of macaroni
into small pieces, and drop into boiling water. Cook for an hour, or
until perfectly tender. Rub two quarts of stewed or canned tomatoes
through a colander, to remove all seeds and fragments. When the macaroni
is done, drain thoroughly, cut each piece into tiny rings, and add it to
the strained tomatoes. Season with salt, and boil for a few minutes. If
desired, just before serving add a cup of thin cream, boil up once, and
serve immediately. If the tomato is quite thin, the soup should be
slightly thickened with a little flour before adding the macaroni.

TOMATO CREAM SOUP.--Heat two quarts of strained, stewed tomatoes to
boiling; add four tablespoonfuls of flour rubbed smooth in a little cold
water. Let the tomatoes boil until thickened, stirring constantly that
no lumps form; add salt to season. Have ready two cups of hot rich milk
or thin cream. Add the cream or milk hot, and let all boil together for
a minute or two, then serve.

TOMATO AND OKRA SOUP.--Take one quart of okra thinly sliced, and
two quarts of sliced tomatoes. Simmer gently from one to two hours. Rub
through a colander, heat again to boiling, season with salt and cream if
desired, and serve.

Canned okra and tomatoes need only to be rubbed through a colander,
scalded and seasoned, to make a most excellent soup. If preferred, one
or two potatoes may be sliced and cooked, rubbed through a colander, and
added.

TOMATO SOUP WITH VERMICELLI.--Cook a cupful of broken vermicelli in
a pint of boiling water for ten minutes. Turn into a colander to drain.
Have boiling two quarts of strained, stewed tomatoes, to which add the
vermicelli. If preferred, the tomato may be thickened slightly with a
little cornstarch rubbed smooth in cold water before adding the
vermicelli. Salt to taste, and just before serving turn in a cup of hot,
thin cream. Let all boil up for a moment, then serve at once.

VEGETABLE OYSTER SOUP.--Scrape all the outer covering and small
rootlets from vegetable oysters, and lay them in a pan of cold water to
prevent discoloration. The scraping can be done much easier if the roots
are allowed first to stand in cold water for an hour or so. Slice rather
thin, enough to make one quart, and put to cook in a quart of water. Let
them boil slowly until very tender. Add a pint of milk, a cup of thin
cream, salt, and when boiling, a tablespoonful or two of flour, rubbed
to a cream with a little milk. Let the soup boil a few minutes until
thickened, and serve.

VEGETABLE SOUP.--Simmer together slowly for three or four hours, in
five quarts of water, a quart of split peas, a slice of carrot, a slice
of white turnip, one cup of canned tomatoes, and two stalks of celery
cut into small bits. When done, rub through a colander, add milk to make
of proper consistency, reheat, season with salt and cream, and serve.

VEGETABLE SOUP NO. 2.--Prepare and slice a pint of vegetable
oysters and a pint and a half of potatoes. Put the oysters to cook
first, in sufficient water to cook both. When nearly done, add the
potatoes and cook all till tender. Rub through a colander, or if
preferred, remove the pieces of oysters, and rub the potato only through
the colander, together with the water in which the oysters were cooked,
as that will contain all the flavor. Return to the fire, and add salt, a
pint of strained, stewed tomatoes, and when boiling, the sliced oysters
if desired, a cup of thin cream and a cup of milk, both previously
heated; serve at once.

VEGETABLE SOUP NO. 3.--Soak a cupful of white beans over night in
cold water. When ready to cook, put into fresh boiling water and simmer
until tender. When nearly done, add three large potatoes sliced, two or
three slices of white turnip, and one large parsnip cut in slices. When
done, rub through a colander, add milk or water to make of proper
consistency, season with salt and cream, reheat and serve. This quantity
of material is sufficient for two quarts of soup.

VEGETABLE SOUP NO. 4.--Prepare a quart of bran stock as previously
directed. Heat to boiling, and add to it one teaspoonful of grated
carrot, a slice of onion, and a half cup of tomato. Cook together in a
double boiler for half an hour. Remove the slice of onion, and add salt
and a half cup of turnip previously cooked and cut in small dice.

VELVET SOUP.--Pour three pints of hot potato soup, seasoned to
taste, slowly over the well-beaten yolks of two eggs, stirring briskly
to mix the egg perfectly with the soup. It must not be reheated after
adding the egg. Plain rice or barley soup may be used in place of potato
soup, if preferred.

VERMICELLI SOUP.--Lightly fill a cup with broken vermicelli. Turn
it into a pint of boiling water, and cook for ten or fifteen minutes.
Drain off all the hot water and put into cold water for a few minutes.
Turn into a colander and drain again; add three pints of milk, salt to
taste, and heat to boiling. Have the yolks of three eggs well beaten,
and when the soup is boiling, turn it gradually onto the eggs, stirring
briskly that they may not curdle. Return to the kettle, reheat nearly to
boiling, and serve at once.

VERMICELLI SOUP NO. 2.--Cook a cupful of sliced vegetable oysters,
a stalk or two of celery, two slices of onion, a parsnip, and half a
carrot in water just sufficient to cover well. Meanwhile put a cupful of
vermicelli in a quart of milk and cook in a double boiler until tender.
When the vegetables are done, strain off the broth and add it to the
vermicelli when cooked. Season with salt and a cup of cream. Beat two
eggs light and turn the boiling soup on the eggs, stirring briskly that
they may not curdle. Reheat if not thickened, and serve.

WHITE CELERY SOUP.--Cut two heads of celery into finger lengths,
and simmer in a quart of milk for half an hour. Remove the pieces of
celery with a skimmer. Thicken the soup with a tablespoonful of
cornstarch braided with a little milk, add salt if desired, and a teacup
of whipped cream.




TABLE TOPICS.

    Soup rejoices the stomach, and disposes it to receive and digest
    other food.--_Brillat Savarin._

    To work the head, temperance must be carried into the
    diet.--_Beecher._

    To fare well implies the partaking of such food as does not disagree
    with body or mind. Hence only those fare well who live
    temperately.--_Socrates._

    The aliments to which the cook's art gives a liquid or semi-liquid
    form, are in general more digestible.--_Dictionaire de Medicine._

    In the most heroic days of the Grecian army, their food was the
    plain and simple produce of the soil. When the public games of
    ancient Greece were first instituted, the _athleta_, in accordance
    with the common dietetic habits of the people, were trained entirely
    on vegetable food.

    The eating of much flesh fills us with a multitude of evil diseases
    and multitudes of evil desires.--_Perphyrises, 233 A.D._

     No flocks that range the valley free
     To slaughter I condemn;
     Taught by the Power that pities me,
     I learn to pity them.
     But from the mountain's grassy side
     A guiltless feast I bring;
     A scrip with herbs and fruits supplied
     And water from the spring.

    --_Goldsmith._




BREAKFAST DISHES

A good breakfast is the best capital upon which people who have real
work to do in the world can begin the day. If the food is well selected
and well cooked, it furnishes both cheer and strength for their daily
tasks. Poor food, or good food poorly prepared, taxes the digestive
powers more than is due, and consequently robs brain and nerves of
vigor. Good food is not rich food, in the common acceptation of the
term; it is such food as furnishes the requisite nutriment with the
least fatigue to the digestive powers. It is of the best material,
prepared in the best manner, and with pleasant variety, though it may be
very simple.

"What to get for breakfast" is one of the most puzzling problems which
the majority of housewives have to solve. The usually limited time for
its preparation requires that it be something easily and quickly
prepared; and health demands that the bill of fare be of such articles
as require but minimum time for digestion, that the stomach may have
chance for rest after the process of digestion is complete, before the
dinner hour. The custom of using fried potatoes or mushes, salted fish
or meats, and other foods almost impossible of digestion, for breakfast
dishes, is most pernicious. These foods set completely at variance all
laws of breakfast hygiene. They are very difficult of digestion, and the
thirst-provoking quality of salted foods makes them an important
auxiliary to the acquirement of a love of intoxicating drinks. We feel
very sure that, as a prominent temperance writer says, "It very often
happens that women who send out their loved ones with an agony of prayer
that they may be kept from drink for the day, also send them with a
breakfast that will make them almost frantic with thirst before they get
to the first saloon."

The foods composing the breakfast _menu_ should be simple in character,
well and delicately cooked, and neatly served. Fruits and grains and
articles made from them offer the requisites for the ideal breakfast.
These afford ample provision for variety, are easily made ready, and
easily digested, while at the same time furnishing excellent nutriment
in ample quantity and of the very best quality. Meats, most vegetables,
and compound dishes, more difficult of digestion, are better reserved
for the dinner bill of fare. No vegetable except the potato is
especially serviceable as a breakfast food, and it is much more readily
digested when baked than when prepared in any other manner. Stewing
requires less time for preparation, but about one hour longer for
digestion.

As an introduction to the morning meal, fresh fruits are most desirable,
particularly the juicy varieties, as oranges, grape fruit, melons,
grapes, and peaches, some one of which are obtainable nearly the entire
year. Other fruits; such as apples, bananas, pears, etc., though less
suitable, may be used for the same purpose. They are, however, best
accompanied with wafers or some hard food, to insure their thorough
mastication.

For the second course, some of the various cereals, oatmeal, rye, corn,
barley, rice, or one of the numerous preparations of wheat, well cooked
and served with cream, together with one or more unfermented breads
(recipes for which have been given in a previous chapter), cooked
fruits, and some simple relishes, are quite sufficient for a healthful
and palatable breakfast.

If, however, a more extensive bill of fare is desired, numerous
delicious and appetizing toasts may be prepared according to the recipes
given in this chapter, and which, because of their simple character and
the facility with which they can be prepared, are particularly suitable
as breakfast dishes. The foundation of all these toasts is _zwieback_,
or twice-baked bread, prepared from good whole-wheat or Graham fermented
bread cut in uniform slices not more than a half inch thick, each slice
being divided in halves, placed on tins, or what is better, the
perforated sheets recommended for baking rolls, and baked or toasted in
a slow oven for a half hour or longer, until it is browned evenly
throughout the entire slice. The zwieback may be prepared in
considerable quantity and kept on hand in readiness for use. It will
keep for any length of time if stored in a dry place.

Stale bread is the best for making zwieback, but it should be good,
light bread; that which is sour, heavy, and not fit to eat untoasted,
should never be used. Care must be taken also not to scorch the slices,
as once scorched, it is spoiled. Properly made, it is equally crisp
throughout, and possesses a delicious, nutty flavor.

Its preparation affords an excellent opportunity for using the left-over
slices of bread, and it may be made when the oven has been heated for
other purposes, as after the baking of bread, or even during the
ordinary cooking, with little or no additional heat. If one possesses an
Aladdin oven, it can be prepared to perfection.

Zwieback may also be purchased in bulk, all ready for use, at ten cents
a pound, from the Sanitarium Food Co., Battle Creek, Mich., and it is
serviceable in so many ways that it should form a staple article of food
in every household.

For the preparation of toasts, the zwieback must be first softened with
some hot liquid, preferably thin cream. Heat the cream (two thirds of a
pint of cream will be sufficient for six half slices) nearly to boiling
in some rather shallow dish. Put the slices, two or three at a time, in
it, dipping the cream over them and turning so that both sides will
become equally softened. Keep the cream hot, and let the slices remain
until softened just enough so that the center can be pierced with a
fork, but not until at all mushy or broken. With two forks or a fork and
a spoon, remove each slice from the hot cream, draining as thoroughly as
possible, and pack in a heated dish, and repeat the process until as
much zwieback has been softened as desired. Cover the dish, and keep hot
until ready to serve. Special care should be taken to drain the slices
as thoroughly as possible, that none of them be wet and mushy. It is
better to remove them from the cream when a little hard than to allow
them to become too soft, as they will soften somewhat by standing after
being packed in the dish. Prepare the sauce for the toast at the same
time or before softening the slices, and pour into a pitcher for
serving. Serve the slices in individual dishes, turning a small quantity
of the hot sauce over each as served.


_RECIPES._

APPLE TOAST.--Fresh, nicely flavored apples stewed in a small
quantity of water, rubbed through, a colander, sweetened, then cooked in
a granite-ware dish in a slow oven until quite dry, make a nice dressing
for toast. Baked sweet or sour apples rubbed through a colander to
remove cores and skins, are also excellent. Soften slices of zwieback in
hot cream, and serve with a spoonful or two on each slice. If desired,
the apple may be flavored with a little pineapple or lemon, or mixed
with grape, cranberry, or apricot, thus making a number of different
toasts.

APRICOT TOAST.--Stew some nice dried apricots as directed on page
191. When done, rub through a fine colander to remove all skins and to
render them homogeneous. Add sugar to sweeten, and serve as a dressing
on slices of zwieback which have been previously softened in hot cream.
One half or two thirds fresh or dried apples may be used with the
apricots, if preferred.

ASPARAGUS TOAST.--Prepare asparagus as directed on page 255. When
tender, drain off the liquor and season it with a little cream, and salt
if desired. Moisten nicely browned zwieback in the liquor and lay in a
hot dish; unbind the asparagus, heap it upon the toast, and serve.

BANANA TOAST.--Peel and press some nice bananas through a colander.
This may be very easily done with a potato masher, or if preferred a
vegetable press may be used for the purpose. Moisten slices of zwieback
with hot cream and serve with a large spoonful of the banana pulp on
each slice. Fresh peaches may be prepared and used on the toast in the
same way.

BERRY TOAST.--Canned strawberries, blueberries, and blackberries
may be made into an excellent dressing for toast.

Turn a can of well-kept berries into a colander over an earthen dish, to
separate the juice from the berries. Place the juice in a porcelain
kettle and heat to boiling. Thicken to the consistency of cream with
flour rubbed smooth in a little water; a tablespoonful of flour to the
pint of juice will be about the right proportion. Add the berries and
boil up just sufficiently to cook the flour and heat the berries; serve
hot. If cream for moistening the zwieback is not obtainable, a little
juice may be reserved without thickening, and heated in another dish to
moisten the toast; of if preferred, the fruit may be heated and poured
over the dry zwieback without being thickened, or it may be rubbed
through a colander as for Apricot Toast.

BERRY TOAST NO. 2.--Take fresh red or black raspberries,
blueberries, or strawberries, and mash well with a spoon. Add sugar to
sweeten, and serve as a dressing on slices of zwieback previously
moistened with hot cream.

CELERY TOAST.--Cut the crisp white portion of celery into inch
pieces, simmer twenty minutes or half an hour, or until tender, in a
very little water; add salt and a cup of rich milk. Heat to boiling, and
thicken with a little flour rubbed smooth in a small quantity of milk--a
teaspoonful of flour to the pint of liquid. Serve hot, poured over
slices of zwieback previously moistened with cream or hot water.

CREAM TOAST.--For this use good Graham or whole-wheat zwieback. Have
a pint of thin sweet cream scalding hot, salt it a little if desired,
and moisten the zwieback in it as previously directed packing it
immediately into a hot dish; cover tightly so that the toast may steam,
and serve. The slices should be thoroughly moistened, but not soft and
mushy nor swimming in cream; indeed, it is better if a little of the
crispness still remains.

CREAM TOAST WITH POACHED EGG.--Prepare the cream toast as
previously directed, and serve hot with a well-poached egg on each
slice.

CHERRY TOAST.--Take a quart of ripe cherries; stem, wash and stew
(if preferred the stones may be removed) until tender but not broken;
add sugar to sweeten, and pour over slices of well-browned dry toast or
zwieback. Serve cold.

GRAVY TOAST.--Heat a quart and a cupful of rich milk to boiling,
add salt, and stir into it three scant tablespoonfuls of flour which has
been rubbed to a smooth paste in a little cold milk. This quantity will
be sufficient for about a dozen slices of toast. Moisten slices of
zwieback with hot water and pack in a heated dish. When serving, pour a
quantity of the cream cause over each slice.

DRY TOAST WITH HOT CREAM.--Nicely prepared zwieback served in hot
saucers with hot cream poured over each slice at the table, makes a most
delicious breakfast dish.

GRAPE TOAST.--Stem well-ripened grapes, wash well, and scald
without water in a double boiler until broken; rub through a colander to
remove sends and skins, and when cool, sweeten to taste. If the toast is
desired for breakfast, the grapes should be prepared the day previous.
Soften the toast in hot cream, as previously directed, and pack in a
tureen. Heat the prepared grapes and serve, pouring a small quantity
over each slice of toast. Canned grapes may be used instead of fresh
ones, if desired.

LENTIL TOAST.--Lentils stewed as directed for Lentil Gravy on page
226 served as a dressing on slices of zwieback moistened with hot cream
or water, makes a very palatable toast. Browned flour may be used to
thicken the dressing if preferred.

PRUNE TOAST.--Cook prunes as directed on page 191, allowing them to
simmer very slowly for a long time. When done, rub through a colander,
and if quite thin, they should be stewed again for a time, until they
are about the consistency of marmalade. Moisten slices of zwieback with
hot cream, and serve with a spoonful or two of the prune dressing on
each. One third dried apple may be used with the prune, if preferred.

PEACH TOAST.--Stew nice fresh peaches in a small quantity of water;
when tender, rub through a colander, and if quite juicy, place on the
back of the range where they will cook very slowly until nearly all the
water has evaporated, and the peach is of the consistency of marmalade.
Add sugar to sweeten, and serve the same as prunes, on slices of
zwieback previously moistened with hot cream. Canned peaches may be
drained from their juice and prepared in the same manner. Dried or
evaporated peaches may also be used. Toast with dried-peach dressing
will be more delicate in flavor if one third dried apples be used with
the peaches.

SNOWFLAKE TOAST.--Heat to boiling a quart of milk to which a half
cup of cream, and a little salt have been added. Thicken with a
tablespoonful of flour rubbed smooth in a little cold milk. Have ready
the whites of two eggs beaten to a stiff froth; and when the sauce is
well cooked, turn a cupful of it on the beaten egg, stirring well
meanwhile so that it will form a light, frothy mixture, to which add the
remainder of the sauce. If the sauce is not sufficiently hot to
coagulate the albumen, it may be heated again almost to the boiling
point, but should not be allowed to boil. The sauce should be of a
light, frothy consistency throughout. Serve as dressing on nicely
moistened slices of zwieback.

TOMATO TOAST.--Moisten slices of zwieback in hot cream, and serve
with a dressing prepared by heating a pint of strained stewed tomato to
boiling, and thickening with a tablespoonful of corn starch or flour
rubbed smooth in a little cold water. Season with salt and a half cupful
of hot cream. The cream may be omitted, if preferred.

VEGETABLE OYSTER TOAST.--Cook a quart of cleaned, sliced vegetable
oysters in a quart of water until very tender; add a pint and a half of
rich milk, salt to taste, and thicken the whole with two tablespoonfuls
of flour rubbed to a smooth paste with a little milk. Let it boil for a
few minutes, and serve as a dressing on slices of well-browned toast
previously moistened with hot water or cream.


_MISCELLANEOUS BREAKFAST DISHES._

BREWIS.--Heat a pint of rich milk to boiling, remove from fire, and
beat into it thoroughly and quickly a cup of very fine stale rye or
Graham bread crumbs. Serve at once with cream.

BLACKBERRY MUSH.--Rub a pint of canned or fresh stewed and
sweetened blackberries, having considerable juice, through a fine
colander or sieve to remove the seeds. Add water to make a pint and a
half cupful in all, heat to boiling, and sprinkle into it a cupful of
sifted Graham flour, or sufficient to make a mush of desired thickness.
Cook as directed for Graham Mush, page 90. Serve hot with cream.

DRY GRANOLA.--This prepared food, made from wheat, corn, and oats,
and obtainable from the Sanitarium Food Co., Battle Creek, Mich., forms
an excellent breakfast dish eaten with cold or hot milk and cream.
Wheatena, prepared wholly from wheat; Avenola, made from oats and wheat;
and Gofio, made from parched grains, all obtainable from the same firm,
are each delicious and suitable foods for the morning meal.

FRUMENTY.--Wash well a pint of best wheat, and soak for twenty-four
hours in water just sufficient to cover. Put the soaked wheat in a
covered earthen baking pot or jar, cover well with water, and let it
cook in a very slow oven for twelve hours. This may be done the day
before it is wanted, or if one has a coal range in which a fire may be
kept all night, or an Aladdin oven, the grain may be started in the
evening and cooked at night. When desired for use, put in a saucepan
with three pints of milk, a cupful of well-washed Zante currants, and
one cup of seeded raisins. Boil together for a few minutes, thicken with
four tablespoonfuls of flour rubbed smooth in a little cold milk, and
serve.

MACARONI WITH RAISINS.--Break macaroni into inch lengths sufficient
to fill a half-pint cup. Heat four cups of milk, and when actively
boiling, put in the macaroni and cook until tender. Pour boiling water
over a half cup of raisins, and let them stand until swelled. Ten or
fifteen minutes before the macaroni is done, add the raisins. Serve hot
with or without the addition of cream. Macaroni cooked in the various
ways as directed in the chapter on Grains, is also suitable for
breakfast dishes.

MACARONI WITH KORNLET.--Break macaroni into inch lengths and cook
in boiling milk and water. Prepare the kornlet by adding to it an equal
quantity of rich milk or thin cream, and thickening with a little flour,
a tablespoonful to the pint. When done, drain the macaroni, and add the
kornlet in the proportion of a pint of kornlet mixture to one and one
half cups of macaroni. Mix well, turn into an earthen dish, and brown in
a moderate oven. Left-over kornlet soup, if kept on ice, may be utilized
for this breakfast dish, and the macaroni may be cooked the day before.
Green corn pulp may be used in place of the kornlet.

PEACH MUSH.--Prepare the same as Blackberry Mush using very thin
peach sauce made smooth by rubbing through a colander. Freshly stewed or
canned peaches or nicely cooked dried peaches are suitable for this
purpose. Apples and grapes may be likewise used for a breakfast mush.

RICE WITH LEMON.--Wash a cup of rice and turn it into three pints
of boiling water, let it boil vigorously until tender, and turn into a
colander to drain. While still in the colander and before the rice has
become at all cold, dip quickly in and out of a pan of cold water
several times to separate the grains, draining well afterward. All
should be done so quickly that the rice will not become too cold for
serving; if necessary to reheat, place for a few moments in a dish in a
steamer over a kettle of boiling water. Serve with a dressing of lemon
previously prepared by cutting two fresh lemons in thin, wafer-like
slices, sprinkling each thickly with sugar, and allowing them to stand
for an hour or more until a syrup is formed. When the rice is ready to
serve, lay the slices of lemon on top of it, pouring the syrup over it,
and serve with a slice or two of the lemon for each dish.




TABLE TOPICS.


    The lightest breakfast is the best.--_Oswald._

    A NEW NAME FOR BREAKFAST.--"Tum, mamma, leth's go down to tupper,"
    said a little toddler to her mother, one morning, recently.

    "Why, we don't have supper in the morning," replied the mother.

    "Den leth's do down to dinner," urged the little one.

    "But we don't have dinner in the morning," corrected the mother.

    "Well, den, leth's do down any way," pleaded the child.

    "But try and think what meal we have in the morning," urged mamma.

    "I know," said the toddler, brightening up.

    "What meal do we have in the morning?"

    "Oatmeal. Tum on; leth's do."--_Sel._

    Seneca, writing to a friend of his frugal fare which he declares
    does not cost a sixpence a day, says:--

    "Do you ask if that can supply due nourishment? Yes; and pleasure
    too. Not indeed, that fleeting and superficial pleasure which needs
    to be perpetually recruited, but a solid and substantial one. Bread
    and polenta certainly is not a luxurious feeding, but it is no
    little advantage to be able to receive pleasure from a simple diet
    of which no change of fortune can deprive one."

     Breakfast: Come to breakfast!
     Little ones and all,--
     How their merry footsteps
     Patter at the call!
     Break the bread; pour freely
     Milk that cream-like flows;
     A blessing on their appetites
     And on their lips of rose.

     Dinner may be pleasant
     So may the social tea,
     But yet, methinks the breakfast
     Is best of all the three.
     With its greeting smile of welcome,
     Its holy voice of prayer,
     It forgeth heavenly armor
     To foil the hosts of care.

    --_Mrs. Sigourney._

    Health is not quoted in the markets because it is without
    price.--_Sel._

    It is a mistake to think that the more a man eats, the fatter and
    stronger he will become.--_Sel._




DESSERTS

Custom has so long established the usage of finishing the dinner with a
dessert of some kind, that a _menu_ is considered quite incomplete
without it; and we shall devote the next few pages to articles which may
be deemed appropriate and healthful desserts, not because we consider
the dessert itself of paramount importance, for indeed we do not think
it essential to life or even to good living, but because we hope the
hints and suggestions which our space permits, may aid the housewife in
preparing more wholesome, inexpensive dishes in lieu of the indigestible
articles almost universally used for this purpose.

We see no objection to the use of a dessert, if the articles offered are
wholesome, and are presented before an abundance has already been taken.
As usually served, the dessert is but a "snare and delusion" to the
digestive organs. Compounded of substances "rich," not in food elements,
but in fats, sweets, and spices, and served after enough has already
been eaten, it offers a great temptation to overeat; while the elements
of which it is largely composed, serve to hamper the digestive organs,
to clog the liver, and to work mischief generally. At the same time it
may be remarked that the preparation of even wholesome desserts requires
an outlay of time and strength better by far expended in some other
manner. Desserts are quite unnecessary to a good, healthful, nutritious
dietary. The simplest of all desserts are the various nuts and delicious
fruits with which nature has so abundantly supplied us, at no greater
cost than their harmful substitutes, and which require no expenditure of
time or strength in their preparation. If, however, other forms of
dessert are desired, a large variety may be prepared in a simple manner,
so as to be both pleasing and appetizing.


GENERAL SUGGESTIONS.

In the preparation of desserts, as in that of all other foods it is
essential that all material used shall be thoroughly good of its kind.
If bread is to be used, the crumbs should be dry and rather stale, but
on no account use that which is sour or moldy. Some housekeepers imagine
that if their bread happens to spoil and become sour, although it is
hardly palatable enough for the table, it may be advantageously used to
make puddings. It is indeed quite possible to combine sour bread with
other ingredients so as to make a pudding agreeable to the palate; but
disguising sour bread makes sweets and flavors by no means changes it
into a wholesome food. It is better economy to throw sour bread away at
once than to impose it upon the digestive organs at the risk of health
and strength.

Bread which has begun to show appearance of mold should never be used;
for mold is a poison, and very serious illness has resulted from the
eating of puddings made from moldy bread.

Eggs, to be used for desserts, should always be fresh and good. Cooks
often imagine that an egg too stale to be eaten in any other way will do
very well for use in cakes and puddings, because it can be disguised so
as not to be apparent to the taste; but stale eggs are unfit for food,
either alone or in combination with other ingredients. Their use is
often the occasion of serious disturbances of the digestive organs. Most
desserts in which eggs are used will be much lighter if the yolks and
whites are beaten separately. If in winter, and eggs are scarce, fewer
may be used, and two tablespoonfuls of dry snow for each omitted egg
stirred in the last thing before baking.

Milk, likewise, should always be sweet and fresh. If it is to be heated,
use a double boiler, so that there will be no danger of scorching. If
fresh milk is not available, the condensed milk found at the grocer's is
an excellent substitute. Dissolve according to directions, and follow
the recipe the same as with fresh milk, omitting one half or two thirds
the given amount of sugar.

If dried sweet fruits, raisins, or currants are to be used, look them
over carefully, put them in a colander, and placing it in a pan of warm
water, allow the currants to remain until plump. This will loosen the
dirt which, while they are shriveled, sticks in the creases, and they
may then be washed by dipping the colander in and out of clean water
until they are free from sediment; rinse in two waters, then spread upon
a cloth, and let them get perfectly dry before using.

It is a good plan, after purchasing raisins and currants, to wash and
dry a quantity, and store in glass cans ready for use. To facilitate the
stoning of raisins, put them into a colander placed in a dish of warm
water until plump; then drain, when the seeds can be easily removed.

For desserts which are to be molded, always wet the molds in cold water
before pouring in the desserts.


_SUGGESTIONS FOR FLAVORING, ETC._

TO PREPARE ALMOND PASTE.--Blanch the nuts according to directions
given on page 215. Allow them to dry thoroughly, and pound in a mortar
to a smooth paste. They can be reduced much easier if dried for a day or
two after blanching. During the pounding, sprinkle with a few drops of
cold water, white of egg, rose water, or lemon juice, to prevent them
from oiling.

COCOANUT FLAVOR.--Cocoanut, freshly grated or desiccated, unless in
extremely fine particles, is a very indigestible substance, and when its
flavor is desired for custards, puddings, etc., it is always better to
steep a few tablespoonfuls in a pint of milk for twenty minutes or a
half hour, and strain out the particles. The milk should not be allowed
to boil, as it will be likely to curdle. One tablespoonful of freshly
grated cocoanut or two of the desiccated will give a very pleasant and
delicate flavor; and if a more intense flavor is desired, use a larger
quantity.

ORANGE AND LEMON FLAVOR.--Orange or lemon flavor may be obtained by
steeping a few strips of the yellow part of the rind of lemon or orange
in milk for twenty minutes. Skim out the rind before using for desserts.
Care should be taken to use only the yellow part, as the white will
impart a bitter flavor. The grated rind may also be used for flavoring,
but in grating the peel, one must be careful to grate very lightly, and
thus use only the outer yellow portion, which contains the essential oil
of the fruit. Grate evenly, turning and working around the lemon, using
as small a surface of the grater as possible, in order to prevent waste.
Generally, twice across the grater and back will be sufficient for
removing all the yellow skin from one portion of a lemon. A well-grated
lemon should be of exactly the same shape as before, with no yellow skin
remaining, and no deep scores into the white. Remove the yellow pulp
from the grater with a fork.

TO COLOR SUGAR.--For ornamenting the meringues of puddings and
other desserts, take a little of the fresh juice of cranberries, red
raspberries, currants, black raspberries, grapes, or other colored
juices of fruits, thicken it stiff with the sugar, spread on a plate to
dry, or use at one. It may be colored yellow with orange peel strained
through a cloth, or green with the juice of spinach. Sugar prepared in
this manner is quite as pretty and much more wholesome than the colored
sugars found in market, which are often prepared with poisonous
chemicals.


FRUIT DESSERTS.


_RECIPES._

APPLE DESSERT.--Pare some large tart apples, remove the cores, put
into the cavities a little quince jelly, lemon flavored sugar, or grated
pineapple and sugar, according to the flavor desired. Have as many
squares of bread with the crust taken off as there are apples, and place
a filled apple on each piece of bread, on earthen pie plates; moisten
well with a little quince jelly dissolved in water, lemon juice, or
pineapple juice, according to the filling used. Cover closely, and bake
in a rather quick oven till the apples are tender. Serve with whipped
cream and sugar.

APPLE MERINGUE DESSERT.--Pare and core enough tart, easy-cooking
apples to make a quart when stewed. Cover closely and cook slowly till
perfectly tender, when they should be quite dry. Mash through a
colander, add a little sugar and a little grated pineapple or lemon
peel. Beat light with a silver fork, turn into a pudding dish, and brown
in a moderate oven ten or fifteen minutes. Then cover with a meringue
made with two tablespoonfuls of sugar and the beaten whites of two eggs,
and return to the oven for a moment to brown. Serve cold.

APPLE ROSE CREAM.--Wash, core, slice, and cook without paring, a
dozen fresh snow apples until very dry. When done, rub through a
colander to remove the skins, add sugar to sweeten, and the whites of
two eggs; beat vigorously with an egg beater until stiff, add a
teaspoonful of rose water for flavoring, and serve at once, or keep on
ice. It is especially important that the apples be very dry, otherwise
the cream will not be light. If after rubbing through the colander,
there is still much juice, they should be cooked again until it has
evaporated; or they may be turned into a jelly bag and drained. Other
varieties of apple may be used, and flavored with pineapple or vanilla.
Made as directed of snow apples or others with white flesh and red
skins, the cream should be of a delicate pink color, making a very
dainty as well as delicious dessert.

APPLE SNOW.--Pare and quarter some nice tart apples. Those that
when cooked will be whitest in color are best. Put them into a china
dish, and steam until tender over a kettle of boiling water. When done,
rub through a colander or beat with a fork until smooth, add sugar to
sweeten and a little grated lemon rind, and beat again. For every cup
and a half of the prepared apple allow the white of one egg, which beat
to a stiff froth, adding the apple to it a little at a time, beating all
together until, when taken up in a spoon, it stands quite stiff. Serve
cold, with or without a simple custard prepared with a pint of hot milk,
a tablespoonful of sugar, and the yolks of two eggs.

BAKED APPLES WITH CREAM.--Pare some nice juicy sweet apples, and
remove the cores without dividing. Bake until tender in a covered dish
with a spoonful or two of water on the bottom. Serve with whipped cream.
Or, bake the apples without paring and when done, remove the skins, and
serve in the same manner. The cream may be flavored with a little lemon
or rose if desired. Lemon apples and Citron apples, prepared as directed
on pages 186 and 187, make a most delicious dessert served with whipped
cream and sugar, or with mock cream flavored with cocoanut.

BAKED SWEET APPLE DESSERT.--Wash and remove the cores from a dozen
medium-sized sweet apples, and one third as many sour ones, and bake
until well done. Mash through a colander to make smooth and remove the
skins. Put into a granite-ware dish, smooth the top with a knife, return
to the oven and bake very slowly until dry enough to keep its shape when
cut. Add if desired a meringue made by heating the white of one egg with
a tablespoonful of sugar. Cut into squares, and serve in individual
dishes. The meringue may be flavored with lemon or dotted with bits of
colored sugar.

BANANAS IN SYRUP.--Heat in a porcelain kettle a pint of currant and
red raspberry juice, equal parts, sweetened to taste. When boiling, drop
into it a dozen peeled bananas, and simmer very gently for twenty
minutes. Remove the bananas, boil the juice until thickened to the
consistency of syrup, and pour over the fruit. Serve cold.

BAKED BANANAS.--Bake fresh, firm, yelow bananas with the skins on
fifteen minutes in a moderate oven. Serve hot.

FRESH FRUIT COMPOTE.--Flavor three tablespoonfuls of sugar by
mixing with it a little of the grated yellow rind of an orange, or by
rubbing it over the orange to extract the oil. If the latter method is
used, the square lump sugar will be preferable. Pare, quarter, and slice
three medium-sized tart apples. Peel, remove the seeds, and cut in quite
fine pieces three oranges. Put the fruit in alternate layers in a glass
dish. Sweeten a cupful of fresh or canned raspberry juice with the
flavored sugar, and turn it over the fruit. Put the dish on ice to cool
for a half hour before serving.

GRAPE APPLES.--Sweeten a pint of fresh grape juice with a pint of
sugar, and simmer gently until reduced one third. Pare and core without
dividing, six or eight nice tart apples, and stew very slowly in the
grape juice until tender, but not broken. Remove the apples and boil the
juice (if any remain) until thickened to the consistency of syrup. Serve
cold with a dressing of whipped cream. Canned grape pulp or juice may be
utilized for this purpose. Sweet apples may be used instead of tart
ones, and the sugar omitted.

PEACH CREAM.--Pare and stone some nice yellow peaches, and mash
with a spoon or press through a colander with a potato masher. Allow
equal quantities of the peach pulp and cream, add a little sugar to
sweeten, and beat all together until the cream is light. Serve in
saucers or glasses with currant buns. A banana cream may be prepared in
the same manner.

PRUNE DESSERT.--Prepare some prune marmalade as directed on page
191. Put in a square granite-ware dish, which place inside another dish
containing hot water, and cook it in a slow oven until the marmalade is
dry enough to retain its shape when cut with a knife. If desired add a
meringue as for baked sweet apple dessert, dotting the top with pink
sugar. Serve in squares in individual dishes.


DESSERTS MADE OF FRUIT WITH GRAINS, BREAD, ETC.


_RECIPES._

APPLE SANDWICH.--Mix half a cup of sugar with the grated yellow
rind of half a lemon. Stir half a cup of cream into a quart of soft
bread crumbs; prepare three pints of sliced apples, sprinkled with the
sugar; fill a pudding dish with alternate layers of moistened crumbs and
sliced apples, finishing with a thick layer of crumbs. Unless the apples
are very juicy, add half a cup of cold water, and unless quite tart,
have mixed with the water the juice of half a lemon. Cover and bake
about one hour. Remove the cover toward the last, that the top may brown
lightly. Serve with cream. Berries or other acid fruits may be used in
place of apples, and rice or cracked wheat mush substituted for bread
crumbs.

APPLE SANDWICH NO. 2.--Prepare and stew some apples as for sauce,
allowing them to become quite dry; flavor with lemon, pineapples,
quince, or any desired flavor. Moisten slices of zwieback in hot cream
as for toast. Spread a slice with the apple mixture, cover with a second
slice of the moistened zwieback, then cut in squares and serve, with or
without a dressing of mock cream. If desired to have the sandwiches
particularly dainty, cut the bread from which the zwieback is prepared
in rounds, triangles, or stars before toasting.

BAKED APPLE PUDDING.--Pour boiling water over bread crumbs; when
soft, squeeze out all the water, and line the bottom and sides of an
oiled earthen pudding dish with the crumbs. Fill the interior with
sliced apples, and cover with a layer of bread crumbs. Bake in a covered
dish set in a pan of hot water, until the apples are tender; then remove
the cover and brown. Loosen the pudding with a knife, invert on a plate,
and it will turn out whole. Serve with sugar and cream.

BARLEY FRUIT PUDDING.--Mix together a pint of cold, well steamed
pearl barley, a cup of finely minced tart apples, three fourths of a cup
of chopped and seeded raisins, a third of a cup of sugar, and a cup of
boiling water and turn into a pudding dish; cover, and place the dish in
the oven in a pan of hot water, and bake slowly an hour and a half, or
until the water has become quite absorbed and the fruit tender. Serve
warm with a water, adding sugar to taste, and thickening with a half
teaspoonful of cornstarch. Any tart fruit jelly may be used, or the
pudding may be served with cream and sugar flavored with a little grated
lemon rind.

BARLEY FIG PUDDING.--One pint of well-steamed pearl barley, two
cups of finely chopped best figs, one half cup of sugar, one half cup of
thin sweet cream, and one and one half cups of fresh milk. Mix all
thoroughly, turn into an earthen pudding dish; place it in the oven in
a pan half full of hot water, and bake slowly till the milk is nearly
absorbed. The pudding should be stirred once or twice during the baking,
so that the figs will be distributed evenly, instead of rising to the
top.

BLACKBERRY CORNSTARCH PUDDING.--Take two quarts of well-ripened
blackberries which have been carefully looked over, put them into a
granite-ware boiler with half a cup of water, and stew for twenty
minutes. Add sugar to sweeten, and three heaping tablespoonfuls of
cornstarch rubbed to a cream with a little cold water. Cook until
thickened, pour into molds, and cool. Serve cold with milk or cream.
Other fresh or canned berries may be used in the same way.

COCOANUT AND CORNSTARCH BLANCMANGE.--Simmer two tablespoonfuls of
desiccated cocoanut in a pint of milk for twenty minutes, and strain
through a fine sieve. If necessary, add more cold milk to make a full
pint. Add a tablespoonful of sugar, heat to boiling, and stir in
gradually two tablespoonfuls of cornstarch rubbed smooth in a very
little cold milk. Cook five minutes, turn into cups, and serve cold with
fruit sauce or cream.

CORNSTARCH BLANCMANGE.--Stir together two tablespoonfuls of
cornstarch, half a cup of sugar, the juice and a little of the grated
rind of one lemon; braid the whole with cold water enough to dissolve
well. Then pour boiling water over the mixture, stirring meanwhile,
until it becomes transparent. Allow it to bubble a few minutes longer,
pour into molds, and serve cold with cream and sugar.

CORNSTARCH WITH RAISINS.--Measure out one pint of rich milk. Rub
two tablespoonfuls of cornstarch perfectly smooth with a little of the
milk, and heat the remainder to boiling, adding to it a tablespoonful of
sugar. Add the braided cornstarch, and let it cook until it thickens,
stirring constantly. Then add a half cup of raisins which have been
previously steamed. This may be served hot with sugar and cream, or
turned into cups and molded, and served cold with lemon, orange, or
other fruit sauce for dressing.

CORNSTARCH WITH APPLES.--Prepare the cornstarch as in the preceding
recipe, omitting the raisins. Place in a pudding dish some lemon apple
sauce, without juice, about two inches deep. Pour the cornstarch over
it, and serve hot or cold with cream.

CORNSTARCH FRUIT MOLD.--Heat a quart of strawberry, raspberry, or
currant juice, sweetened to taste, to boiling. If the pure juice of
berries is used, it may be diluted with one cup of water to each pint
and a half of juice. Stir in four tablespoonfuls of cornstarch well
braided with a little of the juice reserved for this purpose. Boil until
the starch is well cooked, stirring constantly. Pour into molds
previously wet with cold water, and cool. Serve with cream and sugar. A
circle of fresh berries around the mold when served adds to its
appearance.

CORNSTARCH FRUIT MOLD NO. 2.--Wash, stone, and stew some nice
French prunes, add sugar to sweeten, and if there is not an abundance of
juice, a little boiling water. For every one fourth pound of prunes
there should be enough juice to make a pint in all, for which add two
tablespoonfuls of cornstarch, rubbed smooth in a little cold water, and
boil three or four minutes. Pour into cups previously wet in cold water,
and mold. Serve cold with whipped cream. Other dried or canned fruits,
as apricots, peaches, cherries, etc., may be used in place of prunes, if
preferred.

CRACKED-WHEAT PUDDING.--A very simple pudding may be made with two
cups of cold, well-cooked cracked wheat, two and a half cups of milk,
and one half cup of sugar. Let the wheat soak in the milk till
thoroughly mixed and free from lumps, then add the sugar and a little
grated lemon peel, and bake about three fourths of an hour in a moderate
oven. It should be of a creamy consistency when cold, but will appear
quite thin when taken from the oven. By flavoring the milk with
cocoanut, a different pudding may be produced. Rolled or pearl wheat may
be used for this pudding. A cupful of raisins may be added if desired.

CRACKED-WHEAT PUDDING NO. 2.--Four and one half cups of milk, a
very scant half cup of cracked wheat, one half cup of sugar; put
together in a pudding dish, and bake slowly with the dish covered and
set in a pan of hot water for three or four hours, or until the wheat is
perfectly tender, as may be ascertained by dipping a few grains with a
spoon out from the side of the dish.

FARINA BLANCMANGE.--Heat a quart of milk, reserving one half cup,
to boiling. Then add two tablespoonfuls of sugar, and four heaping
tablespoonfuls of farina, previously moistened with the reserved half
cup of milk. Let all boil rapidly for a few minutes till the farina has
well set, then place in a double boiler, or a dish set in a pan of
boiling water, to cook an hour longer. Mold in cups previously wet with
cold water. Serve with sugar and cream flavored with vanilla or a little
grated lemon rind, mock cream, or cocoanut sauce.

Much variety may be given this simple dessert by serving it with a
dressing of fruit juices; red raspberry, strawberry, grape, current,
cranberry, cherry, and plum are all very good. If desired, the milk with
which the blancmange is prepared may be first flavored with cocoanut,
thus making a different blancmange. Fresh fruit, as sliced banana,
blueberries, or strawberries, lightly stirred in just before molding,
make other excellent varieties.

FARINA FRUIT MOLD.--Put a quart of well-sweetened red raspberry
juice into the inner cup of a double boiler. Heat to boiling, and stir
in four heaping tablespoonfuls of farina first moistened with a little
of the juice. Boil up until thickened, then set into the outer boiler,
the water in which should be boiling, and cook for one hour. Pour into
molds previously wet in cold water, and cool. Serve with whipped cream
or mock cream. Currant, strawberry, cherry, or blackberry juice may be
used instead of raspberry. If water be added to dilute the juice, a
little more farina will be needed.

FRUIT PUDDING.--Measure out one quart of rich new milk, reserving
half a pint to wet five large rounded tablespoonfuls of sifted flour.
Add to the milk one even cup of sugar, turn in the flour mixture and
heat to boiling in a farina kettle, stirring all the while to prevent
lumps, and cook till it thickens, which will be about ten minutes after
it begins to boil. Remove from the stove, and beat while it is cooling.
When cool, add sliced bananas or whole strawberries, whortleberries,
raspberries, blackberries, sliced apricots, or peaches. Serve cold.

JAM PUDDING.--Make a jam by mashing well some fresh raspberries or
blueberries and sweetening to taste. Spread over slices of fresh, light
bread or buns, and pile in layers one above another in a pudding dish.
Pour over the layers enough rich milk or thin cream heated to scalding,
to moisten the whole. Turn a plate over the pudding, place a weight upon
it, and press lightly till cold. Cut in slices, and serve with or
without a cream dressing.

PLAIN FRUIT PUDDING OR BROWN BETTY.--Chop together one part seeded
raisins and two parts good tart apples. Fill a pudding dish with
alternate layers of the fruit and bread crumbs, finishing with the bread
crumbs on top. Unless the apples are very juicy, moisten the whole with
a tablespoonful of lemon juice in a cup of cold water, for a pudding
filling a three-pint dish. Cover the dish and place it in a moderate
oven in a pan of hot water, and bake nearly an hour; then remove from
the pan, uncover, and brown nicely. Serve warm with cream and sugar, or
with an orange or lemon sauce. Seeded cherries may be used in place of
the apples and raisins. In that case, each layer of fruit should be
sprinkled lightly with sugar, and the water omitted.

PRUNE PUDDING.--Moisten rather thin slices of stale bread in hot
milk and place in a pudding dish with alternate layers of stewed prunes
from which the stones have been removed, finishing with bread on top.
Pour over the whole a little more hot milk or pure juice or both, and
bake in a moderate over three fourths of an hour. Serve hot or cold with
orange or lemon sauce.

RICE MERINGUE.--Steam a cupful of rice as directed on page 99 until
tender and dry. Heap it loosely on a glass dish, and dot with squares of
cranberry or currant jelly. Beat with the whites of two eggs to a stiff
froth with one third cup of sugar, and pile it roughly over the rice.
Serve with cream.

RICE SNOWBALL.--Wash a cupful of good rice and steam until half
done. Have pared and cored without dividing, six large, easy cooking
tart apples. Put a clean square of cheese cloth over a plate, place the
apples on it, and fill them and all the interstices between with rice.
Put the remainder of the rice over and around the apples; tie up the
cloth, and cook in a kettle of boiling water until the apples are
tender. When done, lift from the water and drain well, untie the cloth,
invert the pudding upon a plate and remove the cloth. Serve hot with
cream and sugar or cocoanut sauce.

RICE FRUIT DESSERT.--Cold boiled rice, molded so that it can be
sliced, may be utilized in making a variety of delicious desserts. A
nice pudding may be prepared by filling a dish with alternate layers of
half-inch slices of molded rice and grated tart raw apples the same
thickness. Grate a little lemon rind over each layer. Cover, and place
in the oven in a pan of boiling water, and bake for an hour. Serve with
sugar and cream. Stoned cherries or peaches may be used instead of the
apple.

RICE DUMPLING.--Steam a teacup of rice until tender, and line an
oiled earthen pudding dish, pressing it up around the sides and over the
bottom. Fill the crust thus made with rather tart apples cut in small
slices; cover with rice, and steam until the apples are tender, which
may be determined by running a broom-straw through them. Let stand until
cold, then turn from the dish, and serve with sugar and cream. Any easy
cooking tart fruit, as stoned cherries, gooseberries, etc., may be used
in place of the apples when preferred.

RICE CREAM PUDDING.--Take one cup of good well-washed rice, one
scant cup of sugar, and eight cups of new milk, with a little grated
lemon rind for flavoring. Put all into an earthen pudding dish, and
place on the top of the range. Heat very slowly until the milk is
boiling, stirring frequently, so that the rice shall not adhere to the
bottom of the dish. Then put into a moderately hot oven, and bake
without stirring, till the rice is perfectly tender, which can be
ascertained by dipping a spoon in one side and taking out a few grains.
It should be, when cold, of a rich, creamy consistency, with each grain
of rice whole. Serve cold. It is best if made the day before it is
needed. If preferred, the milk may be first flavored with cocoanut,
according to the directions given on page 298.

RICE PUDDING WITH RAISINS.--Wash thoroughly one half cup of rice,
and soak for two hours in warm water. Drain off the water, add two
tablespoonfuls of sugar, one half cup of raisins, and four cups of milk.
Put in an earthen pudding dish and cook for two hours in a moderate
oven, stirring once or twice before the rice begins to swell, then add a
cup of hot milk, and cook for an hour longer.

RED RICE MOLD.--Take one and one half pints of red currants and
one half pint of red raspberries, and follow directions on page 209 for
extracting their juice. The juice may be diluted with one part water to
two of juice if desired. Sweeten to taste, and for each pint when
boiling stir in two tablespoonfuls of ground rice or rice flour rubbed
smooth in a little of the juice which may be retained for the purpose.
Pour into molds, cool, and serve with whipped cream.

RICE AND FRUIT DESSERT.--Steam a cup of good well-washed rice in
milk till tender. Prepare some tart apples by paring, dividing midway
between the stem and blow ends, and removing the cores. Fill the
cavities with quince or pineapple jelly; put the apples in a shallow
stewpan with a half cup of water, cover, and steam till nearly tender.
Put the rice, which should be very moist, around the bottom and sides of
a pudding dish; place the apples inside, cover, and bake ten minutes.
Serve with cream flavored with quince or lemon.

RICE AND TAPIOCA PUDDING.--Soak one half cup of tapioca over night
in a cup of water; in the morning drain off the water if any remains.
Add to the tapioca half a cup of rice, one cup of sugar, one cup of
raisins, and eight cups of new milk, with a little grated lemon rind for
flavoring. Put all in an earthen pudding dish on the top of the range,
where it will heat very gradually to the boiling point, stirring
frequently. When the milk boils, put the pudding in the oven, and bake
till the rice grains are perfectly tender but not broken and mushy. From
twenty minutes to half an hour is usually sufficient. When taken from
the oven, it will appear quite thin, but after cooling will be of a
delicious, creamy consistency. Serve cold.

RICE-FLOUR MOLD.--Braid two tablespoonfuls of rice flour with a
little milk and stir the mixture into a pint of boiling milk to which
has been added three tablespoonfuls of sugar, and a little salt if
desired. Let this boil until it thickens, then mold, and serve with
cream and sugar or with lemon, orange, or other fruit sauce.

RICE AND STEWED APPLE DESSERT.--Steam or bake some rice in milk
until tender, sweeten slightly and spread a layer of the rice half an
inch thick on the bottom of a pudding dish, then a layer of
lemon-flavored apple sauce, which has been rubbed through a colander and
afterward simmered on the range until stiff. If preferred, the sauce may
be prepared by first baking the apples, and then rubbing the pulp
through a colander. Add another layer of rice, then one of sauce, and so
on until the dish is full. Bake in a moderate oven and serve hot. If the
apples are not very tart, part stewed and sifted cranberries may be used
with them.

RICE AND STRAWBERRY DESSERT.--Soak a cup of rice in one and a half
cups of new milk; place all in an earthen dish, and steam an hour, or
until dry and tender, stirring occasionally for the first fifteen
minutes. When the rice is done, place in the bottom of cups previously
moistened with cold water, five nice hulled strawberries in the shape of
a star. Carefully fill the interstices between the berries with the
cooked rice, and put in a layer of rice. Add next a layer of
strawberries, then another of rice. Press firmly into the cups, and set
away to cool. When well molded, turn into saucers, and pile whipped
cream around each mold; sprinkle with sugar and serve.

A little care in forming the stars and filling the molds makes this a
delicious and pretty dessert. If preferred, the dessert may be prepared
in one large mold, and a larger number of berries arranged in the form
of a cross in the bottom of the dish, covering with rice, and adding as
many alternate layers of berries and rice as desired.

STEWED FRUIT PUDDING.--Take a deep, square or oblong granite-ware
or earthen dish; cut strips of stale bread uniformly an inch in width
and three fourths of an inch in thickness, and place them in the mold
with spaces between them equal to their width. Or, fit the strips around
the bottom of a round, earthen pudding dish, like the spokes of a wheel,
with stewed or canned fruit, sweetened to taste; whortleberries are
best, but apricots, cherries, currants, strawberries, and gooseberries
may all be used. Separate the juice from the berries by turning them
into a colander. Fill the interstices between the bread with hot fruit,
using just as little juice as possible. Cover with another layer, this
time placing the strips of bread over the fruit in the first layer, and
leaving the spaces for fruit over the bread in the first layer. Fill the
dish with these layers of fruit and bread, and when full, pour over all
the hot fruit juice. Put a plate with a weight on it on the top to press
it firmly. Dip off any juice that may be pressed out, and set the
pudding in the refrigerator to cool and press. When cold, it will turn
out whole, and can be cut in slices and served with whipped cream or
cocoanut sauce.

STRAWBERRY MINUTE PUDDING.--Cook a quart of ripe strawberries in a
pint of water till well scalded. Add sugar to taste. Skim out the fruit,
and into the boiling juice stir a scant cup of granulated wheat flour
previously rubbed to a paste with a little cold water; cook fifteen or
twenty minutes, pour over the fruit, and serve cold with cream sauce.

SWEET APPLE PUDDING.--Pare, core, and slice enough ripe, juicy
sweet apples to fill a pint bowl. Heat a quart of new milk to scalding
in a double boiler. Pour it hot over one cup of good granulated
cornmeal, and beat very thoroughly to remove all lumps. Return to the
double boiler, and cook until the meal is set. The batter then should
be about the consistency of corn mush. Remove from the fire, add a pint
of cold milk, stir in the sliced apples, one third of a cup of sugar or
molasses, and a teaspoonful of flour rubbed smooth in a very little
milk. Turn all into a deep earthen crock or pudding dish, and bake
slowly from three to four hours, stirring frequently the first hour. It
should be moderately browned on top when done. Serve warm or cold.

WHORTLEBERRY PUDDING.--One quart of new milk, one quart of fine
bread crumbs, two quarts of fresh whortleberries, one or two
tablespoonfuls of sugar. Heat the milk to boiling; fill a pudding dish
with alternate layers of bread crumbs and berries, beginning and ending
with crumbs. Add the sugar to the milk, let it dissolve, and pour the
whole over the pudding. Cover closely, and bake in a slow oven within a
pan of hot water nearly an hour. Serve warm with cream or cocoanut
sauce.


DESSERTS WITH TAPIOCA, SAGO, MONICA, AND SEA MOSS.

Both pearl and flake tapioca are suitable for these desserts. They
should be soaked for some hours before using, and it is always best to
soak over night if convenient. The flake tapioca requires longer soaking
and cooking than the pearl tapioca. For soaking, use one and a half cups
of water for each cup of flake tapioca, and one pint of water for a cup
of pearl tapioca. For cooking, three or four additional cups of water
will be required for each cup of tapioca, depending upon, the articles
used with it. A double boiler should be used for the cooking.


_RECIPES._

APPLE TAPIOCA.--Soak a cupful of pearl tapioca over night. In the
morning simmer in a quart of boiling water until transparent and
thickened. Arrange in the bottom of a pudding dish four or five
good-sized tart apples, which have been pared, cored, and the cavities
filled with sugar. Squeeze the juice of a lemon and grate a very little
of the rind over the apples. Pour the tapioca over the fruit. Set the
dish inside a pan filled with hot water, cover, and bake one hour, or
until the apples are done. Serve with sugar and cream. It is best nearly
cold. Fresh peaches, pared and stewed, may be used in place of apples,
if preferred.

APPLE TAPIOCA NO. 2.--Soak a half cup of tapioca in a cap of tepid
water, for at least three hours. Pare, core, and quarter nice tart
apples to fill a two-quart pudding dish nearly half full. Add four cups
of water and one of sugar to the soaked tapioca, pour it over the
apples, and bake two or three hours in a slow oven. Serve with whipped
cream.

BANANA DESSERT.--Soak a cup of tapioca over night. In the morning
cook in a double boiler in a quart of water until transparent. When
done, add a cup of sugar and three or four sliced bananas. Serve cold
with cream.

BLACKBERRY TAPIOCA.--Soak a cup of tapioca over night. When ready
to cook, add three cups of boiling water and cook in a double boiler
until transparent and smooth. Sprinkle a quart of fresh blackberries
with sugar, and stir lightly into the tapioca. Pour into molds and serve
cold with cream and sugar. Other fresh berries may be used in the same
way.

CHERRY PUDDING.--Soak and cook a half cup of tapioca in a pint of
water until transparent. Have a pint of fresh pitted cherries in an
earthen pudding dish. Sprinkle them well with sugar, pour over them the
cooked tapioca, and bake for an hour in a moderate oven. Serve hot with
or without cream.

FRUIT TAPIOCA.--Cook three fourths of a cup of tapioca in four cups
of water until smooth and transparent Stir into it lightly a pint of
fresh strawberries, raspberries, currants, or any small fruit, adding
sugar as required. For variety a cup of canned quinces or apricots may
be substituted for fresh fruit. Serve warm or cold with whipped cream or
mock cream.

MOLDED TAPIOCA WITH FRUIT.--Simmer one half cup of desiccated
cocoanut in a pint of milk for twenty minutes. Strain out the cocoanut,
and add milk to make a full pint. Add one half cup of sugar and one half
cup of tapioca previously soaked over night. Let the whole simmer until
the tapioca is transparent. Dip some cups in cold water, drain, and lay
fresh strawberries, currants, or cherries in the bottom of each in the
form of a star or cross. Pour the tapioca into the molds gently, so as
not to displace the fruit. When cold, turn out and serve with whipped
cream or fruit sauce. Raisins may be substituted for fresh fruit, or
bits of jelly may be placed around the mold after it has cooled, if
preferred.

PINEAPPLE TAPIOCA.--Soak one cup of tapioca over night in one and
one half cups of water. Add two and one half cups of water and cook in a
double boiler until transparent, then add one cup of sugar and one juicy
pineapple minced fine with a sharp knife. Mold, and serve cold with or
without cream.

PRUNE AND TAPIOCA PUDDING.--Soak one half cup of tapioca over
night. In the morning cook until transparent in two cups of water. Stew
two cups of well-washed and stoned prunes in a quart of water till
perfectly tender; then add the juice of a good lemon and two
tablespoonfuls of sugar, and boil till the syrup becomes thick and
rich. Turn the prunes into a pudding dish, cover with the cooked
tapioca, and add a little grated lemon rind. Bake lightly. Serve without
dressing or with sugar and cream or almond sauce. If preferred, the
prunes and tapioca may be placed in the dish in alternate layers, having
the top one of tapioca.

TAPIOCA AND FIG PUDDING.--Cook three fourths of a cup of tapioca as
for Apple Tapioca. Have ready two cups of finely sliced or chopped tart
apples, and one cup of chopped figs, which have first been lightly
steamed. If preferred, raisins may be used in place of half the figs.
Put the fruit in the bottom of the pudding dish, turn the tapioca over
it, and bake till the fruit is very soft. If the apples are not very
tart, sprinkle the juice of a lemon over them before adding the figs and
tapioca.

A nice fruit pudding can also be made by using half canned pears and
half apples, or canned quinces may be substituted for figs.

PEACH TAPIOCA.--For this will be needed a quart of nicely canned
peaches, a cup of tapioca, and from one half to three fourths of a cup
of sugar, according to the sweetness of the peaches. Soak the tapioca
over night in just enough water to cover. When ready to cook, put in a
double boiler with three cups of water, and cook for an hour. Remove
from the fire and add to it the juice from the peaches, of which there
should be a cup and a half, which has been secured by draining the
peaches in a colander, and stir it well into the tapioca. Place a layer
of this mixture in an oiled pudding dish, add the peaches, cover with
the remainder of the tapioca, and bake for an hour in a moderate oven.

TAPIOCA JELLY.--Soak a cup of tapioca in a pint of water over
night. Add another pint and cook until transparent and smooth. Add three
tablespoonfuls of lemon juice and four tablespoonfuls of sugar; beat
well together and tun into molds. Serve cold. No dressing is required.
This may be varied by using unsweetened currant, grape, or other acid
fruit juice in place of lemon. Fruit jelly may be used if the juice is
not easily obtained. Add when the tapioca is well cooked, and stir until
dissolved.

APPLE SAGO PUDDING.--Soak one cup of sago in six cups of water;
stew ten small apples, mix with the sago, and bake three quarters of an
hour. Serve with cream and sugar. It is better warm than cold, but
acceptable either way.

RED SAGO MOLD.--Take a quart of red raspberry juice, pure or
diluted with one third water, and sweeten to taste. Have ready one half
cup of best sago which has soaked for twenty minutes in just enough
water to cover. Drain off any water that may remain. Add the sago to the
juice, and cook until the sago is transparent, then turn into molds.
Serve cold with cream. Cranberry or strawberry juice may be used in
place of the raspberry, if preferred.

SAGO FRUIT PUDDING.--Soak a small cup of sago an hour in just
enough water to cover. Drain off any water that may not be absorbed. Mix
two thirds of a cup of sugar with this sago, and stir all into a quart
of boiling water. Let it boil until the sago is perfectly transparent
and pour in a pint of nicely hulled strawberries. Turn into molds to
cool, or serve warm with cream, as preferred. Tapioca can be used
instead of sago, but needs longer soaking. Raspberries, stoned cherries,
or currants can be used in place of strawberries.

SAGO PUDDING.--Soak a cupful of sago for twenty minutes in a cup of
cold water; then pour over it a quart and a cup of boiling water, add a
cup of sugar and one half cup of raisins. Cook till the sago is
perfectly transparent, flavor with vanilla, and set away to cool. Serve
with whipped cream.

MANIOCA WITH FRUIT.--Pare, core, and quarter six medium-sized tart
apples, and put them to cook in a quart of boiling water. Add a cup of
sugar, and cook without stirring until softened, then sprinkle into the
water in which they are cooking five tablespoonfuls of manioca, and cook
until it is transparent, which will be in about ten minutes. Flavor with
a little grated lemon rind, and serve hot with sugar and cream, or mold,
as preferred. Canned peaches, apricots, or cherries may be used in a
similar manner, adding boiling water if there is not sufficient juice to
properly cook the manioca. Or the manioca may be first cooked in boiling
water, using four scant tablespoonfuls for a pint of water, and when
transparent, turning it over sliced bananas, pineapples, or oranges,
molding and serving with cream and sugar.

RASPBERRY MANIOCA MOLD.--Heat a pint of water, and when boiling,
sprinkle into it four scant tablespoonfuls of manioca and cook for ten
minutes or until transparent, stirring continually. When transparent and
thickened, remove from the fire and add a tablespoonful of lemon juice
and one cup of sugar. Place a layer of the cooked manioca in the bottom
of a pudding dish, add a layer of freshly picked red raspberries, then
another of the manioca, filling the dish in alternate layers with one of
manioca for the top. Set away in some cool place until well molded.
Serve in slices with cream flavored with rose. Other fresh berries may
be used instead of raspberries.

SEA MOSS BLANCMANGE.--Wash the moss well in several waters, and
soak in a very little cold water for an hour before using. It is hardly
possible to give exact directions for making this blancmange, owing to
the difficulty of accurately measuring the moss, but in general, a small
handful will be ample for a quart of milk. Add the moss, when washed, to
the milk, and cook in a double boiler until the milk has become
thickened and glutinous. Add sugar to sweeten, flavor with vanilla or
rose water, and strain through a fine sieve into cups previously wet in
cold water, and mold. This may be varied by using boiling water instead
of milk for cooking, adding the juice of one or two lemons and a little
grated rind to flavor.


DESSERTS MADE WITH GELATINE.

Gelatine is an article largely employed in making delicate and dainty
dishes. It is economical and convenient, because the dessert can be
prepared several hours before needed; but it must be stated that it has
in itself little or no food value, and there is great liability of its
being unwholesome. A writer in the _Anti-Adulteration Journal_, a short
time since, speaking of the use of gelatine, says:--

"The nutritive value of pure gelatine has been shown to be very low in
the scale of foods. The beef gelatine of the markets that is used by
bakers, is far from being pure gelatine. It frequently has a very
disagreeable, fetid odor, and has evidently begun to decompose during
the process of manufacture. After a thorough drying, putrefaction does
not take place as long as it remains dry. But suppose that gelatine
which has thus begun to decompose during the drying process, containing,
perhaps, putrefactive germs in the dried state, be dissolved in water,
and in hot weather, kept in this condition for a few hours previous to
being used; the result would be rapid putrefaction. The putrefaction
would be checked by freezing; but the bacteria causing it are not killed
by the low temperature. As soon as the dessert is melted or eaten, they
resume their activity in the body, and may cause sickness. It is a
well-known fact that gelatine is an excellent medium in which to
cultivate various kinds of micro-organisms; and if the conclusions here
mentioned be correct, it seems that gelatine should be used with great
care in connection with food preparations. When used carelessly, it may
do a great deal of harm. I wish to impress those who use it with the
importance of guarding against its dangers. Gelatine should not be
allowed to remain in solution for many hours before using, especially in
hot weather.

"When used at all, the best varieties should be employed, and such as
are free from putrefactive odor."

A "box" of gelatine is used to signify a two-ounce package. If half a
box is called for, divide it by cutting the box and its contents in
halves rather than by emptying the box and then attempting to make a
division.

To prepare gelatine for desserts, first soak it till soft in a small
quantity of cold water (a cupful to one box of gelatine is sufficient);
fifteen minutes will suffice if it is stirred frequently; then dissolve
in boiling liquid. Do not cook the gelatine, and after it is dissolved,
always strain through a cloth strainer before using.

In winter, a two-ounce package will solidify two quarts of liquid,
including the water in which the gelatine is soaked. In summer, a little
less liquid should be used. Gelatine desserts must be left on ice or in
a cool place until hardened, but they should not be served at the table
so cold as to interfere with the digestion of other foods.


_RECIPES._

APPLES IN JELLY.--Pare and core without cutting open, a half dozen
medium-sized tart apples of the same degree of hardness. Fill the
centers with a little grated lemon rind and sugar. Steam until tender
but not broken. Have ready half a package of gelatine which has been
soaked for an hour in just enough water to cover. Prepare a syrup with
one cup of sugar and a pint of water. When boiling, turn the syrup over
the gelatine, stirring well to dissolve it, and add the juice of half a
lemon. Strain, place the apples in a deep dish with a little space
between each; turn the mixture over them, and set in the ice box to
cool. Serve with or without a little whipped cream.

APPLE SHAPE.--Steam some nice tart apples. When tender, rub through
a colander. Have two thirds of a box of gelatine soaked in just enough
water to cover; pour over it a cup and a half of boiling water; when
well dissolved, strain and add a pint of the sifted apples sweetened to
taste, and one half cup of grated fresh or canned pineapple, or if
preferred, one half cup of the juice of canned pineapple. Turn into cups
previously wet in cold water, and mold. Serve with a little cream.
Canned peaches, apricots, and other fruit may be used the same as
apples, if preferred. Rub the fruit with but little juice through a
colander, and proceed as above.

BANANA DESSERT.--Dissolve half a box of gelatine in a half cup of
warm water. Heat three cups of rich milk to boiling, and add to it one
cup of sugar and turn over the well-dissolved gelatine and strain. Let
it partly cool, and mix in three or four bananas, sliced thin or chopped
fine. Turn all into a mold previously wet with cold water, and leave
till hardened, which may require several hours unless the mold be placed
on ice. When well molded, turn into a glass dish, serve with whipped
cream flavored with vanilla or lemon.

CLEAR DESSERT.--Soak a box of gelatine in a large bowl with half a
cup of cold water. When soft, pour over it three pints of boiling water,
add the juice of three large lemons and two cups of sugar. Stir well,
strain, and pour into molds previously wet with cold water. Put into the
refrigerator until hardened. Serve with whipped cream. Quince, apricot,
orange, or pineapple juice may be substituted for lemon, and thus a
variety of desserts may be made.

FRUIT FOAM DESSERT.--Soak half a package of gelatine in half a cup
of cold water until soft. Heat to boiling two and one half cups of red
raspberry, currant, strawberry, or grape juice, sweetened to taste, and
pour over the soaked gelatine. Stir until perfectly dissolved, then
strain, and set the dish in ice water to cool. When it is cold and
beginning to thicken, beat the whites of three eggs to a stiff froth and
stir into the thickening gelatine. Beat thoroughly for fifteen minutes
with an egg beater, or whip till the whole is of a solid foam stiff
enough to retain its shape. Turn into molds previously wet with cold
water, or pile roughly in large spoonfuls in a glass dish. Set away in
the refrigerator until needed. Serve with a little whipped cream piled
lightly around it.

FRUIT SHAPE.--Take a quart of nicely canned red raspberries,
sweetened to taste; turn into a colander and drain off the juice, taking
care to keep the fruit as perfect as possible. Put two thirds of a box
of gelatine to soak in just enough of the juice to cover. When the
gelatine is ready, heat the remainder of the juice to boiling and pour
over it. When well dissolved, add the fruit, turn into cups, and mold.
Serve with cream. Peaches, strawberries, apricots, and other canned
fruit may be used in place of the raspberries, if preferred.

GELATINE CUSTARD.--Soak a quarter of a box of gelatine in one
fourth of a cup of cold water till soft; then pour over it three fourths
of a cup of boiling water, and stir until dissolved. Beat the yolks of
two eggs and three tablespoonfuls of sugar to a cream; pour over it
slowly, stirring continuously, a pint of boiling milk, and cook in a
double boiler until it thickens. Then add the gelatine mixture, which
should first be strained, the whites of the two eggs beaten stiff, and a
little vanilla for flavoring. Beat all well together, turn into molds
previously wet in cold water, and place on ice to harden. Serve with
fruit sauce.

LAYER PUDDING.--Divide a package of gelatine into three portions,
and put each to soak in one third of a cup of cold water. Heat one and
one fourths cups of water to boiling, add the juice of one lemon and two
thirds of a cup of sugar. Turn this slowly, stirring well meanwhile,
over the well-beaten yolks of two eggs. Cook in a double boiler five
minutes, or until the mixture thickens. Pour the hot custard over one
portion of the soaked gelatine, and stir it until dissolved. Strain, add
a little grated lemon rind for flavoring, and turn into a broad, shallow
dish to mold. A square granite-ware baking tin is admirable for this
purpose.

Take one and one half cups of raspberry, strawberry, grape, or currant
juice, sweetened to taste; heat to boiling and pour over the second
portion of the soaked gelatine. Stir till well dissolved, strain, and
turn into a shallow mold like that containing the first portion.

Heat one and one half cups of rich milk to boiling, add one half cup of
sugar, and pour over the third portion of soaked gelatine. Strain and
cool a little, flavor with vanilla or a few chopped bananas; or, if
preferred, flavor the milk with cocoanut before using, as directed on
page 298. Pour into a third mold like the others to cool. When all are
cold, arrange in layers, the yellow at the bottom and the white at the
top. The whites of the eggs may be used for meringue, or for making a
whipped cream sauce to serve with the pudding.

LEMON JELLY.--Soak one half box of gelatine in a scant cup of cold
water until soft. Then pour over it one pint of boiling water and stir
until well dissolved. Add one cup of sugar, the yellow rind of one
lemon, and one half cup of lemon juice. Strain, put into molds
previously wet in cold water, and place in the ice chest to harden. If
preferred, the above may be cooled in a shallow dish and cut into
irregular shapes to be served with a custard sauce. Use only the yolks
of eggs in making the custard, that it may have a rich color, using two
yolks in place of one whole egg.

JELLY WITH FRUIT.--Soak a package of gelatine in a cup of cold
water until soft; then pour over it one quart and a cup of boiling
water. Strain, add the juice of four lemons and twelve tablespoonfuls of
sugar. Cool a little of the gelatine in a mold, and as soon as set,
scatter in some nice currants or seedless raisins; add another layer of
gelatine, and when set, scatter in more fruit; continue until the mold
is full, having gelatine at the top. Fresh fruit, currants, grapes,
cherries, plums, peaches, etc., may be used in place of raisins, if
preferred.

ORANGE DESSERT.--Soak one third of a cup of gelatine in one third
of a cup of cold water until soft; then pour over it one third of a cup
of boiling water. Add a scant cup of sugar, the juice of one lemon, and
a cupful of orange juice and pulp. Set the dish containing the mixture
in a pan of ice water until it begins to harden. Have ready the whites
of three eggs well whipped, add to the jelly, and beat all together
until light and stiff enough to drop. Pour into molds wet in cold water,
and lined with sections of oranges, from which seeds and white fiber
have been removed.

ORANGES IN JELLY.--Pare divide, and take out the seeds from four or
five sweet oranges, being careful to remove all the white rind and
shreds. Place in a deep dish and pour over them a syrup prepared as for
Apples in Jelly, using the juice of a whole lemon. Set in the ice box
over night. A very little orange peel may be grated into the syrup if
liked; and if the oranges are very sweet, less sugar will be required.
If one can afford to use orange juice in place of the water in making
the syrup, the dessert will be greatly improved.

ORANGE JELLY.--Soak one quarter of a box of gelatine until soft in
just enough cold water to cover. Then pour over it one half cup of
boiling water. Stir until well dissolved, add the juice of one small
lemon, one cupful of orange juice, and one half cup of sugar. Strain,
turn into molds previously wet in cold water, and set on ice to harden.
Strawberry, raspberry, and other fruit juices may be used in a similar
manner.

SNOW PUDDING.--Soak one fourth of a box of gelatine until soft in
an equal measure of cold water. Then pour over it one cup of boiling
water, and add one fourth of a cup of strained lemon juice and one cup
of sugar; stir till the sugar is all dissolved. Strain into a large
china dish, and set in ice water to cool. Let it stand until cold and
beginning to thicken. Have ready the whites of three eggs beaten to a
stiff froth, and add to the gelatine as it begins to thicken; beat all
together for fifteen or twenty minutes, until it is of a solid foam and
stiff enough to hold its shape. Turn into molds and keep in a cool place
till needed. A half dozen finely sliced or chopped bananas stirred in
toward the last, makes a nice variation. Serve with custard sauce made
with the yolks of the eggs and flavored with rose or vanilla. Orange,
quince, or pineapple juice may be substituted for lemon, for a change.

This dessert is best if made several hours before it is needed and set
in the refrigerator to keep cold.


DESSERTS WITH CRUSTS.


_RECIPES._

APPLE TART.--Pare and slice some quick-cooking, tart apples, and
place them in the bottom of a pudding dish, with a tablespoonful of
water. Cover with a crust prepared in the following manner: Into a cup
of thin cream stir a gill of yeast and two cups of flour; let this
become very light, then add sufficient flour to mix soft. Knead for
fifteen or twenty minutes very thoroughly, roll evenly, and cover the
apples; put all in a warm place until the crust has become very light,
then bake. If the apples do not bake easily, they may be partially
cooked before putting on the crust. Dish so that the fruit will be
uppermost, and serve cold with cream and sugar, cocoanut sauce, or mock
cream.

GOOSEBERRY TART.--Fill a pudding dish with well prepared green
gooseberries, adding a tablespoonful or two of water. Cover with a crust
as for Apple Tart, and when light, bake in a moderately quick oven. Cut
the crust into the required number of pieces, and dish with gooseberries
heaped on top. Serve cold with sugar and cream.

CHERRY TART.--Prepare the same as for Apple Tart, with stoned
cherries, only omitting the water, as the cherries will be sufficiently
juicy of themselves. If the fruit is very juicy, sprinkle a
tablespoonful of flour over it before putting on the crust. Plum and
peach tart may be made in the same manner, and are both very nice.

STRAWBERRY AND OTHER FRUIT SHORTCAKES.--Beat together one cup of
thin cream, slightly warmed, a tablespoonful of yeast, and two small
cups of flour. Set in a warm place till very light. Add sufficient warm
flour to mix soft, and knead thoroughly for fifteen or twenty minutes.
Divide into two equal portions, and roll into sheets about one half inch
in thickness, making the center a very little thinner than the edges, so
that when risen, the center will not be highest. Place in tins, and set
in a warm place until perfectly risen, or until they have doubled their
first thickness. Bake quickly. When cold, spread one cake with fruit,
and cover with the other. If the fruit is large, it may be chopped fine
with a knife, or mashed with a spoon. A little lemon juice added to
peaches is an addition for shortcake.

BANANA SHORTCAKE.--Prepare the crust as previously directed. Fill
with sliced bananas, for every three of which add the juice of one
orange, a little of the grated rind, and a half cup of sugar.

LEMON SHORTCAKE.--Prepare the crust as for Fruit Shortcake. For the
filling, grate the yellow portion only of the lemon, and squeeze the
juice into a bowl; add a cupful of sugar. Braid a tablespoonful of flour
smooth with two tablespoonfuls of water, add enough boiling water,
stirring well meanwhile, to make a teacupful. Add this to the other
ingredients, beat well together, and place the bowl in a basin of
boiling water or over the teakettle. Cook until about as thick as boiled
custard. Fill this between the shortcakes and serve.

BERRY SHORTCAKE WITH PREPARED CREAM.--Prepare the shortcake as
previously directed. Sweeten the berries and spread on the lower crust,
then pour over them a "cream" prepared as follows, and add top crust:--

CREAM.--Heat one half cup of milk and the same of thin cream to
boiling, add two tablespoonfuls of sugar, and thicken with one
teaspoonful of cornstarch rubbed smooth in a little cold milk. Turn the
hot sauce over the beaten white of two eggs, stirring rapidly meanwhile,
until the egg is thoroughly mingled with the whole. Allow it to become
cold before using.

RAISED PIE.--Prepare the dough as for shortcake. Divide in two
portions, spread one on the tin, and cover with a layer of easy-cooking
tart apples sliced in eighths. Put two or three spoonfuls of rather
thick sweet cream over the apples, and cover with the top crust. Let the
crusts rise until very light, and bake. Peaches may be used in the same
manner.

BAKED APPLE LOAF.--Prepare some dough as for buns on page 347,
leaving out the sugar, and when ready for the last melding, cut it into
three portions. Put some flour on the bread board, mold the dough well,
and roll as thin as pie crust in such shape as will fit a shallow baking
tin. Spread over the tin, and cover the dough with a layer of
easy-cooking, sour apples sliced very thin, or with very stiff apple
marmalade. Cover this with a second layer of dough, then add another
layer of apples, and cover with the third portion of the dough. Pinch
the edges of the dough well together, let the loaf rise till very light,
then bake. Eat cold with sugar and cream. If the apples will not cook
quickly, they may be first steamed until nearly tender. If the crust
appears too hard when taken from the oven, cover with a wet napkin and
allow it to steam for a little time until softened.


CUSTARD PUDDINGS.

Very much depends upon the baking in all puddings made with milk and
eggs.

A custard pudding made with one egg, and slowly baked, will be much
thicker and nicer than one made with more eggs, baked in too hot an
oven.

A custard pudding baked too quickly or too long will have the eggs mixed
with the farinaceous substance and the milk turned to whey, while one
more carefully baked will have eggs and milk formed into a thick custard
on the top.

Custard puddings and all other baked puddings which require to be cooked
slowly, are best cooked in an earthen dish set in the oven in a pan of
hot water, and baked only till the pudding is set. If it is desirable
to use with eggs any ingredient which requires a lengthy cooking, it is
much better to cook it partially before adding the eggs. Many custard
desserts are much more dainty and more easily served when cooked in cups
than when baked in a large dish. The blue willow pattern stoneware cups
and the blue and white Japanese ware are very suitable for this purpose.
When cooking, set the cups, allowing one for each person, in the oven in
a dripping pan containing hot water, and bake. Serve without removing
from the cups.

If desired to stir beaten eggs into heated milk, add a few spoonfuls of
cold milk to the eggs, and pour the mixture, a little at a time, into
the hot milk, taking care to stir it constantly.

A nice way to flavour custards and meringues for custard puddings is to
beat fruit jelly with the whites of the eggs; red raspberry, quince, and
pineapple jellies give especially nice flavours.


_RECIPES._

APPLE CUSTARD.--Bake good tart apples; when done, remove the pulp,
and rub through a sieve; sweeten, and flavour with grated pineapple or
grated orange or lemon rind. Put in a glass dish, and cover with a plain
custard prepared as directed on page 328. Bits of jelly may be scattered
over the top of the custard.

APPLE CUSTARD NO. 2.--Peel, halve, and core eight or ten
medium-sized sour apples. Have prepared a syrup made with a cup of
water, the juice of one lemon, a little grated rind, and a half cup of
sugar. When the sugar is dissolved, add the fruit, and simmer till
tender but not fallen to pieces. Skim out the apples, draining
thoroughly, and lay them in a glass dish. Boil up the syrup until thick,
and poor it over the apples. Make a soft boiled custard with a pint of
milk, yolks of three eggs, and two tablespoonfuls of sugar. When cold,
spread over the apples; whip the whites to a stiff froth, flavor with
lemon, and pile irregularly upon the top. Brown lightly in the oven.

APPLE CUSTARD NO. 3.--Pare and remove the cores from a dozen tart
apples, and fill the cavities with black raspberry, quince, or grape
jelly. Put them in a covered baking dish with a tablespoonful of water,
and steam in the oven till tender but not fallen to pieces. Then cover
the apples with a raw custard made by cooking two tablespoonfuls of
flour rubbed smooth with a little milk, in a quart of milk, till just
thickened, and adding, when cold, the yolks of two eggs well beaten
with two heaping tablespoonfuls of sugar, and lastly the whites of the
eggs whipped to a stiff froth. Bake in a dish set in a pan of hot water,
until the custard has set, but not till it separates.

APPLE CORNSTARCH CUSTARD.--Cover the bottom of a small earthen-ware
pudding dish an inch or more in depth with apples stewed until very dry,
sweetened and flavored with a teaspoonful of rose water. Heat a cup of
milk to boiling, and stir into it a tablespoonful of cornstarch rubbed
smooth in a little cold milk, and one fourth cup of sugar; cook until
thickened, then add the yolk of one egg, and pour the whole over the
apple. Meringue the top with the white of the egg beaten stiff with a
tablespoonful of sugar, and flavored with a little rose water.

APPLE AND BREAD CUSTARD.--For this is required one cup of finely
rolled bread crumbs, two eggs, one half cup of sugar, one cup minced
sour apples, and one quart of milk. Beat the sugar and yolks together,
add the milk, bread, and fruit, and lastly the well-beaten whites of the
eggs. Bake in a dish set in a pan of hot water till firm but not dry.

ALMOND CORNSTARCH PUDDING.--Blanch one and one half ounces of sweet
almonds, and reduce them to a paste as directed on page 298; or if
obtainable, almondine may be used instead of the prepared almonds. Heat
a quart of milk, and while boiling, stir into it four tablespoonfuls of
cornstarch which has been braided smooth with a little cold milk; let it
thicken over the fire, stirring all the time. Then add two
tablespoonfuls of thick, sweet cream. Lastly, stir in two or three
well-beaten eggs and a tablespoonful of rose water. Let it come just to
the boiling point, and remove from the stove. Keep in a cold place till
needed. Serve with hot mock cream or with grape pulp as dressing.

ALMOND CREAM.--Heat a pint of milk, and when boiling stir into it
two tablespoonfuls of cornstarch rubbed smooth in a little cold milk,
also one fourth cup of sugar and three tablespoonfuls of almondine. Cook
until thickened, and pour it, stirring constantly meanwhile, over the
beaten whites of two eggs. Set on ice to cool, and serve with grape pulp
as dressing. A cupful of blanched and chopped almonds may be used
instead of almondine if that is not obtainable. The pudding will then
require an additional one fourth cup of sugar.

APPLE CHARLOTTE.--Take three cups of nicely stewed tart apples
which have been beaten smooth or rubbed through a colander and sweetened
to taste. If the sauce is thin and very juicy, place it upon the range,
and simmer slowly till it is of the consistency of thick marmalade or
jelly. Add to the apples four tablespoonfuls of grated fresh or canned
pineapple for flavoring. Remove the hard crusts from slices of light
whole-wheat bread, spread them quite thickly with the prepared apple,
and pack in layers in a pudding mold. Cover with a simple custard made
of a quart of milk, three tablespoonfuls of sugar, and two eggs. Let it
stand half an hour, then bake. Do not press the bread or beat it after
the custard is turned on, as that will be likely to make the pudding
heavy. Other fruit marmalade may be used in place of the apple
preparation if preferred.

BANANA CUSTARD.--Prepare a custard as directed for Plain Custard
with a quart of milk, two well-beaten eggs, four tablespoonfuls of
sugar, and one of cornstarch. When the custard is cool, pour it over
four thinly sliced yellow bananas, over which a tablespoonful of sugar
and a teaspoonful of water have been sprinkled. Serve cold.

BOILED CUSTARD.--Beat thoroughly together one pint of milk, two
eggs, and a tablespoonful or two of sugar, until thoroughly mingled.
Turn the mixture into a double boiler, and cook until the custard is
set.

BOILED CUSTARD BREAD PUDDING.--Crumble enough of the soft portion
of stale whole-wheat bread to lightly fill a pint bowl. Heat a pint of
milk to boiling. Stir into it, as soon as it boils, two eggs, yolks and
whites well beaten separately, two heaping tablespoonfuls of sugar, a
little grated lemon rind, and the light bread crumbs; stir rapidly till
the whole thickens, pour into a deep dish, and when cold, dot the top
with bits of currant or cranberry jelly.

BREAD AND FRUIT CUSTARD.--Take for this, two cups of grated bread
crumbs, two cups of finely chopped tart apples, one cup of English
currants or stoned raisins, mixed with a very little chopped citron for
flavor, two tablespoonfuls of sugar, three cups of milk, and two eggs.
Beat the yolks of the eggs and the sugar together, then add the milk,
bread, fruit, and lastly the well-beaten whites of the eggs. Bake in a
dish set within a pan of hot water, until the custard is set.

BREAD CUSTARD PUDDING.--Take one cup of finely powdered bread
crumbs, one half cup of sugar, one quart of milk, and the beaten yolks
of three eggs and whites of two. Mix the bread and milk, and when well
softened, add the beaten yolks, sugar, and lastly the well-beaten
whites; beat all together thoroughly, season with a little grated lemon
rind; place the pudding dish in the oven in a pan of hot water, and bake
till firm and lightly brown. Take from the oven, cover the top with a
layer of apple marmalade made without sugar, or with some tart fruit
jelly; add to this a meringue made of the white of the remaining egg and
a tablespoonful of sugar, beaten to a stiff froth, and place in the oven
a moment to brown lightly.

Fresh fruit, strawberries, raspberries, chopped peaches, currants,
cherries, or shredded oranges are equally as good as the marmalade or
jelly for the top dressing, and may be used to vary this pudding in a
number of different ways. Canned fruits, if well drained from juice,
especially apricots and peaches, are excellent for this purpose. A
cocoanut custard pudding may be made of the above by flavoring the milk
before using, with two tablespoonfuls of desiccated cocoanut Another
variety still may be made by adding to the first recipe half a cup of
Zante currants and the same of seedless raisins, or a half cup of finely
shredded, tender citron.

BREAD AND FIG PUDDING.--Put together two cups of finely grated
bread crumbs, two cups of milk, one cup of finely chopped figs
previously steamed or cooked, one fourth cup of sugar, and lastly, two
well-beaten eggs. Bake in a moderate oven till the custard is set.

BREAD AND APRICOT PUDDING.--Fill a pudding dish with alternate
layers of bread crumbs and canned apricots well drained from juice. Pour
over it a custard made with two eggs, one half cup of sugar, and a pint
of milk. Bake one half hour, or only until the custard is set. Canned
peaches, to which a teaspoonful of lemon juice has been added after
draining, may be used in place of apricots.

CARAMEL CUSTARD.--Turn one fourth of a cup of sugar into a stewpan,
and stir it over the fire until it becomes liquid and brown. Scald a cup
and a half of milk, and add the browned sugar. Beat two eggs thoroughly,
add to them one half cup cold milk, and turn the mixture slowly,
stirring constantly that no lumps form, into the scalding milk; continue
to stir until the custard thickens. Set away to cool, and serve in
glasses.

CARROT PUDDING.--Take two cups of carrots, boiled tender and rubbed
through a colander, one pint of milk, two thirds of a cup of sugar, and
two well beaten eggs. Flavor with vanilla, and having beaten all well
together, turn into an earthen pudding dish, set the dish in a pan of
hot water, and place in the oven. Bake only till the custard sets.

COCOANUT CORNSTARCH PUDDING.--Simmer a cupful of grated cocoanut in
a quart of milk for twenty minutes. Strain the milk to remove the
cocoanut, adding enough more milk to make a full quart. With a small
portion of it braid smoothly one and one half tablespoonfuls of
cornstarch or rice flour, and put the remainder in a saucepan over the
fire. When the milk is boiling, add the cornstarch, stirring constantly
until it thickens; then remove from the fire and cool. Next add two
tablespoonfuls of sugar and two well-beaten eggs. Bake in a moderate
oven, in a dish set in a pan of hot water, until the custard is well
set.

COCOANUT CUSTARD.--Flavor a pint of milk with cocoanut, add a
tablespoonful of sugar and two well-beaten eggs, and boil till set in a
double boiler or a bowl set in a dish of boiling water. Richer custards
may be made by using three or four eggs, but the richer the custard the
more likely it is to curdle and become watery, as well as being less
wholesome.

COCONUT RICE CUSTARD.--Flavor one quart of milk quite strongly
with coconut, as previously directed. Add to it one and one half cups of
boiled rice, one cup of raisins, one half cup of sugar, and lastly three
well-beaten eggs. Set the pudding dish in a pan of hot water, and bake
till the custard is well set.

CORN MEAL PUDDING.--Heat a quart of milk lacking two thirds of a
cupful, to boiling. Moisten three tablespoonfuls of nice granulated corn
meal with the two thirds of a cup of milk, and stir gradually into the
boiling milk. Let it boil up until set, turn into a double boiler, and
cook for an hour. Then add a tablespoonful of thick sweet cream, one
half a cup of molasses or sugar, a quart of cold milk, a little salt if
desired, and lastly, two well-beaten eggs. Mix thoroughly. Pour into a
pudding dish and bake one hour. A cup of currants or seeded raisins may
be used to give variety.

CORN MEAL PUDDING NO. 2.--Crumble cold corn puffs or corn cake to
make a cupful; add a pint of sweet milk, three teaspoonfuls of sugar,
the yolks of two eggs and the white of one, and bake slowly in a dish
set inside a pan of hot water for an hour.

CORN MEAL AND FIG PUDDING.--Beat together a scant cup of best
sifted corn meal with a cupful of molasses, and stir the mixture
gradually into a quart of boiling milk. Cook ten or twelve minutes, or
until well thickened, then set aside to cool. Add a cupful of finely
chopped figs, one and two thirds cups of cold milk, part cream if it can
be afforded, and when the mixture is cool, add two well-beaten eggs.
Pour into a pudding dish and bake in a moderate, steady oven for three
or more hours; the longer the better. When the pudding has baked an
hour, pour over it a cupful of cold milk. Do not stir the pudding, but
allow the milk to soak in gradually, a pint of finely sliced or chopped
sweet apples may be used in place of figs for variety, or if preferred,
both may be omitted.

CORNSTARCH MERINGUE.--Heat one and one half pints of milk to
boiling, and then stir in gradually two tablespoonfuls of cornstarch
which has been previously rubbed smooth in a little cold milk. When the
starch has thickened, allow it partially to cool, and then add, stirring
continuously meanwhile, the yolks of two eggs which have been previously
well beaten with three table spoonfuls of sugar. Let the whole simmer
for a minute or two longer, turn into a dish, meringue with the whites
of the eggs, and when cold, dot with lumps of strawberry jelly.

CRACKED WHEAT PUDDING.--Beat two cups of cold steamed cracked wheat
in two cups of rich milk until so thoroughly mingled that no lumps
remain. Add one cup of canned sweet cherries well drained from juice,
one half cup of sugar, and two eggs, whites and yolks beaten separately.
Bake in a slow oven till the custard is set.

CUP CUSTARD.--Into four cups of milk stir the yolks of three eggs
and one whole one well beaten. Add four tablespoonfuls of sugar, and
strain the mixture into cups; place these in a dripping pan full of hot
water, grate a little lemon rind over the top of each, and bake in a
moderate oven. If preferred, the milk may be first flavoured with
cocoanut. It is also better to have the milk nearly hot when stirring in
the egg. Half a cupful of the milk should be reserved to add to the egg
before turning into the heated portion.

FARINA CUSTARD.--Flavor a quart of milk with cocoanut as directed
on page 298. Cook two tablespoonfuls of farina in the flavored milk for
twenty minutes, in a double boiler; then set aside to cool. When nearly
cold, add two tablespoonfuls of sugar and the well-beaten yolks of two
eggs. Beat all together very thoroughly, and lastly stir in the whites
of the eggs which have been previously beaten to a stiff froth. Bake in
one dish set inside another filled with hot water, just long enough to
set the custard. Serve cold.

FARINA PUDDING.--Take a cup of cold cooked farina and soak it in
four cups of milk until there are no lumps, or rub through a colander;
add two well-beaten eggs, one scant cup of sugar and one cup of raisins;
bake in a moderate oven until the custard is well set.

FLOATING ISLAND.--Make a custard of a pint of milk flavored with
cocoanut, and the yolks of three eggs; sweeten to taste, and steam in a
double boiler. When done, turn into a glass dish. Have the whites of the
eggs whipped to a stiff froth, and drop for a few seconds on the top of
a pan of scalding hot water, turning so that both sides may be alike
coagulated but not hardened; skim off, and put in islands on the top of
the custard. When quite cold, drop bits of different colored jellies on
the islands, and keep in a cool place till needed. Or put a spoonful of
fruit jelly in the bottom of small glasses, and fill with the custard
with a spoonful of the white on top.

FRUIT CUSTARD.--Heat a pint of red raspberry, strawberry, or
currant juice to boiling, and stir into it two tablespoonfuls or
cornstarch rubbed smooth in a little cold water. Stir constantly until
thickened, then add half a cup of sugar, or less if the fruit juice has
been sweetened; take from the fire and stir in the stiffly beaten whites
of three eggs, stirring all the time so that the hot mixture will
coagulate the egg. Make a custard of a pint of milk, the yolks of the
three eggs, and three tablespoonfuls of sugar. When done, set on the ice
to cool. Dish in a glass dish when cold, placing the fruit mixture by
spoonfuls on top, and serve.

GRAHAM GRITS PUDDING.--Heat two cups of milk in a double boiler.
When boiling, stir in one cup of Graham grits moistened with one cup of
cold milk. Cook for an hour and a half in a double boiler, then remove
from the fire and cool. Add three tablespoonfuls of sugar, three fourths
of a cup of finely chopped apples, and one fourth of a cup of chopped
raisins, and two well-beaten eggs. Bake three fourths of an hour in a
moderate oven.

GROUND RICE PUDDING.--Simmer a few pieces of thinly cut lemon rind
or half a cup of cocoanut, very slowly in a quart of milk for twenty
minutes, or until the milk is well flavored. Strain the milk through a
fine strainer to remove the lemon rind or cocoanut, and put into a
saucepan to boil. Mix four large tablespoonfuls of ground rice smooth
with a little cold milk, and add to the boiling milk. Cook until the
whole has thickened, then set aside to cool. When nearly cold, add two
tablespoonfuls of sugar and two well-beaten eggs. Bake in a gentle oven
in a dish placed in a pan of hot water, until the whole is lightly
browned.

LEMON PUDDING.--Grate the rind of one lemon; soften one pint of
bread crumbs in one quart of sweet milk, add the yolks of two eggs, and
half a cup of sugar mixed with grated lemon rind. Bake twenty minutes.
Beat to a froth the whites of the eggs, the juice of the lemon, and half
a cup of sugar. Spread over the top, and return to the oven for five
minutes. This may be baked in cups if preferred.

LEMON CORNSTARCH PUDDING.--Beat the yolks of two eggs in a pudding
dish; add a cupful of sugar; dissolve four tablespoonfuls of cornstarch
in a little cold water, stir it into two teacupfuls of actively boiling
water; when thickened, add the juice of two lemons with a little grated
peel; turn over the eggs and sugar, beating well to mix all together,
and bake about fifteen minutes. If desired, the beaten whites of the
eggs may be used to meringue the top. Serve either cold or hot.

LEMON CORNSTARCH PUDDING NO. 2.--Mix together one half cup of
cornstarch, one half cup of sugar, the juice and a portion of the grated
rind of one medium-sized lemon. Add to these ingredients just enough
cold water to dissolve thoroughly, then pour boiling water over the
mixture until it becomes thickened and looks transparent. Stir
continuously and boil for a few minutes until the starch is cooked. Take
from the fire, and add gradually, with continuous stirring, the
well-beaten yolks of three eggs. Whip the whites of the eggs with a
teaspoonful of quince jelly to a stiff froth, and pour over the pudding;
then brown in the oven. Orange juice with a very little of the grated
rind, or pineapple juice may be substituted for the lemon, if preferred.

MACARONI PUDDING.--Break sufficient macaroni to make a pint in inch
lengths, put into a double boiler, turn over it three pints of milk, and
cook until tender. Turn into a pudding dish, add a pint of cold milk,
two thirds of a cup of sugar, one egg, and the yolks of two others well
beaten. Bake from twenty minutes to one half hour. When done, cool a
little, spread the top with some mashed fresh berries or grape
marmalade, and meringue with the whites of the eggs and a tablespoonful
of sugar.

MOLDED RICE OR SNOW BALLS.--Steam a pint of well-cleaned rice until
tender, as directed on page 99, and tarn Into cups previously wet in
cold water, to mold. When perfectly cold, place in a glass dish, and
pour over them a cold custard made of a pint of milk, half a cup of
sugar, a teaspoonful of cornstarch, and one egg. Or, if preferred, the
rice balls may be served in individual dishes with the custard sauce, or
with a dressing of fruit juice.

ORANGE FLOAT.--Heat one quart of water, the juice of two lemons,
and one and one half cupfuls of sugar. When boiling, stir into it four
tablespoonfuls of cornstarch rubbed smooth in a very little water. Cook
until the whole is thickened and clear. When cool, stir into the mixture
five nice oranges which have been sliced, and freed from seeds and all
the white portions. Meringue, and serve cold.

ORANGE CUSTARD.--Turn a pint of hot milk over two cups of stale
bread crumbs and let them soak until well softened: add the yolks of two
eggs, and beat all together until perfectly smooth; add a little of the
grated rind and the juice of three sweet oranges, and sugar to taste.
Lastly add the whites of the eggs beaten to a stiff froth, turn into
cups, which place into a moderate oven in a pan of hot water, and bake
twenty minutes, or until the custard is well set but not watery.

ORANGE PUDDING.--Pare and slice six sweet Florida oranges, removing
the seeds and all the white skin and fibers. Place in the bottom of a
glass dish. Make a custard by stirring two table spoonfuls of cornstarch
braided with a little milk into a pint of boiling milk, and when
thickened, adding gradually, stirring constantly meanwhile, one egg and
the yolk of a second egg well beaten with one fourth cup of sugar. When
partially cool, pour over the oranges. Whip the white of the second egg
to a stiff froth with one fourth cup of sugar which has been flavored by
rubbing over some orange peel, and meringue the top of the pudding.
Fresh strawberries, raspberries, or peaches may be substituted for
oranges in making this dessert, if preferred.

PEACH MERINGUE.--To every pint of stewed or canned peaches,
sweetened to taste, stir in the beaten yolks of two eggs. Bake in a deep
pudding dish fifteen minutes, then cover with the whites of the two eggs
beaten till very light with two tablespoonfuls of sugar. Brown in the
oven, and serve cold with whipped cream. For peaches, substitute any
other stewed fruit desired.

PICNIC PUDDING.--Thicken a pint of strawberry or raspberry juice,
sweetened to taste, with two tablespoonfuls of corn starch, as for Fruit
Custard. Turn into the bottom of cups previously wet with cold water,
or a large mold, as preferred. In a second dish heat to boiling a pint
of milk, flavored with cocoanut, to which a tablespoonful of sugar has
been, added. Stir into it two tablespoonfuls of cornstarch rubbed smooth
in a little cold milk, and cook thoroughly. When done, cool slightly and
turn into the molds on the top of the pink portion, which should be
sufficiently cool so that it will not mix. A third layer may be added by
cooking two tablespoonfuls of cornstarch and one of sugar, rubbed smooth
in a little milk, in a pint of boiling milk, and stirring in, just as it
is taken from the stove, the well-beaten yolks of two eggs.

PLAIN CORNSTARCH PUDDING.--Heat to boiling a pint and a half of
milk, with a few bits of the yellow rind of a lemon to flavor it. While
the milk is heating, rub four large spoonfuls of cornstarch to a cream
with half a cup of cold milk; beat well together the yolks of three
eggs, three tablespoonfuls of sugar, and half a cup of cold milk, and
whip the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth. When the milk is actively
boiling, remove the bits of lemon rind with a skimmer, and stir in the
starch mixture; stir constantly and boil three or four minutes--until
the starch is well cooked; then add gradually, stirring well meanwhile,
the yolks and sugar. Remove from the fire, and stir the beaten whites
lightly through the whole. Serve with a dressing of fruit juice or fruit
syrup; if in the season of fresh berries, the pudding may be dressed
with a few spoonfuls of mashed strawberries, raspberries, or currants.

PLAIN CUSTARD.--Heat a pint of milk to boiling, and stir in a
tablespoonful of cornstarch nabbed smooth in a little milk; let the milk
and starch boil together till they thicken; then cool and add one
well-beaten egg and two tablespoonfuls of sugar. Cook in the oven in a
dish set inside another filled with hot water, or in a double boiler.
The milk may be previously flavored with orange, lemon, or cocoanut.

PRUNE PUDDING.--Heat two and one half cups of milk to boiling, then
stir in gradually a heaping tablespoonful of cornstarch which has been
rubbed smooth in a little cold milk; let this boil and thicken for a
minute, then remove from the fire. When cool, add three well-beaten
eggs, two tablespoonfuls of sugar, and a cupful of prunes which have
been stewed, then drained of all juice, the stones removed, and the
prunes chopped fine. Pour into a pudding dish and bake twenty minutes.
Serve with or without cream.

PRIME WHIP.--Sift through a colander some stewed sweet California
prunes which have been thoroughly drained from juice, and from which the
stones have been removed. Beat the whites of three eggs to a stiff
froth, and add two cups of the sifted prunes; beat all together
thoroughly; turn into a pudding dish, and brown in the oven fifteen
minutes. Serve cold, with a little cream or custard for dressing. Almond
sauce also makes an excellent dressing.

RICE APPLE CUSTARD PUDDING.--Pare, and remove the cores without
dividing from a sufficient number of apples to cover the bottom of a
two-quart pudding dish. Fill the cavities of the apples with a little
grated lemon rind and sugar, and put them into the oven with a
tablespoon of water on the bottom of the dish. Cover, and steam till the
apples are tender, but not fallen to pieces. Then pour over them a
custard made with two cups of boiled rice, a quart of milk, half a cup
of sugar, and two eggs.

RICE CUSTARD PUDDING.--Take one and one half cups of nicely steamed
rice, four tablespoonfuls of sugar, and a pint of milk; heat to boiling
in a saucepan. Then stir in very carefully the yolk of one egg and one
whole egg, previously well beaten together with a few spoonfuls of milk
reserved for the purpose. Let the whole boil up till thickened, but not
longer, as the custard will whey and separate. When partly cool, flavor
with a little vanilla or lemon, turn into a glass dish, and meringue
with the white of the second egg beaten to a stiff froth. Cold steamed
rice may be used by soaking it in hot milk until every grain is
separate.

RICE SNOW.--Into a quart of milk heated to boiling, stir five
tablespoonfuls of rice flour previously braided with a very little cold
milk; add one half cup of sugar. Let the whole boil up together till
well cooked and thickened; then remove from the stove, and stir in
lightly the beaten whites of four eggs. Mold, and serve cold with foam
sauce.

RICE SNOW WITH JELLY.--Steam or bake a teacupful of best rice in
milk until the grains are tender. Pile it up on a dish roughly. When
cool, lay over it squares of jelly. Beat the whites of two eggs and one
third of a cup of sugar to a stiff froth, and pile like snow over the
rice. Serve with cream sauce.

RICE WITH EGGS.--Steam rice as previously directed, and when
sufficiently cooked, stir into half of it while hot, the yolks of one or
two eggs well beaten with a little sugar. Into the other half, the
whites of the eggs, sweetened and beaten to a stiff froth, may be
lightly stirred while the rice is still hot enough to set the eggs.
Serve with the yellow half in the bottom of the dish, and the white part
piled on top covered with whipped cream flavored with lemon or vanilla.

SNOW PUDDING.--Heat one half pint each of water and milk together,
to boiling, stir into this a tablespoonful of cornstarch rubbed smooth
in a little cold milk, and cook for five minutes. Cool partially and add
the whites of two well-beaten eggs. Turn into molds and set in the ice
box to cool. Serve with a cream made by stirring into a half pint of
boiling milk the yolks of two eggs, a teaspoonful of cornstarch rubbed
smooth in a little cold milk, and half a cup of sugar. Cook until well
thickened. Cool and flavor with a little lemon or vanilla. Or, if
preferred, serve with a dressing of fruit juice.

STEAMED CUSTARD.--Heat a pint of milk, with which has been well
beaten two eggs and one third of a cup of sugar, in a double boiler
until well thickened. When done, turn into a glass dish, and grate a
little of the yellow rind of lemon over the top to flavor. If desired to
have the custard in cups, remove from the fire when it begins to
thicken, turn into cups, and finish in a steamer over a kettle of
boiling water.

STRAWBERRY CHARLOTTE.--Fit slices of nice plain buns (those made
according to recipe on page 347 are nice for this) in the bottom of a
pudding dish, and cover with a layer of hulled strawberries; add another
layer of the buns cut in slices, a second layer of strawberries, and
then more slices of buns. Make a custard in the following manner: Heat a
scant pint of milk to boiling in the inner cup of a double boiler, and
stir into it gradually, beating thoroughly at the same time, an egg
which has been previously well beaten with half a cup of sugar, a
teaspoonful of cornstarch, and a spoonful or two of milk until perfectly
smooth. Cook together in the double boiler until well set. Cool
partially, and pour over the buns and strawberries. Place a plate with a
weight upon it on the top of the charlotte, and set away to cool.

POP CORN PUDDING.--Take a scant pint of the pop corn which is
ground and put up in boxes, or if not available, freshly popped corn,
rolled fine, is just as good. Add to it three cups of new milk, one half
cup of sugar, two whole eggs and the yolk of another, well beaten. Bake
in a pudding dish placed inside another filled with hot water, till the
custard is set. Cover with a meringue made of the remaining white of
egg, a teaspoonful of sugar, and a sprinkling of the pop corn.

SAGO CUSTARD PUDDING.--Put one half cup of sago and a quart of rich
milk into the inner cup of a double boiler, or a basin set inside a pan
of boiling water, and let it simmer until the sago has thickened the
milk and become perfectly transparent. Allow it to cool, then add a cup
of sugar, two well-beaten eggs, and a little of the grated rind of a
lemon. Turn into a pudding dish, and bake only till the custard has set.

SAGO AND FRUIT CUSTARD PUDDING.--Soak six table spoonfuls of sago
in just enough water to cover it, for twenty minutes. Meanwhile pare and
remove the cores from half a dozen or more tart apples, and fill the
cavities with a mixture of grated lemon rind and sugar. Place the apples
in the bottom of a pudding dish, with a tablespoonful of water; cover,
and set in the oven to bake. Put the soaked sago with a quart of milk
into a double boiler. Let it cook until the sago is clear and thick;
then add three fourths of a cup of sugar and two well-beaten eggs. Pour
the sago custard over the apples, which should be baked tender but not
mushy. Put the pudding dish in the oven in a pan of hot water, and bake
till the custard is well set. Serve cold.

SNOWBALL CUSTARD.--Flavor a pint of milk by sleeping in it three
or four slices of the yellow rind of a lemon for twenty minutes or more.
Skim out the rind; let the milk come to the boiling point, and drop into
it the well-beaten whites of two eggs, in tablespoonfuls, turning each
one over carefully, allowing them to remain only long enough to become
coagulated but not hardened, and then place the balls upon a wire sieve
to drain. Afterward stir into the scalding milk the yolks of the eggs
and one whole one well beaten, together with two tablespoonfuls of
sugar. Stir until it thickens. Pour this custard into a glass dish, and
lay the white balls on top.

TAPIOCA CUSTARD.--Soak a cup of pearl tapioca over night in
sufficient water to cover. When ready to prepare the custard, drain off
the water if any remain, and add one quart of milk to the tapioca; place
in a double boiler and cook until transparent; then add the well-beaten
yolks of three eggs or the yolks of two and one whole one, mixed with
three fourths of a cup of sugar. Let it cook a few minutes, just long
enough for the custard to thicken and no more, or it will whey and be
spoiled; flavor with a little vanilla and turn into a glass dish. Cover
the top with the whites beaten stiffly with a tablespoonful of sugar,
and dot with bits of jelly, or colored sugar prepared by mixing sugar
with cranberry or raspberry juice and allowing it to dry. For variety,
the custard may be flavored with grated lemon rind and a tablespoonful
of lemon juice whipped up with the whites of the eggs, or other flavor
may be dispensed with, and the meringue flavored by beating with a
tablespoonful of quince jelly with the whites of the eggs.

TAPIOCA PUDDING.--Soak a cupful of tapioca over night in just
enough water to cover. In the morning, add to it one quart of milk, and
cook in a double boiler until transparent. Add three eggs well beaten,
one half cup of sugar, one half cup of chopped raisins, and a very
little chopped citron. Bake till the custard is set. Serve warm or cold
as preferred.

VERMICELLI PUDDING.--Flavor two and one half cups of milk with
lemon as directed on page 229. Drop into it, when boiling, four ounces
of vermicelli, crushing it lightly with one hand while sprinkling it in,
and stir to keep it from gathering in lumps. Let it cook gently in a
double boiler, stirring often until it is tender and very thick. Then
pour it into a pudding dish, let it cool, and add a tablespoonful of
rather thick sweet cream if you have it (it does very well without),
half a cup of sugar, and lastly, two well-beaten eggs. Bake in a
moderately hot oven till browned over the top.

WHITE CUSTARD.--Beat together thoroughly one cup of milk, the
whites of two eggs, one tablespoonful of sugar, and one and one half
tablespoonfuls of almondine. Turn into cups and steam or bake until the
custard is set.

WHITE CUSTARD NO. 2.--Cook a half cup of farina in a quart of milk
in a double boiler, for an hour. Remove from the stove, and allow it to
become partially cool, then add one half cup of sugar, the whites of two
eggs, and one half the yolk of one egg. Turn into a pudding dish, and
bake twenty minutes or until the custard is well set.


STEAMED PUDDING.

The following precautions are necessary to be observed in steaming
puddings or desserts of any sort:--

1. Have the water boiling rapidly when the pudding is placed in the
steamer, and keep it constantly boiling.

2. Replenish, if needed, with boiling water, never with cold.

3. Do not open the steamer and let in the air upon the pudding, until it
is done.


_RECIPES._

BATTER PUDDING.--Beat four eggs thoroughly; add to them a pint of
milk, and if desired, a little salt. Sift a teacupful of flour and add
it gradually to the milk and eggs, beating lightly the while. Then pour
the whole mixture through, a fine wire strainer into a small pail with
cover, in which it can be steamed. This straining is imperative. The
cover of the pail should be tight fitting, as the steam getting into the
pudding spoils it. Place the pail in a kettle of boiling water, and do
not touch or move it until the pudding is done. It takes exactly an hour
to cook. If moved or jarred during the cooking, it will be likely to
fall. Slip it out of the pail on a hot dish, and serve with cream sauce.
A double boiler with tightly fitting cover is excellent for cooking this
pudding.

BREAD AND FRUIT CUSTARD.--Soak a cupful of finely grated bread
crumbs in a pint of rich milk heated to scalding. Add two thirds of a
cup of sugar, and the grated yellow rind of half a lemon. When cool, add
two eggs well beaten. Also two cups of canned apricots or peaches
drained of juice, or, if preferred, a mixture of one and one half cups
of chopped apples, one half cup of raisins, and a little citron. Turn
into a pudding dish, and steam in a steamer over a kettle of boiling
water for two hours. The amount of sugar necessary will vary somewhat
according to the fruit used.

DATE PUDDING.--Turn a cup of hot milk over two cups of stale bread
crumbs, and soak until softened; add one half cup of cream and one cup
of chopped and stoned dates. Mix all thoroughly together. Put in a china
dish and steam for three hours. Serve hot with lemon sauce.

RICE BALLS.--Steam one cup of rice till tender. Wring pudding
cloths about ten inches square out of hot water, and spread the rice one
third of an inch over the cloth. Put a stoned peach or apricot from
which the skin has been removed, in the center, filling the cavity in
each half of the fruit with rice. Draw up the cloth until the rice
smoothly envelops the fruit, tie, and steam ten or fifteen minutes.
Remove the cloth carefully, turn out into saucers, and serve with sauce
made from peach of apricot juice. Easy-cooking tart apples may also be
used. Steam them thirty minutes, and serve with sugar and cream.

STEAMED BREAD CUSTARD.--Cut stale bread in slices, removing hard
crusts. Oil a deep pudding mold, and sprinkle the bottom and sides with
Zante currants; over these place a layer of the slices of bread,
sprinkled with currants; add several layers, sprinkling each with the
currants in the same manner. Cover with a custard made by beating
together three or four eggs, three tablespoonfuls of sugar, and one
quart of milk. Put the pudding in a cool place for three hours; at the
end of that time, steam one and a quarter hours. Serve with mock cream
flavored with vanilla. Apple marmalade may be used to spread between the
slices in place of currants, if preferred.

STEAMED FIG PUDDING.--Moisten two cupfuls of finely grated Graham
bread crumbs with half a cup of thin sweet cream. Mix into it a heaping
cupful of finely chopped fresh figs, and a quarter of a cup of sugar.
Add lastly a cup of sweet milk. Turn all into a pudding dish, and steam
about two and one half hours. Serve as soon as done, with a little cream
for dressing, or with orange or lemon sauce.


PASTRY AND CAKE.

So much has been said and written about the dietetic evils of these
articles that their very names have been almost synonymous with
indigestion and dyspepsia. That they are prolific causes of this dire
malady cannot be denied, and it is doubtless due to two reasons; first,
because they are generally compounded of ingredients which are in
themselves unwholesome, and rendered doubly so by their combination; and
secondly, because tastes have become so perverted that an excess of
these articles is consumed in preference to more simple and nutritious
food.

As has been elsewhere remarked, foods containing an excess of fat, as do
most pastries and many varieties of cake, are exceedingly difficult of
digestion, the fat undergoing in the stomach no changes which answer to
the digestion of other elements of food, and its presence interferes
with the action of the gastric juice upon other elements. In
consequence, digestion proceeds very slowly, if at all, and the delay
often occasions fermentative and putrefactive changes in the entire
contents of the stomach.

It is the indigestibility of fat, and this property of delaying the
digestion of other foods, chiefly that render pastry and cakes so
deleterious to health.

We do not wish to be understood as in sympathy with that class of people
who maintain that dyspepsia is a disciplinary means of grace, when,
after having made the previous statement, we proceed to present recipes
for preparing the very articles we have condemned. Pie and cake are not
necessarily utterly unwholesome; and if prepared in a simple manner, may
be partaken of in moderation by persons with good digestion.
Nevertheless, they lack the wholesomeness of more simple foods, and we
most fully believe that would women supply their tables with perfectly
light, sweet, nutritious bread would cease. However, if pies and cakes
must needs be, make them as simple as possible.

GENERAL SUGGESTIONS FOR MAKING PIES.--Always prepare the filling
for pies before making the crust, if the filling is to be cooked in the
crust. Have all the material for the crust on the table, measured and in
readiness, before beginning to put together. Follow some of the simple
recipes given in these pages. Have all the material cold, handle the
least possible to make it into a mass, and do not knead at all.

When the crust is ready, roll it out quickly to about one half inch in
thickness, then fold up like a jelly roll, and cut from the end only
sufficient for one crust at a time. Lay this, the flat side upon the
board, and roll evenly in every direction, until scarcely more than an
eighth of an inch in thickness, and somewhat larger than the baking
plate, as it will shrink when lifted from the board.

Turn one edge over the rolling pin, and carefully lift it onto the
plate. If there is to be an upper crust, roll that in the same manner,
make a cut in the center to allow the steam to escape, fill the pie,
slightly rounding it in the center, and lift on the upper crust; press
both edges lightly together; then, lifting the pie in the left hand,
deftly trim away all overhanging portions of crust with a sharp knife;
ornament the edge if desired, and put at once into the oven, which
should be in readiness at just the right temperature, a rather moderate
oven being best for pies.

The under crust of lemon, pumpkin, custard, and very juicy fruit pies,
filled before baking, is apt to become saturated and softened with the
liquid mixture, if kept for any length of time after baking. This may be
prevented in a measure by glazing the crust, after it is rolled and
fitted on the plate, with the beaten white of an egg, and placing in the
oven just a moment to harden the egg before filling; or if the pie is
one of fruit, sprinkle the crust with a little flour and sugar, brushing
the two together with the hand before; adding the filling. During the
baking, the flour and melted sugar will adhere together, tending to keep
the juice from contact with the crust.

Pies are more wholesome if the crusts are baked separately and filled
for use as needed. This is an especially satisfactory way to make pies
of juicy fruit, as it does away largely with the saturated under crusts,
and the flavor of the fruit can be retained much more perfectly. Pies
with one crust can be made by simply fitting the crust to the plate,
pricking it lightly with a fork to prevent its blistering while baking,
and afterward filling when needed for the table. For pies with two
crusts, fit the under crust to the plate, and fill with clean pieces of
old white linen laid in lightly to support the upper crust. When baked,
slip the pie on a plate, lift off the upper crust, take out the pieces
of cloth, and just before serving, fill with fruit, which should be
previously prepared.

Canned peaches filled into such a crust make a delicious pie.
Strawberries, cherries, gooseberries, and other juicy fruits, that lose
so much of their flavor in baking, may be lightly scalded, the juice
thickened a little with flour if desired, sweetened to taste, and filled
into such a crust. An excellent pie may be made in this manner from
apples, stewed carefully so as to keep the slices whole, sweetened to
taste, and flavored with lemon, orange, or grated pineapple. One
pineapple will be sufficient for four pies. Fresh fruit for filling may
be used without cooking, if desired. If desired, several crusts may be
baked and put away unfilled. When needed, the crusts may be placed for a
few minutes in a hot oven until heated through, then filled with freshly
prepared fruit.

In preparing material for custard or pumpkin pies, if the milk used be
hot, the pies will be improved and the time of baking be considerably
shortened.

Tin or granite-ware plates are preferable to earthen ones for pies, as
they bake better on the bottom. The perforated pans are superior in some
respects. No greasing is needed; simply rub them well with flour. The
time required for baking pies varies from one half to three fourths of
an hour. The dampers should be so adjusted as to bake the bottom crust
first.

After baking, remove at once to heated earthen plates, or set the tins
upon small supports, so that the air can circulate underneath them.


_RECIPES._

PASTE FOR PIES.--Sift together equal parts of Graham grits and
white flour (Graham flour will do if the grits are not obtainable, but
the grits will produce a more crisp and tender crust), and wet with very
cold, thin sweet cream. Have the flour also as cold as possible, since
the colder the material, the more crisp the paste; mix together very
quickly into a rather stiff dough. Do not knead at all, but gather the
fragments lightly together, roll out at once, fill and bake quickly,
since much of the lightness of the crust depends upon the dispatch with
which the pie is gotten into the oven after the materials are thrown
together. If for any reason it is necessary to defer the baking, place
the crust in the ice-chest till needed.

CORN MEAL CRUST.--Equal parts of sifted white corn meal and flour,
mixed together lightly with rather thin sweet cream which has been set
in the ice-chest until very cold, makes a very good crust.

GRANOLA CRUST.--For certain pies requiring an under crust only, the
prepared granola manufactured by the Sanitarium Food Co. makes a
superior crust. To prepare, moisten with thin sweet cream--one half cup
of cream for every two thirds cup of granola is about the right
proportion, and will make sufficient crust for one pie. Flour the board,
and lift the moistened granola onto it, spreading it as much as possible
with the hands. Dredge lightly with flour over the top, and roll out
gently to the required size without turning. The material, being coarse
and granular, will break apart easily, but may be as easily pressed
together with the fingers. Change the position of the rolling pin often,
in order to shape the crust without moving it. When well roiled,
carefully slip a stiff paper under it, first loosening from the board
with a knife if necessary, and lift it gently onto the pan. Press
together any cracks, trim the edges, fill, and bake at once. Use the
least flour possible in preparing this crust, and bake as soon as made,
before the moisture has become absorbed. Such a crust is not suited for
custard or juicy fruit pies, but filled with prune, peach, or apple
marmalade, it makes a most delicious and wholesome pie. A cooked custard
may be used in such a crust.

PASTE FOR TART SHELLS.--Take one half cup of rather thin sweet
cream, which has been placed on ice until very cold; add to it the
stiffly beaten whites of two eggs, and whip all together briskly for ten
minutes. Add sufficient white flour to roll. Cut into the required
shape, bake quickly, but do not brown. Fill after baking. This paste,
rolled thin and cut into shapes with a cookie-cutter, one half of them
baked plain for under crusts, the other half ornamented for tops by
cutting small holes with a thimble or some fancy mold, put together with
a layer of some simple fruit jelly between them, makes a most attractive
looking dessert. It is likewise very nice baked in little patty pans,
and afterward filled with apple or peach marmalade, or any of the
following fillings:--

CREAM FILLING.--One cup of rich milk (part cream if it can be
afforded) heated to boiling. Into this stir one scant tablespoonful of
flour previously braided smooth with a little cold milk. Add to this the
well-beaten yolk of one egg and one tablespoonful of sugar. Turn this
mixture into the hot milk and stir until it thickens. Flavor with a
little grated lemon rind, vanilla, or, if preferred, flavor the milk
with cocoanut before using. Fill the tart shells, and meringue with the
white of the egg beaten stiff with a tablespoonful of sugar.

GRAPE TART.--Into one pint of canned or fresh grape juice, when
boiling, stir two tablespoonfuls of cornstarch braided with a little
water, and cook for five minutes. Sweeten to taste, and fill a baked
crust.

LEMON FILLING.--Into one cup of boiling water stir one
tablespoonful of cornstarch previously braided smooth with the juice of
a large lemon. Cook until it thickens, then add one half cup of sugar
and a little grated yellow rind of the lemon.

TAPIOCA FILLING.--Soak one tablespoonful of tapioca over night in
one cup of water; mash and stir the tapioca, simmer gently until clear
and thick, adding enough water to cook it well; add half a cup of white
sugar and a tablespoonful each of lemon and orange juice. If desired, a
little raspberry or currant juice may be added to make the jelly of a
pink color.

APPLE CUSTARD PIE.--Stew good dried apples till perfectly tender
and there remains but very little juice. Rub through a colander. For
each pie use one cup of the sifted apples, one and a half cups of rich
milk, two eggs, five tablespoonfuls of sugar, and a little grated lemon
rind for flavoring. Bake with under crust only. Stewed fresh apples,
beaten smooth or rubbed through a colander, can be used if preferred.
The eggs may be omitted, and one half cup more of the sifted apples,
with more sugar, may be used instead.

BANANA PIE.--For each pie required prepare a custard with one and
one half cups of milk, the yolks of two eggs, and two heaping
tablespoonfuls of sugar. Mash two large bananas through a colander,
strain the custard over them, and beat well together. Bake in an under
crust only, and meringue the top with the whites of the eggs beaten to a
stiff froth with two tablespoonfuls of sugar.

BREAD PIE.--Soak a slice of very light bread in a pint of rich
milk. When it is quite soft, rub through a colander and afterward beat
well through the milk. Add one well-beaten egg, four tablespoonfuls of
sugar, and a little grated lemon rind for flavor. Bake with under crust
only, till the custard is set. This is sufficient for one pie.

CARROT PIE.--Boil, drain, and rub the carrots through a colander.
For each pie required, use two large tablespoonfuls of carrot thus
prepared, two eggs, two cups of milk, a little salt if desired, four
tablespoonfuls of sugar, and lemon or vanilla for flavoring. Bake with
under crust only.

COCOANUT PIE.--Flavor a pint of milk with two tablespoonfuls of
desiccated, or finely grated fresh cocoanut according to directions on
page 298; strain, and add enough fresh milk to make a pint in all. Add
three tablespoonfuls of sugar, heat, and as the milk comes to a boil,
add a tablespoonful of cornstarch rubbed smooth in a little cold milk.
Boil for a minute or two till the cornstarch thickens the milk; then
remove from the stove. Allow it to get cold, and then stir in one
well-beaten egg; bake in an under crust. Tie a tablespoonful of
desiccated cocoanut in a clean cloth, and pound it as fine as flour; mix
it with a tablespoonful of sugar and the white of an egg beaten to a
stiff froth. When the pie is done, spread this over the top, and brown
in the oven for a moment only.

COCOANUT PIE NO. 2.--Steep one half cup of cocoanut in a pint of
milk for one half hour. Strain out the cocoanut and add sufficient fresh
milk to make a pint. Allow it to become cold, then add a quarter of a
cup of sugar and two well-beaten eggs. Bake with an under crust only.
When done, the top may be covered with a meringue the same as in the
preceding recipe.

CREAM PIE.--For one pie beat together one egg, one half cup of
sugar, one tablespoonful of flour, and two cups of rich milk. Bake in
one crust.

CRANBERRY PIE.--Stew a quart of cranberries until broken in a pint
of boiling water. Rub through a colander to remove the skins, add two
cups of sugar and one half cup of sifted flour. Bake with under crust
only.

DRIED APPLE PIE.--Stew good dried apples till perfectly tender in
as small a quantity of water as possible. When done, rub through a
colander; they should be about the consistency of fruit jam; if not, a
little flour may be added. Sweeten to taste, fill under crusts with the
mixture, and bake. If lemon flavor is liked, a few pieces of the yellow
rind may be added to the apples a little while before they are tender.
If the apples are especially tasteless, lemon juice or some sour apple
jelly should be added after rubbing through the colander. The crusts may
first be baked, and filled with the mixture when needed; in which case
the sauce should be simmered lightly till of the desired consistency.
The top may be ornamented with strips or rings of crust, if desired.

DRIED APPLE PIE WITH RAISINS.--Rub a quart of well-stewed dried
apples through a colander, add a cupful of steamed raisins, sugar to
sweeten, and bake with two crusts. This is sufficient for two pies.

DRIED APRICOT PIE.--Stew together one third dried apricots and two
thirds dried apples or peaches. When soft, rub through a colander, add
sugar to sweeten, and if very juicy, stew again until the juice is
mostly evaporated; then beat until light and bake in a granola crust.

FARINA PIE.--Cook one fourth cup of farina in a double boiler for
an hour in three cups of rich milk. Allow it to become cool, then add
one half cup of sugar, the yolks of two eggs, and a little grated lemon
rind. Bake with under crust only. Meringue the top with the white of the
egg beaten to a stiff froth with one tablespoonful of sugar and a little
grated lemon rind for flavoring. The quantity given is sufficient for
two small pies.

FRUIT PIES.--Apples, peaches, and all small fruits and berries may
be made into palatable pies without rich crusts or an excess of sugar,
or the addition of unwholesome spices and flavorings. Bake the crust
separately, and fill when needed with prepared fruit; or, fill with the
fruit, using only sufficient sugar to sweeten; add no spices, and bake
quickly. Prepare apples for pies by paring, coring, and dividing in
eighths. Peaches are best prepared in a similar manner. Fill crusts in
which the fruit is to be baked quite full and slightly heaping in the
center. If flavoring is desired, let it be that of some other fruit. For
apple pies, a teaspoonful or two of pineapple juice, a little grated
lemon or orange peel, or a little strawberry or quince syrup, may be
used for flavoring. For pies made of apples, peaches, and fruits which
are not very juicy, add a tablespoonful or so of water or fruit juice;
but for very juicy fruits and berries, dredge the under crust with a
tablespoonful of sugar and a little flour mixed together before filling,
or stir a spoonful of flour into the fruit so that each berry or piece
may be separately floured.

GRAPE JELLY PIE.--Cook perfectly ripe, purple grapes; rub them
through a colander to remove the seeds and skins. Return the pulp to the
fire and thicken with rice flour or cornstarch, to the consistency of
thick cream or jelly, and sweeten to taste. Fill an under crust with the
mixture, and bake. The top may be ornamented with pastry cut in fancy
shapes if desired.

JELLY CUSTARD PIE.--Dissolve three tablespoonfuls of nice, pure
fruit jelly in very little warm water, add one and one half cups of milk
and two well-beaten eggs, stirring the whites in last. Bake with under
crust only. Jellies are usually so sweet that no sugar is needed. Apple,
raspberry, currant, strawberry, and quince jellies all make nice pies,
prepared in this way.

LEMON PIE.--Take four tablespoonfuls of lemon juice (one large
lemon or two small ones will yield about this quantity), the grated
yellow portion only of the rind of half a lemon, and two thirds of a cup
of sugar. Beat the lemon juice and sugar together. Braid a slightly
heaping tablespoonful of cornstarch with as little water as possible,
and pour over it, stirring constantly, one half pint of boiling water,
to thicken the starch. Add the lemon and sugar to the starch, and let it
cool; then stir in the yolks of two eggs and half the white of one, well
beaten together. Beat thoroughly, pour into a deep crust, and bake. When
done, cover with the remaining whites of the eggs, beaten with one and a
half tablespoonfuls of sugar, and brown lightly in the oven.

LEMON MERINGUE CUSTARD.--Heat two cups of milk to boiling, add a
tablespoonful of cornstarch well braided with a little cold milk; let
the whole simmer till thickened, stirring constantly. Allow it to cool,
add one third of a cup of sugar and the beaten yolks of two eggs. Bake
in an under crust, and cover with a meringue made of the whites of the
eggs beaten to a stiff froth with two tablespoonfuls of sugar mixed
with grated lemon peel. If liked, a spoonful of lemon juice may be
added, a few drops at a time, during the beating of the meringue.

ONE-CRUST PEACH PIE.--Pare and remove the stones from ripe, nice
flavored peaches; stew till soft in the smallest quantity of water
possible without burning. Rub through a colander, or beat smooth with a
large spoon. Add sugar as required. Bake with one crust. If the peach
sauce is evaporated until quite dry, it is very nice baked in a granola
crust. When done, meringue with the whites of two eggs whipped stiff
with two tablespoonfuls of sugar. The flavor is improved by adding by
degrees to the egg while whipping, a tablespoonful of lemon juice.
Return to the oven and brown lightly. Serve cold.

Canned peaches or stewed dried peaches may be used in place of the fresh
ones. In using the dried peaches, carefully examine and wash; soak them
over night in cold water, and stew them in the same water until soft
enough to rub through the colander. For each pie, add two tablespoonfuls
of sweet cream, and sufficient sugar to sweeten; too much, sugar
destroys the flavor of the fruit. Evaporated peaches, soaked over night
and stewed carefully until tender, then removed from the syrup, which
may be sweetened and boiled until thick and rich and afterward turned
over the peaches, makes a delicious pie. Bake in one crust, with or
without a meringue.

ORANGE PIE.--Rub smooth a heaping tablespoonful of cornstarch in
three tablespoonfuls of water; pour over it a cup of boiling water, and
cook until clear, stirring frequently that no lumps form. Add one cupful
of sour orange juice, a little grated rind, and the juice of one lemon,
with two eggs. Bake with under crust only. Meringue the top when baked,
with the whites of the eggs well beaten with a tablespoonful of sugar,
and a very little grated orange peel sprinkled over it.

PEACH CUSTARD PIE.--Cover a pie plate with an under crust. Take
fresh peaches, pare, halve, and stone them, and place a layer, hollow
side up, in the pie. Prepare a custard with one egg, one cup of milk,
and three tablespoonfuls of sugar. Pour the custard over the peaches,
and bake. If the quantity given will not entirely cover the peaches, a
little more must be prepared. Canned peaches which are not broken can be
used instead of fresh ones. The pieces should be drained free from
juice, and less sugar used.

PRUNE PIE.--Prepare and cook sweet California prunes as directed
for Prune Marmalade. Fill an under crust and bake. The top may be
ornamented with strips of crust or pastry leaves; or if desired, may be
meringued with the whites of two eggs beaten to a stiff froth with two
tablespoonfuls of sugar and a little grated lemon peel. This pie is
excellent baked in a granola crust.

PUMPKIN PIE.--To prepare the pumpkin, cut into halves, remove the
seeds, divide into moderately small pieces, and bake in the oven until
thoroughly done. Then scrape from the shell, rub through a colander, and
proceed as follows: For one and one third pints of the cooked pumpkin
use one quart of hot, rich, sweet milk. Add one half cup of sugar and
the well-beaten yolks of three eggs, beat well together, add the whites
of the eggs beaten to a stiff froth, and beat thoroughly. Line the tins
with a stiff cream paste, fill, and bake in a moderate oven till the
pies are barely firm in the center, or till the custard is well set.

PUMPKIN PIE NO. 2.--For each pie desired, take one half pint of
baked pumpkin, a pint of rich milk, one third of a cup of sugar, and two
eggs. Mix the sugar and eggs, add the pumpkin, and lastly the milk,
which should be hot, and beat all together with an egg beater until very
light. Fill the crust, and bake slowly.

PUMPKIN PIE WITHOUT EGGS.--Prepare the pumpkin as previously
directed. For two medium-sized pies, heat a pint and a half of milk in a
farina kettle, and when scalding, stir into it two scant tablespoonfuls
of white flour rubbed smooth in a little cold milk. Cook, stirring
often, until it thickens. Add half a cup of sugar, or a little less of
syrup, to a pint and a half of the sifted pumpkin, and after beating
well together, stir this into the hot milk. Bake in an under crust; or,
for three pies, take one quart and a cupful of pumpkin, three fourths of
a cup of sugar, two thirds of a cup of best New Orleans molasses, and
three pints of hot milk. Beat all together thoroughly. Line deep plates
with a cream crust, and bake an hour and a half in a moderate oven.

SIMPLE CUSTARD PIE.--For one pie, take one pint of milk, two
well-beaten eggs, one third of a cup of sugar, and a little grated lemon
rind for flavor. Bake in an under crust. If eggs are scarce, a very good
pie can be made by using only one egg, and a tablespoonful of
cornstarch, with the above proportions of milk and sugar; in which case,
heat the milk to scalding, stir in the cornstarch, and cook till
thickened; cool, and then add the well-beaten egg. If preferred, the
crust may be baked before filling, and the custard steamed, meanwhile.

SQUASH PIE.--Squash prepared as directed for pumpkin, and flavored
with rose water, makes an excellent pie. Or, for each pie desired, take
one pint of rich milk (part cream if it can be afforded), add one cup of
nicely baked mealy squash which has been rubbed through a colander, one
third of a cup of sugar, and two well-beaten eggs. Beat all together
thoroughly. Bake in a deep pan slowly and carefully until firm.

SQUASH PIE WITHOUT EGGS.--Bake the squash in the shell; when done,
remove with a spoon and mash through a colander. For one pie, take eight
tablespoonfuls of the squash, half a cup of sugar, and one and one third
cups of boiling milk. Pour the milk slowly over the squash, beating
rapidly meanwhile to make the mixture light. Bake in one crust.

SWEET-APPLE CUSTARD PIE.--Into one pint of new milk, grate three
ripe sweet apples (Golden Sweets are excellent); add two well-beaten
eggs, and sugar to taste. Bake with under crust only.

SWEET POTATO PIE.--Bake sufficient sweet potatoes to make a pint of
pulp when rubbed through a colander; add a pint of rich milk, a scant
cup of sugar, salt if desired, the yolks of two eggs, and a little
grated lemon rind for flavor. Bake with under crust. When done, meringue
with the whites of the eggs beaten up with a tablespoonful of sugar.


CAKE.

GENERAL SUGGESTIONS.--Always sift the flour for cake before
measuring out the amount required. Use the best granulated white sugar.
Eggs for use in cake are better to have the yolks and whites beaten
separately. Beat the former until they cease to froth and begin to
thicken as if mixed with flour. Beat the whites until stiff enough to
remain in the bowl if inverted. Have the eggs and dishes cool, and if
practicable, beat in a cool room. Use earthen or china bowls to beat
eggs in.

If fruit is to be used, it should be washed and dried according to
directions given on page 298, and then dusted with flour, a
dessertspoonful to the pound of fruit. For use in cup cake or any other
cake which requires a quick baking, raisins should be first steamed. If
you have no patent steamer, place them in a close covered dish within an
ordinary steamer, and cook for an hour over a kettle of boiling water.
This should be done the day before they are to be used.

Use an earthen or granite-ware basin for mixing cake. Be very accurate
in measuring the materials, and have them all at hand and all utensils
ready before beginning to put the cake together. If it is to be baked at
once, see that the oven also is at just the right temperature. It should
be less hot for cake than for bread. Thin cakes require a hotter oven
than those baked in loaves. They require from fifteen to twenty minutes
to bake; thicker loaves, from thirty to sixty minutes. For loaf cakes
the oven should be at such a temperature that during the first half of
the time the cake will have risen to its full height and just begun to
brown.

The recipes given require neither baking powder, soda, nor saleratus.
Yeast and air can be made to supply the necessary lightness, and their
use admits of as great a variety in cakes as will be needed on a
hygienic bill of fare.

In making cake with yeast, do not use very thick cream, as a rich, oily
batter retards fermentation and makes the cake slow in rising. If the
cake browns too quickly, protect it by a covering of paper. If necessary
to move a cake in the oven, do it very gently. Do not slam the oven door
or in any way jar a cake while baking, lest it fall. Line cake tins with
paper to prevent burning the bottom and edges. Oil the paper, not the
tins, very lightly. Cake is done when it shrinks from the pan and stops
hissing, or when a clean straw run into the thickest part comes up
clean.

As soon as possible after baking, remove from the pan, as, if allowed to
remain in the pan, it is apt to become too moist.


_RECIPES._

APPLE CAKE.--Scald a cup of thin cream and cool to blood heat, add
one and a half cups of sifted white flour, one fourth of a cup of sugar,
and a gill of liquid yeast or one half cake of compressed yeast
dissolved in a gill of thin cream. Beat well together, set in a warm
place, and let it rise till perfectly light. When well risen, add one
half cup of sugar mixed with one half cup of warm flour. Beat well and
set in a warm place to rise again. When risen a second time, add two
eggs, whites and yolks beaten separately, and about one tablespoonful of
flour. Turn the whole into three round shallow baking tins, which have
been previously oiled and warmed, and place where it will rise again for
an hour, or until it is all of a foam. Bake quickly in a moderately hot
oven. Make this the day before it is needed, and when ready to use
prepare a filling as follows: Beat together the whites of two eggs, one
half cup of sugar, the juice of one lemon, and two large tart apples
well grated. Heat in a farina kettle until all are hot; cool, and
spread between the layers of cake. This should be eaten the day the
filling is prepared.

COCOANUT CUSTARD CAKE.--Make the cake as directed in the preceding
recipe. For the filling, prepare a soft custard by heating just to the
boiling point one pint of rich milk previously flavored with cocoanut;
into which stir A tablespoonful of cornstarch braided with a little
milk, and let it boil until thickened. Beat together an egg and one
third of a cup of sugar, and turn the hot mixture slowly over it,
stirring constantly till the custard thickens. When cold, spread between
the layers of raised cake.

CREAM CAKE.--Prepare the cake as above. Spread between the layers
when cold a cream made as follows: Stir into one half pint of boiling
milk two teaspoonfuls of cornstarch rubbed smooth in a little cold milk.
Take with two tablespoonfuls of sugar; return to the rest of the custard
and cook, stirring constantly until quite thick. Cool and flavor with a
teaspoonful of vanilla or rose water.

DELICATE CUP CAKE.--This cake contains no soda or baking powder,
and to make it light requires the incorporation of as much air as
possible. In order to accomplish this, it should be put together in the
same manner as directed for Batter Breads (page 154). Have all material
measured and everything in readiness before beginning to put the cake
together, then beat together the yolk of one egg, one cup of sugar, and
one cup of very cold sweet cream, until all of a foam; add a little
grated lemon rind for flavoring; stir in slowly, beating briskly all the
time, two cups of granular white flour (sometimes termed gluten flour)
or Graham meal. When all the flour is added, add lastly the beaten
whites of two eggs, stirring just enough to mix them well throughout the
whole; turn at once into slightly heated gem irons which have been
previously oiled, and bake in a moderately quick oven. If made according
to directions, this cake will be very light and delicate. It will not
puff up much above its first proportions, but will be light throughout.

A nice cake may be prepared in the same manner with Graham meal or even
white flour, by the addition of a heaping tablespoonful of cornstarch
sifted into the flour, in the way in which baking powder is ordinarily
mixed with flour before using.

FIG LAYER CAKE.--Prepare the cake as directed for Apple Cake. Chop
one half pound of figs very fine, add one half cup of sugar, one cup of
water and boil in a farina kettle until soft and homogeneous. Cool, and
spread between the cakes. Or chop steamed figs very fine, mix with an
equal quantity of almondine, and use.

FRUIT JELLY CAKE.--Prepare the cake as in the foregoing, using
fruit jelly between the layers.

GOLD AND SILVER CAKE.--Prepare the cake as for Apple Cake. When it
has risen the second time, measure out one third of it, and add the
yolks of the eggs to that portion with a little grated lemon rind for
flavoring; add the whites with some very finely pulverized desiccated
cocoanut to the other two thirds. Make two sheets of the white and one
of the yellow. Allow them to become perfectly light before baking. When
baked, place the yellow portion between the two white sheets, binding
them together with a little frosting or white currant jelly.

ICING FOR CAKES.--Since icing adds to the excess of sugar contained
in cakes, it is preferable to use them without it except when especially
desired for ornament. An icing without eggs may be prepared by boiling a
cup of granulated sugar in five tablespoonfuls of sweet milk for five
minutes, then beating until cool enough to spread. One with egg may be
easily made of six tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar, the white of one
egg, and one teaspoonful of boiling water mixed without beating. A
colored icing may be made by using a teaspoonful of boiling cranberry
juice or other red fruit juice instead of water. The top of the icing
may be ornamented with roasted almonds, bits of colored sugar or frosted
fruits, directions for the preparation of all of which have already been
given.

ORANGE CAKE.--Prepare the cake as for Apple Cake, and bake in two
layers. For the filling, take two good-sized, juicy oranges. Flavor two
tablespoonfuls of sugar by rubbing it over the skin of the oranges, then
peel, remove the white rind, and cut into small pieces, discarding the
seeds and the central pith. Put the orange pulp in a china bowl, and set
in a dish of boiling water. When it is hot, stir in a heaping
teaspoonful of cornstarch which has been braided smooth in two spoonfuls
of water. Stir constantly until the starch has cooked, and the whole
becomes thickened. Beat the yolk of one egg to a cream with two
tablespoonfuls of sugar. Stir this very gradually, so as not to lump,
into the orange mixture, and cook two or three minutes longer. Remove
from the fire, and when cool, spread between the cakes. If the oranges
are not very tart, a little lemon juice is an improvement. Meringue the
top of the cake with the white of the egg beaten up with the two
tablespoonfuls of sugar flavored with orange.

FRUIT CAKE.--Make a sponge of one pint of thin cream which has been
scalded and cooled to lukewarm, one gill of liquid yeast or one half
cake of compressed yeast dissolved in a gill of cream, one half cup of
sugar, and two and one half cups of flour. Beat all together very
thoroughly and let rise until light. When light, add another half cup of
sugar, one half cup of rather thick cream which has been scalded and
cooled, one cup of warm flour, and after beating well together, set away
to rise again. When well risen, add one cup of seeded raisins, one
fourth cup of citron chopped fine, one half cup of Zante currants, two
well-beaten eggs, and about one and one third cups of flour. Turn into a
brick loaf bread pan, let it rise until very light, and bake. When done,
remove from the pan and set away until at least twenty-four hours old
before using.

LOAF CAKE.--Scald a cup of rather thin cream, and cool to blood
heat. Add one and one half cups of warm flour, one half a cup of sugar,
and one fourth cake of compressed yeast dissolved in two tablespoonfuls
of thin cream or as much of liquid yeast. Beat well, and let rise until
perfectly light; then add one half cup more of sugar mixed with one half
cup of warm flour. Beat well, and set away to rise a second time. When
again well risen, add the whites of three eggs beaten to a stiff froth,
one half cup of warm flour, and a little grated lemon rind, or two
teaspoonfuls of rose water to flavor. Turn into a brick loaf bread pan
lined with oiled paper, allow it to become perfectly light again, and
bake. This cake, like other articles made with yeast, should not be
eaten within at least twenty-four hours after baking.

PINEAPPLE CAKE.--Prepare as for orange cake, using grated pineapple
in place of oranges.

PLAIN BUNS.--These are the simplest of all cakes. Dissolve half a
small cake of compressed yeast in a cup of thin cream which has been
previously warmed to blood heat, add two cups of warm flour, and beat
thoroughly together. Put in a warm place, and let it rise till very
light. Add three tablespoonfuls of sugar mixed well with a half cup of
warm flour, one half cup of Zante currants, and sufficient flour to make
of the consistency of dough. Buns should be kneaded just as soft as
possible, and from fifteen to twenty minutes. Shape into biscuits a
little larger than an English walnut, place them on tins far enough
apart so they will not touch each other when risen. Put in a warm place
till they have risen to twice their first size, then bake in a
moderately quick oven. If desired, the currants may be omitted and a
little grated lemon rind for flavoring added with the sugar, or a bit of
citron may be placed in the top of each bun when shaping. When taken
from the oven, sprinkle the top of each with moist sugar if desired, or
glace by brushing with milk while baking.

SPONGE CAKE.--For this will be required four eggs, one cup of
sugar, one tablespoonful of lemon juice with a little of the grated
rind, and one cup of white flour. Success in the making of sponge cake
depends almost wholly upon the manner in which it is put together. Beat
the yolks of the eggs until very light and thick, then add the sugar
little by little, beating it in thoroughly; add the lemon juice and the
grated rind. Beat the whites of the eggs until perfectly stiff and firm,
and fold or chop them very lightly into the yolk mixture. Sift the flour
with a sifter little by little over the mixture and fold it carefully
in. On no account stir either the white of the eggs or the flour in,
since stirring will drive out the air which has been beaten into the
eggs. Do not beat after the flour is added. The cake, when the flour is
all in, should be stiff and spongy. If it is liquid in character, it
will be apt to be tough and may be considered a failure. Bake in a
shallow pan in a rather hot oven fifteen or twenty minutes.

SUGAR CRISPS.--Make a soft dough of two and one fourth cups of
Graham flour, one half cup of granulated white sugar, and one cup of
rather thick sweet cream. Knead as little as possible, roll out very
thinly, cut in rounds or squares, and bake in a quick oven.

VARIETY CAKE.--Make the same as Gold and Silver Cake, and mix a
half cup of Zante currants and chopped raisins with the yellow portion.
The white portion may be flavored by adding a very little chopped citron
instead of the cocoanut, if preferred.




TABLE TOPICS.

    If families could be induced to substitute the apple--sound, ripe,
    and luscious--for the pies, cakes, candies, and other sweetmeats
    with which children are too often stuffed, there would be a
    diminution of doctors' bills, sufficient in a single year to lay up
    a stock of this delicious fruit for a season's use.--_Prof.
    Faraday._

    Food for repentance--mince pie eaten late at night.

    _Young Student_--"This cook book says that pie crust needs plenty of
    shortening. Do you know what that means, pa?"

    _Father_--"It means lard."

    "But why is lard called shortening, pa?"

    "Because it shortens life."

    The health journals and the doctors all agree that the best and most
    wholesome part of the New England country doughnut is the hole. The
    larger the hole, they say, the better the doughnut.

    An old gentleman who was in the habit of eating a liberal slice of
    pie or cake just before retiring, came home late one evening after
    his wife had gone to bed. After an unsuccessful search in the
    pantry, he called to his wife, "Mary, where is the pie?" His good
    wife timidly acknowledged that there was no pie in the house. Said
    her husband, "Then where is the cake?" The poor woman meekly
    confessed that the supply of cake was also exhausted; at which the
    disappointed husband cried out in a sharp, censorious tone, "Why,
    what would you do if somebody should be sick in the night?"

    _Woman_ (to tramp)--"I can give you some cold buckwheat cakes and a
    piece of mince pie." _Tramp_--(frightened) "What ye say?"
    _Woman_--"Cold buckwheat cakes and mince pie." _Tramp_--(heroically)
    "Throw in a small bottle of pepsin, Madam, and I'll take the
    chances."




GRAVIES AND SAUCES

Gravies for vegetables, sauces for desserts, and similar foods thickened
with flour or cornstarch, are among the most common of the poorly
prepared articles of the _cuisine_, although their proper preparation is
a matter of considerable importance, since neither a thin, watery sauce
nor a stiff, paste-like mixture is at all palatable. The preparation of
gravies and sauces is a very simple matter when governed by that
accuracy of measurement and carefulness of detail which should be
exercised in the preparation of all foods. In consistency, a properly
made sauce should mask the back of the spoon; that is to say, when
dipped into the mixture and lifted out, the metal of the spoon should
not be visible through it as it runs off. The proportion of material
necessary to secure this requisite is one tablespoonful of flour,
slightly rounded, for each half pint of water or stock. If the sauce be
made of milk or fruit juice, a little less flour will be needed. If
cornstarch be used, a scant instead of a full tablespoonful will be
required. The flour, or cornstarch should be first braided or rubbed
perfectly smooth in a very small amount of the liquid reserved for the
purpose (salt or sugar, if any is to be used, being added to the flour
before braiding with the liquid), and then carefully added to the
remaining liquid, which should be actively boiling. It should then be
continuously stirred until it has thickened, when it should be allowed
to cook slowly for five or ten minutes until the starch or flour is well
done. If through any negligence to observe carefully these simple
details, there should be lumps in the sauce, they must be removed before
serving by turning the whole through a fine colander or wire strainer.

The double boiler is the best utensil for the preparation of sauces and
gravies, since it facilitates even cooking and renders them less liable
to become scorched. The inner cup should be placed on the top of the
range until the sauce has become thickened, as in the cooking of grains,
and afterwards placed in the outer boiler to continue the cooking as
long as needed.

Cream gravies for vegetables may be delicately flavored with celery, by
steeping a few bits of celery in the milk for a few minutes, and
removing with a fork before adding the thickening. Sauces for puddings
may be similarly flavored, by steeping cocoanut or bits of orange or
lemon rind in the milk.


GRAVIES AND SAUCES FOR VEGETABLES.


_RECIPES._

BROWN SAUCE.--Heat a pint of thin cream, and when boiling, add half
a teaspoonful of salt and a tablespoonful of flour browned in the oven
as directed on page 274, and rubbed to a smooth paste with a little cold
milk. Allow it to boil rapidly, stirring constantly until thickened;
then cook more slowly, in a double boiler, for five or ten minutes. If
desired, the milk may be flavored with onion before adding the flour.
This makes a good dressing for potatoes.

CREAM OR WHITE SAUCE.--Heat a pint of rich milk, part cream if it
can be afforded, to boiling, and stir into it one tablespoonful of flour
previously rubbed smooth in a little milk. Season with salt, and cook in
a double boiler five or ten minutes, stirring frequently that no lumps
be formed. If lumps are found in the sauce, turn it quickly through a
fine, hot colander into the dish in which it is to be served.

CELERY SAUCE.--Cut half a dozen stalks of celery into
finger-lengths, and simmer in milk for ten or fifteen minutes. Skim out
the celery, add a little cream to the milk, salt to taste, and thicken
with flour as for white sauce. This is very nice for potatoes and for
toast.

EGG SAUCE.--Heat a pint of milk to boiling, and stir in a
dessertspoonful of flour rubbed smooth in a little milk. Stir constantly
until the sauce is well thickened; add the well-beaten yolk of an egg,
turning it in very slowly and stirring rapidly so that it shall be well
mingled. Boil up once only, add a very little salt, and serve. The egg
makes an excellent substitute for cream.

PEASE GRAVY.--A gravy prepared either of dried or green peas as
directed for Lentil Gravy on page 226, makes a suitable dressing for
baked potatoes. Lentil gravy is also good for the same purpose. The
addition of a little lemon juice to the lentil gravy makes another
variety.

TOMATO GRAVY.--A gravy made of tomatoes as directed on page 261, is
excellent to use on baked or boiled sweet potatoes.

TOMATO CREAM GRAVY.--Prepare a gravy as for Cream Sauce, using a
slightly heaping measure of flour. When done, add, just before serving,
for each quart of the cream sauce, one cup of hot, stewed tomato which
has been put through a fine colander to remove all seeds. Beat it
thoroughly into the sauce and serve on boiled or baked potato.


SAUCES FOR DESSERTS AND PUDDINGS.


_RECIPES._

ALMOND SAUCE.--Heat a pint of rich milk in the inner cup of a
double boiler, placed directly upon the stove. When the milk is boiling,
stir into it a heaping tablespoonful of flour which has been rubbed to a
cream in a little cold milk. Boil rapidly until thickened, stirring
constantly; then add three tablespoonfuls of almondine; place in the
outer boiler, and cook for five or ten minutes longer.

CARAMEL SAUCE.--Stir a cup of sugar in a saucepan over the fire
until melted and lightly browned. Add one cup of boiling water, and
simmer ten minutes.

COCOANUT SAUCE.--Flavor a pint of new milk with cocoanut, as
directed on page 298. Skim out the cocoanut, and add enough fresh milk
to make one pint. Heat the milk to boiling, add two tablespoonfuls of
sugar, thicken with two even spoonfuls of cornstarch, and proceed in the
same manner as for Mock Cream.

CREAM SAUCE.--Beat together two thirds of a cup of sugar, one
tablespoonful of thick, sweet cream, and one egg. Wet half a teaspoonful
of cornstarch with a little milk, and stir in with the mixture; then
add five tablespoonfuls of boiling milk, stirring rapidly all the time.
Pour into the inner cup of a double boiler; have the water in the outer
cup boiling, and cook five minutes. Flavor to taste.

CRANBERRY PUDDING SAUCE.--To a quart of boiling water add two cups
of sugar, and when well dissolved, one quart of carefully sorted
cranberries. Mash the berries as much as possible with a silver spoon,
and boil just seven minutes. Turn through a colander to remove skins,
cool and serve.

CUSTARD SAUCE.--Rub two teaspoonfuls of flour to a smooth paste
with half a cup of new milk. Heat two and a half cups of fresh milk in a
double boiler to scalding, then stir in the braided flour; heat again,
stirring constantly till just to the boiling point, but no longer;
remove from the stove and cool a little. Beat together one egg, three
tablespoonfuls of sugar, and a little lemon rind for flavoring. Turn the
hot milk over this, a little at a time, stirring briskly meanwhile.
Return the whole to the double boiler, and cook, stirring frequently,
until when a spoon is dipped into the custard a coating remains upon it.
Then remove at once from the fire. If the spoon comes out clean, the
custard is not sufficiently cooked.

EGG SAUCE.--Separate the yolks and whites of three eggs. Beat the
whites to a stiff froth, and stir in very gently, so as not to let the
air out of the beaten whites, one cup of powdered sugar and a
teaspoonful of vanilla or lemon flavoring powder. Lastly, stir in
carefully the beaten yolks of the eggs, and serve at once.

EGG SAUCE NO. 2.--Beat the whites of three eggs to a stiff froth
with one half cup of sugar. Add three tablespoonfuls of lemon juice and
one of water. Serve at once.

FOAMY SAUCE.--Beat one egg or the whites of two very thoroughly
with one half cup of sugar and a little grated lemon rind. Pour on this
very slowly, stirring constantly to make it smooth, one cup of boiling
milk, part cream if it can be afforded. If the whites alone are used,
they should not be beaten stiff. If preferred, the lemon may be omitted
and a tablespoonful or two of currant juice or quince jelly added last
as flavoring.

FRUIT CREAM.--Take the juice pressed from a cupful of fresh
strawberries, red raspberries, or black caps, add to it one third of a
cup of sugar, and place in the ice chest till chilled. Set a cup of
sweet cream also on ice till very cold. When thoroughly cold, whip with
an egg beater till the froth begins to rise, then add to it the cold
fruit juice and beat again. Have ready the white of one egg beaten to a
stiff froth, which add to the fruit cream, and whip till no more froth
will rise. This makes a delicious dressing for simple grain molds and
blancmanges, but is so rich it should be used rather sparingly. Serve as
soon as possible after being prepared. Fruit syrup, in the proportion of
two or three tablespoonfuls to the pint of cream, may be used in the
same manner when the fresh juice is not available. The juice of orange,
quince, and pineapple may also be used in the same manner as that of
berries.

FRUIT SAUCE.--Heat a pint of red raspberry, currant, grape,
strawberry, apricot, or any other fruit juice to scalding, and stir in a
tablespoonful of cornstarch previously rubbed to a cream with a little
cold water. Cook till it thickens; then add sugar according to the
acidity of the fruit. Strain and cool before using. If fruit juice is
not available, two or three tablespoonfuls of pure fruit jelly may be
dissolved in a pint of hot water and used instead of the juice. A
mixture of red and black raspberry juice, or currant and raspberry, will
be found acceptable for variety.

FRUIT SAUCE NO. 2.--Mash a quart of fresh berries, add one cup of
sugar, beat very thoroughly together, and set away until needed. Just
before it is wanted for serving, turn into a granite fruit kettle and
heat nearly to boiling, stirring constantly to avoid burning. Serve hot
with hot or cold puddings, or molded desserts.

LEMON PUDDING SAUCE.--Heat to boiling, in a double boiler, a pint
of water in which are two slices of lemon, and stir into it a
dessertspoonful of cornstarch; cook four to five minutes, or until it
thickens. Squeeze the juice from one large lemon, and mix it with two
thirds of a cup of sugar. Add this to the cornstarch mixture, and allow
the whole to boil up once, stirring constantly; then take from the fire.
Leave in the double boiler, surrounded by the hot water, for ten
minutes. Cool to blood heat before serving.

MOCK CREAM.--Heat a pint of fresh, unskimmed milk in a double
boiler. When the milk is boiling, stir in two tablespoonfuls of sugar,
and two even tablespoonfuls of cornstarch which has first been rubbed
smooth in a very little cold milk. Bring just to a boil, stirring
constantly; then pour the hot mixture, a little at a time, beating
thoroughly all the while, over the well-beaten white of one egg. Put
again into the double boiler, return to the fire, and stir till it
thickens to the consistency of cream.

MOLASSES SAUCE.--To one half cup of molasses, add one half cup of
water, and heat to boiling. Thicken with a teaspoonful of flour rubbed
to a cream with a little cold water. Serve hot.

ORANGE SAUCE.--Squeeze a cupful of juice from well-flavored, sour
oranges. Heat a pint of water, and when boiling, thicken with a
tablespoonful of cornstarch. Add the orange juice, strain, and sweeten
to taste with sugar that has been flavored by rubbing over the yellow
rind of an orange until mixed with the oil in the rind. If a richer
sauce is desired, the yolk of an egg may be added lastly, and the sauce
allowed to cook until thickened.

PEACH SAUCE.--Strain the juice from a well-kept can of peaches.
Dilute with one half as much water, heat to boiling, and thicken with
cornstarch, a scant tablespoonful to the pint of liquid.

PLAIN PUDDING SAUCE.--Thicken one and one half cups of water with
one tablespoonful of cornstarch; boil a few minutes, then stir in two
thirds of a cup of sugar, and one half cup of sweet cream. Take off the
stove, and flavor with a little rose, vanilla, or lemon.

RED SAUCE.--Pare and slice a large red beet, and simmer gently in
three cups of water for twenty minutes, or until the water is rose
colored, then add two cups of sugar, the thin yellow rind and juice of
one lemon, and boil until the whole is thick syrup. Strain, add a
teaspoonful of rose water or vanilla, and serve.

ROSE CREAM.--Remove the thick cream from the top of a pan of cold
milk, taking care not to take up any of the milk. Add sugar to sweeten
and a teaspoonful or two of rose water. Beat with an egg beater until
the whole mass is thick. Good thick cream, beaten in this manner, makes
nearly double its original quantity.

SAGO SAUCE.--Wash one tablespoonful of sago in two or three waters,
then put it into a saucepan with three fourths of a cup of hot water,
and some bits of lemon peel. Simmer gently for ten minutes, take out the
lemon peel, add half a cup of quince or apricot juice; and if the
latter, the strained juice of half a lemon, and sugar to taste. Beat
together thoroughly.

WHIPPED CREAM SAUCE.--Beat together with an egg beater until of a
stiff froth one cup of sweet cream which has been cooled to a
temperature of 64° or less, one teaspoonful of vanilla or a little
grated lemon rind, and one half cup of powdered white sugar, and the
whites of one or two eggs. The sauce may be variously flavored with a
little fruit jelly beaten with the egg, before adding to the cream.




TABLE TOPICS.

    Whether or not life is worth living, all depends upon the
    liver.--_Sel._

    Diet cures mair than doctors.--_Scotch Proverb._

    According to the ancient Hindu Scriptures, the proper amount of food
    is half of what can be conveniently eaten.

    Every hour you steal from digestion will be reclaimed by
    indigestion.--_Oswald._

    "Very few nations in the world," says a sagacious historian,
    "produce better soldiers than the Russians. They will endure the
    greatest fatigues and sufferings with patience and calmness. And it
    is well know that the Russian soldiers are from childhood nourished
    by simple and coarse vegetable food. The Russian Grenadiers are the
    finest body of men I ever saw,--not a man is under six feet high.
    Their allowance consists of eight pounds of black bread, and four
    pounds of oil per man for eight days."

    Colonel Fitzgibbon was, many years ago, colonial agent at London for
    the Canadian Government, and wholly dependent upon remittances from
    Canada for his support. On one occasion these remittances failed to
    arrive, and it being before the day of cables, he was obliged to
    write to his friends to ascertain the reason of the delay. Meanwhile
    he had just one sovereign to live upon. He found he could live upon
    a sixpence a day,--four pennyworth of bread, one pennyworth of milk,
    and one pennyworth of sugar. When his remittances arrived a month
    afterward, he had five shillings remaining of his sovereign, and he
    liked his frugal diet so well that he kept it up for several years.

    An hour of exercise to every pound of food.--_Oswald._

     Some eat to live, they loudly cry;
     But from the pace they swallow pie
     And other food promiscuously,
     One would infer they eat to die.

    --_Sel._




BEVERAGES

The use of beverages in quantities with food at mealtime is prejudicial
to digestion, because they delay the action of the gastric juice upon
solid foods. The practice of washing down food by copious draughts of
water, tea, or coffee is detrimental, not only because it introduces
large quantities of fluid into the stomach, which must be absorbed
before digestion can begin, but also because it offers temptation to
careless and imperfect mastication, while tea and coffee also serve as a
vehicle for an excessive use of sugar, thus becoming a potent cause of
indigestion and dyspepsia. It is best to drink but sparingly, if at all,
at mealtimes. Consideration should also be given to the nature of the
beverage, since many in common use are far from wholesome. Very cold
fluids, like iced water, iced tea, and iced milk, are harmful, because
they cool the contents of the stomach to a degree at which digestion is
checked. If drunk at all, they should be taken only in small sips and
retained in the mouth until partly warmed.

Tea is often spoken of as the "cup that cheers but not inebriates."
"The cup that may cheer yet does injury" would be nearer the truth, for
there is every evidence to prove that this common beverage is
exceedingly harmful, and that the evils of its excessive use are second
only to those of tobacco and alcohol. Tea contains two harmful
substances, theine and tannin,--from three to six per cent of the former
and more than one fourth its weight of the latter. Theine is a poison
belonging to the same class of poisonous alkaloids, and is closely
allied to cocaine. It is a much more powerful poison than alcohol,
producing death in less than one hundredth part the deadly dose of
alcohol; and when taken in any but the smallest doses, it produces all
the symptoms of intoxication. Tannin is an astringent exercising a
powerful effect in delaying salivary and stomach digestion, thus
becoming one of the most common causes of digestive disorders. It is
also a matter of frequent observation that sleeplessness, palpitation of
the heart, and various disorders of the nervous system frequently follow
the prolonged use of tea. Both theine and tannin are more abundant in
green than in black tea.

The dependence of the habitual tea-drinker upon the beverage, and the
sense of loss experienced when deprived of it, are among the strongest
proofs of its evil effects, and should be warnings against its use. No
such physical discomfort is experienced when deprived of any article of
ordinary food. The use of tea makes one feel bright and fresh when
really exhausted; but, like all other stimulants, it is by exciting
vital action above the normal without supplying extra force to support
the extra expenditure. The fact that a person feels tired is evidence
that the system demands rest, that his body is worn and needs repair;
but the relief experienced after a cup of tea is not recuperation.
Instead, it indicates that his nerves are paralyzed so that they are
insensible to fatigue.

Some people suppose the manner of preparing tea has much to do with its
deleterious effects, and that by infusion for two or three minutes only,
the evils resulting from the tannin will be greatly lessened. This,
however, is a delusion, if the same amount of tea be used proportionate
to the water; for tannin in its free state, the condition in which it is
found in tea is one of the most readily soluble of substances; and tea
infused for two minutes is likely to hold nearly as much tannin in
solution as that infused for a longer period.

Tea is not a food, and it can in no wise take the place of food, as so
many people attempt to make it, without detriment to health in every
respect.

Coffee, cocoa, and chocolate rank in the same category with tea, as
beverages which are more or less harmful. Coffee contains caffein, a
principle identical with theine and a modified form of tannin, though in
less quantity than tea. Cocoa and chocolate contain substances similar
to theine and equally harmful, though usually present in much less
proportion than in tea.

Custom has made the use of these beverages so common that most people
seldom stop to inquire into their nature. Doubtless the question arises
in many minds; If these beverages contain such poisons, why do they not
more commonly produce fatal results?--Because a tolerance of the poison
is established in the system by use, as in the case of tobacco and other
narcotics and stimulants; but that the poisons surely though insidiously
are doing their work is attested by the prevalence of numerous disorders
of the digestive and nervous systems, directly attributable to the use
of these beverages.

Both tea and coffee are largely adulterated with other harmful
substances, thus adding another reason why their use should be
discarded. It is stated on good authority that it is almost impossible
to obtain unadulterated ground coffee.

In view of all these facts, it certainly seems wisest if a beverage is
considered essential, to make use of one less harmful. Hot milk, hot
water, hot lemonade, caramel coffee, or some of the various grain
coffees, recipes for which are give in the following pages, are all
excellent substitutes for tea and coffee, if a hot drink is desired.


_RECIPES_

BEET COFFEE.--Wash best beets thoroughly, but do not scrape; slice,
and brown in a moderate oven, taking care not to burn. When brown, break
in small pieces and steep the same as ordinary coffee.

CARAMEL COFFEE.--Take three quarts best bran, one quart corn meal,
three tablespoonfuls of molasses; mix and brown in the oven like
ordinary coffee. For every cup of coffee required, use one heaping
tablespoonful of the caramel. Pour boiling water over it, and steep, not
boil, for fifteen or twenty minutes.

CARAMEL COFFEE NO. 2.--Take one cup each of white flour, corn meal,
unsifted Graham flour, and molasses. Mix well, and form into cakes half
an inch thick and a little larger around than a silver dollar. If the
molasses is not thin enough to take up all the dry material, one fourth
or one half a cup of cold water may be added for that purpose. Bake the
cakes in the oven until very dark brown, allowing them to become
slightly scorched. When desired for use, take one cake for each cup of
coffee required, pour sufficient water over them, and steep, not boil,
twenty minutes.

CARAMEL COFFEE NO. 3.--To three and one half quarts of bran and one
and one half quarts of corn meal, take one pint of New Orleans molasses
and one half pint of boiling water. Put the water and molasses together
and pour them over the bran and corn meal which have been previously
mixed. Rub all well together, and brown slowly in the oven, stirring
often, until a rich dark brown. Use one heaping tablespoonful of coffee
to each small cup of boiling water, let it just boil up, then steep on
the back of the stove for five or ten minutes.

CARAMEL COFFEE NO. 4.--Beat together four eggs and one pint of
molasses, and mix thoroughly with four quarts of good wheat bran. Brown
in the oven, stirring frequently. Prepare for use the same as the
preceding.

MRS. T'S CARAMEL COFFEE.--Make a rather thick batter of Graham
grits or Graham meal and milk, spread it in shallow pans and bake in a
moderate oven until evenly done throughout. Cut the cake thus prepared
into thin strips, which break into small uniform pieces and spread on
perforated tins or sheets and brown in the oven. Each piece should be
very darkly and evenly browned, but not burned. For each cup of coffee
required, steep a small handful in boiling water for ten or fifteen
minutes, strain and serve.

PARCHED GRAIN COFFEE.--Brown in the oven some perfectly sound
wheat, sweet corn, barley, or rice, as you would the coffee berry. If
desired, a mixture of grains may be used. Pound or grind fine. Mix the
white of an egg with three tablespoonfuls of the ground grain, and pour
over it a quart of boiling water. Allow it to come just to the boiling
point, steep slowly for twelve or fifteen minutes, and serve.

WHEAT, OATS AND BARLEY COFFEE.--Mix together equal quantities of
these grains, brown in the oven like ordinary coffee, and grind. To one
quart of boiling water take three tablespoonfuls of the prepared coffee
mixed with the white of an egg, and steep in boiling water ten or
fifteen minutes.


_RECIPES FOR COLD BEVERAGES._

BLACKBERRY BEVERAGE.--Crush a quart of fresh blackberries, and pour
over them a quart of cold water; add a slice of lemon and a teaspoonful
of orange water, and let it stand three or four hours. Strain through a
jelly bag. Sweeten to taste with a syrup prepared by dissolving white
sugar in hot water, allowing it to become cold before using. Serve at
once with bits of broken ice in the glasses, or place the pitcher on ice
until ready to serve.

FRUIT BEVERAGE.--A great variety of pleasant, healthful drinks may
be made by taking equal quantities of water and the juice of currants,
strawberries, raspberries, cherries, or a mixture of two kinds, as
raspberries and currants, sweetening to taste, and putting into each
glass a small lump of ice. Directions for the preparation of fruit
juices will be found on page 209.

FRUIT BEVERAGE NO. 2.--Mash a pint of red raspberries, add one cup
of canned pineapple or half a fresh one chopped fine; pour over all
three pints of water. Stir frequently, and let the mixture stand for two
hours. Strain, add the juice of six lemons, and sugar or syrup to
sweeten.

ANOTHER.--Extract the juice from three lemons and as many sour
oranges, add a quart of cold water, sugar or syrup to sweeten, half a
teaspoonful of rose water, and a cup of pure grape juice; or the rose
water and grape juice may be omitted and two tablespoonfuls of
strawberry, raspberry, or cherry juice used instead, and the whole
poured over half a dozen slices of pineapple, and allowed to stand until
well flavored before using.

FRUIT CORDIAL.--Crush a pint of blackberries, raspberries, grapes,
currants, or cherries, adding the juice of two sour oranges, and a
sliced lemon; pour over all a quart of cold water. Stir the mixture
frequently and let it stand for two hours, then strain and add a syrup
made by dissolving white sugar in boiling water, sufficient to sweeten.
Cool on ice and serve.

GRAPE BEVERAGE.--Crush two pounds of perfectly ripened purple
grapes and strain the juice through a jelly bag. Add to the juice three
tablespoonfuls of granulated sugar or syrup, and dilute with cold water
to suit the taste.

LEMONADE.--Use three large or four medium-sized lemons for each
quart of water, and from six to eight tablespoonfuls of sugar. Rub or
squeeze the lemons till soft. Cut a slice or two from each, and extract
the juice with a lemon drill; strain the juice through a fine wire
strainer to remove the seeds and bits of pulp, and pour it over the
sugar. Add the slices of lemon, and pour over all a very little boiling
water to thoroughly dissolve the sugar; let it stand ten or fifteen
minutes, then add the necessary quantity of cold water, and serve. Or
rub the sugar over the outside of the lemons to flavor it, and make it
into a syrup by adding sufficient boiling water to dissolve it. Extract
and strain the lemon juice, add the prepared syrup and the requisite
quantity of cold water, and serve.

MIXED LEMONADE.--A very pleasant, cooling summer drink is made from
the juice of six oranges and six lemons, with sugar to taste; add to
this some pounded ice and the juice of a small can of pineapple, and
lastly pour over the whole two quarts of water.

OATMEAL DRINK.--Boil one fourth of a pound of oatmeal in three
quarts of water for half an hour, then add one and one half
tablespoonfuls of sugar, strain and cool. It may be flavored with a
little lemon or raspberry syrup if desired; or the sugar may be omitted
and a quart of milk added. Cool on ice and serve.

ORANGEADE.--Pare very thin from one orange a few bits of the yellow
rind. Slice three well-peeled sour oranges, taking care to remove all
the white portion and all seeds. Add the yellow rind and a tablespoonful
of sugar; pour over all a quart of boiling water. Cover the dish, and
let it remain until the drink is cold. Or, if preferred, the juice of
the oranges may be extracted with a lemon drill and strained as for
lemonade.

PINEAPPLE BEVERAGE.--Pare and chop quite fine one fresh pineapple;
add a slice or two of lemon, and cover with three pints of boiling
water. Let it stand for two hours or more, stirring frequently; then
strain and add the juice of five lemons, and sugar or syrup to sweeten.

PINEAPPLE LEMONADE.--Lemonade made in the usual manner and flavored
with a few spoonfuls of canned pineapple juice, is excellent for
variety.

PINK LEMONADE.--Add to a pint of lemonade prepared in the usual
manner half a cup of fresh or canned strawberry, red raspberry, currant,
or cranberry juice. It gives a pretty color besides adding a pleasing
flavor.

SHERBET.--Mash a quart of red raspberries, currants, or
strawberries, add the juice of a lemon, and pour over all three pints of
cold water. Stir frequently, and let it stand for two or three hours.
Strain through a jelly bag, sweeten to taste, and serve.

TISANE.--This is a favorite French beverage, and is prepared by
chopping fine a cupful of dried fruits, such as prunes, figs, or
prunelles, and steeping for an hour in a quart of water, afterward
straining, sweetening to taste, and cooling on ice before using.




TABLE TOPICS.

    The nervousness and peevishness of our times are chiefly
    attributable to tea and coffee. The digestive organs of confirmed
    coffee drinkers are in a state of chronic derangement which reacts
    on the brain, producing fretful and lachrymose moods. The snappish,
    petulant humor of the Chinese can certainly be ascribed to their
    immoderate fondness for tea.--_Dr. Bock._

    Dr. Ferguson, an eminent physician who has carefully investigated
    the influence of tea and coffee upon the health and development of
    children, says he found that children who were allowed these
    beverages gained but four pounds a year between the ages of thirteen
    and sixteen, while those who had been allowed milk instead, gained
    fifteen pounds in weight during the same period.

    Dr. Richardson, the eminent English physician and scientist, asserts
    that the misery of the women of the poorer classes of the population
    in England is more than doubled by the use of tea, which only
    soothes or stimulates to intensify the after-coming depression and
    languor.

    A physician recommended a lady to abandon the use of tea and coffee.
    "O, but I shall miss it so," said she.

    "Very likely," replied her medical adviser, "but you are missing
    health now, and will soon lose it altogether if you do not."

    Dr. Stenhouse, of Liverpool, once made a careful analysis of a
    sample package of black tea, which was found to contain "some pure
    Congo tea leaves, also siftings of Pekoe and inferior kinds,
    weighing together twenty-seven per cent of the whole. The remaining
    seventy-three per cent was composed of the following substances;
    Iron, plumbago, chalk, China-clay, sand, Prussian-blue, tumeric,
    indigo, starch, gypsum, catechu, gum, the leaves of the camelia,
    sarangna, _Chlorantes officinalis_, elm, oak, willow, poplar, elder,
    beach, hawthorn, and sloe."




MILK CREAM BUTTER

MILK.

Chemically considered, the constituents of milk are nitrogenous matter
(consisting of casein and a small proportion of albumen), fat, sugar of
milk, mineral matter, and water, the last constituting from sixty-five
to ninety per cent of the whole.

The proportion of these elements varies greatly in the milk of different
animals of the same species and of the same animals at different times,
so that it is not possible to give an exact analysis.

The analysis of an average specimen of cow's milk, according to Letheby,
is:--

    Nitrogenous matter.......................................4.1
    Fat......................................................3.9
    Sugar of milk............................................5.2
    Mineral matter...........................................0.8
    Water...................................................86.0

If a drop of milk be examined with a microscope, it will be seen as a
clear liquid, holding in suspension a large number of minute globules,
which give the milk its opacity or white color. These microscopic
globules are composed of fatty matter, each surrounded by an envelope of
casein, the principal nitrogenous element found in milk. They are
lighter than the surrounding liquid, and when the milk remains at rest,
they gradually rise to the top and form cream. Casein, unlike albumen,
is not coagulated by heat; hence when milk is cooked, it undergoes no
noticeable change, save the coagulation of the very small amount of
albumen it contains, which, as it solidifies, rises to the top, carrying
with it a small portion of the sugar and saline matter and some of the
fat globules, forming a skin-like scum upon the surface. Casein,
although not coagulable by heat, is coagulated by the introduction into
the milk of acids or extract of rennet. The curd of cheese is coagulated
casein. When milk is allowed to stand for some time exposed to warmth
and air, a spontaneous coagulation occurs, caused by fermentative
changes in the sugar of milk, by which it is converted into lactic acid
through the action of germs.

Milk is sometimes adulterated by water, the removal of more or less of
the cream, or the addition of some foreign substance to increase its
density.

The quality of milk is more or less influenced by the food upon which
the animal is fed. Watery milk may be produced by feeding a cow upon
sloppy food.

The milk of diseased animals should never be used for food. There is no
way by which such milk can invariably be detected, but Prof. Vaughan, of
Michigan University, notes the following kinds of milk to be avoided:

1. Milk which becomes sour and curdles within a few hours after it has
been drawn, and before any cream forms on its surface. This is known in
some sections as 'curdly' milk, and it comes from cows with certain
inflammatory affections of the udder, or digestive diseases, or those
which have been overdriven or worried.

2. "Bitter-sweet milk" has cream of a bitter taste, is covered with
'blisters,' and frequently with a fine mold. Butter and cheese made from
such milk cannot be eaten on account of the disagreeable taste.

3. 'Slimy milk' can be drawn out into fine, ropy fibers. It has an
unpleasant taste, which is most marked in the cream. The causes which
lead to the secretion of this milk are not known.

4. 'Blue milk' is characterized by the appearance on its surface,
eighteen or twenty-four hours after it is drawn, of small, indigo-blue
spots, which rapidly enlarge until the whole surface is covered with a
blue film. If the milk be allowed to stand a few days, the blue is
converted into a greenish or reddish color. This coloration of the milk
is due to the growth of microscopic organisms. The butter made from
'blue milk' is dirty-white, gelatinous, and bitter.

5. 'Barnyard milk' is a term used to designate milk taken from unclean
animals, or those which have been kept in filthy, unventilated stables.
The milk absorbs and carries the odors, which are often plainly
perceptible. Such milk may not be poisonous, but it is repulsive.

There is no doubt that milk often serves as the vehicle for the
distribution of the germs of various contagious diseases, like scarlet
fever, diphtheria, and typhoid fever, from becoming contaminated in some
way, either from the hands of milkers or from water used as an
adulterant or in cleansing the milk vessels. Recent investigations have
also shown that cows are to some extent subject to scarlet fever, the
same as human beings, and that milk from infected cows will produce the
same disease in the consumer.

Milk should not be kept in brass or copper vessels or in earthen-ware
lined with lead glazing; for if the milk becomes acid, it is likely to
unite with the metal and form a poisonous compound. Glass and granite
ware are better materials in which to keep milk.

Milk should never be allowed to stand uncovered in an occupied room,
especially a sitting-room or bedroom, as its dust is likely to contain
disease-germs, which falling into the milk, may become a source of
serious illness to the consumer. Indeed it is safest to keep milk
covered whenever set away, to exclude the germs which are at all times
present in the air. A good way is to protect the dishes containing milk
with several layers of cheese-cloth, which will permit the air but not
the germs to circulate in and out of the pans. Neither should it be
allowed to stand where there are strong odors, as it readily takes up by
absorption any odors to which it is exposed.

A few years ago Dr. Dougall, of Glasgow, made some very interesting
experiments on the absorbent properties of milk. He inclosed in jars a
portion of substances giving off emanations, with a uniform quantity of
milk, in separate vessels, for a period of eight hours, at the end of
which time samples of the milk were drawn off and tested. The result was
that milk exposed to the following substances retained odors as
described:--

Coal gas, distinct; paraffine oil, strong; turpentine, very strong;
onions, very strong; tobacco smoke, very strong; ammonia, moderate;
musk, faint; asafetida, distinct; creosote, strong; cheese (stale),
distinct; chloroform, moderate; putrid fish, very bad; camphor,
moderate; decayed cabbage, distinct.

These facts clearly indicate that if the emanations to which milk is
exposed are of a diseased and dangerous quality, it is all but
impossible that the milk can remain free from dangerous properties.

Too much pains cannot be taken in the care of milk and vessels
containing it. Contact with the smallest quantity of milk which has
undergone fermentation will sour the whole; hence the necessity for
scrupulous cleanliness of all vessels which have contained milk before
they are used again for that purpose.

In washing milk dishes, many persons put them first into scalding water,
by which means the albumen in the milk is coagulated; and if there are
any crevices or seams in the pans or pails, this coagulated portion is
likely to adhere to them like glue, and becoming sour, will form the
nucleus for spoiling the next milk put into them. A better way is first
to rinse each separately in cold water, not pouring the water from one
pan to another, until there is not the slightest milky appearance in the
water, then wash in warm suds, or water containing sal-soda, and
afterward scald thoroughly; wipe perfectly dry, and place if possible
where the sun will have free access to them until they are needed for
further use. If sunshine is out of the question, invert the pans or cans
over the stove, or place for a few moments in a hot oven.

The treatment of milk varies with its intended use, whether whole or
separated from the cream.

Cream rises best when the milk is quite warm or when near the
freezing-point. In fact, cream separates more easily from milk at the
freezing-point than any other, but it is not thick and never becomes so.
An intermediate state seems to be unfavorable to a full rising of the
cream.

A temperature of 56° to 60°F. is a good one. Milk to be used whole
should be kept at about 45° and stirred frequently.

All milk obtained from city milkmen or any source not certainly known to
be free from disease-germs, should be sterilized before using. Indeed,
it is safest always to sterilize milk before using, since during the
milking or in subsequent handling and transportation it is liable to
become infected with germs.

TO STERILIZE MILK FOR IMMEDIATE USE.--Put the milk as soon as
received into the inner dish of a double boiler, the outer vessel of
which should be filled with boiling water. Cover and heat the milk
rapidly to as near the boiling point as possible. Allow it to remain
with the water in the outer boiler actively boiling for half an hour,
then remove from the stove and cool very quickly. This may be
accomplished by pouring into shallow dishes, and placing these in cold
water, changing the water as frequently as it becomes warm, or by using
pieces of ice in the water. It is especially important to remember that
the temperature of the milk should be raised as rapidly as possible, and
when the milk is sufficiently cooked, cooled very quickly. Either very
slow heating or slow cooling may prove disastrous, even when every other
precaution is taken.

Or, well-cleaned glass fruit cans may be nearly filled with milk, the
covers screwed on loosely, then placed in a kettle of cold water,
gradually heated to boiling and kept at that temperature for a half hour
or longer, then gradually cooled. Or, perfectly clean bottles may be
filled with milk to within two inches of the top, the neck tightly
closed with a wad of cotton, and the bottles placed in a steam cooker,
the water in which should be cold at the start, and steamed for half an
hour.

This cooking of milk, while it destroys many of the germs contained in
milk, particularly the active disease-germs which are liable to be found
in it, thus rendering it more wholesome, and improving its keeping
qualities somewhat, does not so completely sterilize the milk that it
will not undergo fermentative changes. Under varying conditions some
thirty or forty different species of germs are to be found in milk, some
of which require to be subjected to a temperature above that of boiling
water, in order to destroy them. The keeping quality of the milk may be
increased by reboiling it on three successive days for a half hour or
longer, and carefully sealing after each boiling.

TO STERILIZE MILK TO KEEP.--This is a somewhat more difficult
operation, but it may be done by boiling milk sealed in very strong
bottles in a saturated solution of salt. The milk used should be
perfectly fresh. It is best, when possible, to draw the milk from the
cow directly into the bottles. Fill the bottles to within two inches of
the top, cork them immediately and wire the corks down firmly and place
them in the cold salt solution. Boil fifteen minutes or half an hour.
Allow the solution to cool before removing them. If the bottles are
removed from the solution while hot, they will almost instantly break.
When cold, remove the bottles, and cover the tops with sealing wax.
Store in a cool place, shake thoroughly once or twice a week. Milk
sterilized in this manner will keep indefinitely.

CONDENSED MILK.--Condensed milk is made by evaporating milk in a
vacuum to one fifth its original volume; it is then canned like any
other food by sealing at boiling temperature in air-tight cans. When
used, it should be diluted with five times its bulk of warm water.

Condensed milk, when not thoroughly boiled in the process of
condensation, is liable to harbor disease-germs the same as any other
milk.


CREAM.

Cream varies in composition according to the circumstances under which
it rises.

The composition of an average specimen as given by Letherby is:--

    Nitrogenous matter............................................ 2.7
    Fat.......................................................... 26.7
    Sugar of milk................................................. 2.8
    Mineral matter................................................ 1.8
    Water........................................................ 66.0

In the process of churning; the membranes of casein which surround each
of the little globules constituting the cream are broken, and the fat of
which they are composed becomes a compact mass known as butter. The
watery looking residue containing casein, sugar of milk, mineral matter,
and a small proportion of fat, comprises the buttermilk.

Skim-milk, or milk from which the cream has been removed, and buttermilk
are analogous in chemical composition.

The composition of each, according to Dr. Edward Smith, is:--

SKIM-MILK

    Nitrogenous matter......................................... 4.0
    Sugar...................................................... 3.8
    Fat........................................................ 1.8
    Mineral matter............................................. 0.8
    Water......................................................88.0

BUTTERMILK

    Nitrogenous matter..........................................4.1
    Sugar.......................................................3.6
    Fat.........................................................0.7
    Mineral matter..............................................0.8
    Water......................................................88.0

Skim-milk and buttermilk, when the butter is made from sweet cream and
taken fresh, are both excellent foods, although lacking the fat of new
milk.

Cream is more easily digested than butter, and since it contains other
elements besides fat, is likewise more nutritious. In cream the fat is
held in the form of an emulsion which allows it to mingle freely with
water. As previously stated, each atom of fat is surrounded with a film
of casein. The gastric juice has no more power to digest casein than it
has free fat, and the little particles of fat thus protected are carried
to the small intestines, where the pancreatic juice digests them, and on
their way they do not interfere with the stomach digestion of other
foods, as the presence of butter and other free fats may do.

It is because of its greater wholesomeness that in the directions for
the preparation of foods given in this work we have given preference to
the use of cream over that of butter and other free fats. The usual
objection to its use is its expense, and the difficulty of obtaining it
from city dealers. The law of supply and cost generally corresponds with
that of demand, and doubtless cream would prove no exception if its use
were more general.

[Illustration: Creamery.]

Cream may be sterilized and preserved in a pure state for some time, the
same as milk.

Milk requires especial care to secure a good quality and quantity of
cream. Scrupulous cleanliness, good ventilation, and an unvarying
temperature are absolute essentials. The common custom of setting milk
in pans is objectionable, not only because of the dust and germs always
liable to fall into the milk, but also from the difficulty of keeping
milk thus set at the proper temperature for cream-rising. Every family
using milk in any quantity ought to have a set of creameries of large or
small capacity according to circumstances, in which the milk supply can
be kept in a pure, wholesome condition, and so arranged as to facilitate
the full rising of the cream if desired. A very simple and satisfactory
creamery, with space for ice around the milk, similar to that
represented in the accompanying cut, may be constructed by any tinman.

The plan of scalding milk to facilitate the rising of the cream is
excellent, as it not only secures a more speedy rising, but serves to
destroy the germs found in the milk, thus lessening its tendency to
sour. The best way to do this is to heat the milk in a double boiler, or
a dish set inside another containing hot water, to a temperature of 150°
to 165°F. as indicated by wrinkles upon its surface. The milk must not,
however, be allowed to come to a boil. When scalded, it should be cooled
at once to a temperature of about 60° F. and kept thus during the rising
of the cream.


BUTTER.

Of all foods wholly composed of fat, good fresh butter is the most
wholesome. It should, however, be used unmelted and taken in a finely
divided state, and only in very moderate quantities. If exposed to great
heat, as on hot buttered toast, meats, rich pastry, etc., it is quite
indigestible. We do not recommend its use either for the table or for
cooking purposes when cream can be obtained, since butter is rarely
found in so pure a state that it is not undergoing more or less
decomposition, depending upon its age and the amount of casein retained
in the butter through the carelessness of the manufacturer.

Casein, on exposure to air in a moist state, rapidly changes into a
ferment, which, acting upon the fatty matter of the butter, produces
rancidity, rendering the butter more or less unwholesome. Poor, tainted,
or rancid butter should not be used as food in any form.

Good butter is pale yellow, uniform throughout the whole mass, and free
from rancid taste or odor. White lumps in it are due to the
incorporation of sour milk with the cream from which it was produced. A
watery, milk-like fluid exuding from the freshly cut surface of butter,
is evidence that insufficient care was taken to wash out all the
buttermilk, thus increasing its liability to spoil.

The flavor and color of butter vary considerably, according to the breed
and food of the animal from which the milk was obtained. An artificial
color is often given to butter by the use of a preparation of annatto.

Both salt and saltpeter are employed as preservatives for butter; a
large quantity of the former is often used to increase the weight of the
butter.

ARTIFICIAL BUTTER.--Various fraudulent preparations are sold as
butter. Oleomargarine, one of the commonest, is made from tallow or
beef-fat, cleaned and ground like sausage, and heated, to separate the
oil from the membranes. It is then known as "butter-oil," is salted,
cooled, pressed, and churned in milk, colored with annatto, and treated
the same as butter. Butterine, another artificial product, is prepared
by mixing butter-oil and a similar oil obtained from lard, then churning
them with milk.

An eminent analyst gives the following excellent way of distinguishing
genuine butter from oleomargarine:--"When true butter is heated over a
clear flame, it 'browns' and gives out a pleasant odor,--that of browned
butter. In heating there is more or less sputtering, caused by minute
particles of water retained in washing the butter. On the bottom of the
pan or vessel in which true butter is heated, a yellowish-brown crust is
formed, consisting of roasted or toasted casein. When oleomargarine is
heated under similar circumstances, it does not 'brown,' but becomes
darker by overheating, and when heated to dryness, gives off a grayish
steam, smelling of tallow. There is no 'sputtering' when it is being
heated, but it boils easily. If a pledget of cotton or a wick saturated
with oleomargarine be set on fire and allowed to burn a few moments
before being extinguished, it will give out fumes which are very
characteristic, smelling strongly of tallow, while true butter behaves
very differently."

BUTTER IN ANCIENT TIMES.--Two kinds of butter seem to have been
known to the ancient Jews, one quite like that of the present day,
except that it was boiled after churning, so that it became in that warm
climate practically an oil; the other, a sort of curdled milk. The juice
of the Jerusalem artichoke was mixed with the milk, when it was churned
until a sort of curd was separated. The Oriental method of churning was
by putting the milk into a goat-skin and swinging and shaking the bag
until the butter came, as illustrated in the accompanying cut.

[Illustration: Oriental Butter-Making.]

An article still sold as butter in Athens is made by boiling the milk of
goats, allowing it to sour, and then churning in a goat-skin. The result
is a thick, white, foamy substance appearing more like cream than
butter.

BUTTER-MAKING.--The manufacture of good butter is dependent upon
good cows and the care given them, as well as most careful treatment of
the milk and cream. The milk to be used for butter making, as indeed for
all purposes, should be most carefully strained through a wire strainer
covered with three or four thicknesses of perfectly clean cheese cloth.

The following points given by an experienced dairyman will be found
worthy of consideration by all who have to do with the manufacture of
this article:--

"Milk is almost as sensitive to atmospheric changes as mercury itself.
It is a question among many as to what depth milk should be set to get
the most cream. It does not make so much difference as to the depth as
it does the protection of the milk from acid or souring. As soon as the
milk begins to sour, the cream ceases to rise.

"With a clear, dry atmosphere the cream will rise clean in the milk; but
in that condition of the atmosphere which readily sours the milk, the
cream will not rise clean, but seems to hang in the milk, and this even
when the milk is protected by being set in water.

"The benefit of setting milk in cold water is that the water protects
the milk from becoming acid until the cream has time to rise. For cream
to rise readily on milk set in cold water, the atmosphere in the room
should be warmer than the water. As much cream will rise on milk set in
cold water in one hour as on milk not set in water in twenty-four hours.
The milk should be skimmed while sweet, and the cream thoroughly stirred
at each skimming.

"Cream skimmed from different milkings, if churned at the same time in
one churn, should be mixed eight to ten hours before churning; then the
cream will all come alike.

"The keeping qualities of butter depend principally upon two things:
First, the buttermilk must be all gotten out; and secondly, the grain of
the butter should be kept as perfect as possible. Butter should not be
allowed to be churned after it has fairly come, and should not be
gathered compactly in the churn in taking out, but the buttermilk should
be drained from the butter in the churn, through a hair sieve, letting
the butter remain in the churn. Then take water and turn it upon the
butter with sufficient force to pass through the butter, and in
sufficient quantity to rinse the buttermilk all out of the butter. With
this process of washing the butter the grain is not injured or mashed,
and is thus far kept perfect. And in working in the salt the ladle or
roll or worker, whatever it is, should never be allowed to slip on the
butter,--if it does, it will destroy the grain,--but it should go upon
the butter in a pressing or rolling motion."

Test the temperature of the cream with a thermometer, and churn it at
60° in summer and 62° in winter. If the butter is soft, it may be
hardened by pouring onto it while working a brine made by dissolving a
pint of salt in ten quarts of water. The salt used in the butter should
be carefully measured, three fourths of an ounce of salt to the pound
being the usual allowance.

Butter, like milk, absorbs odors readily, and should never be allowed to
remain in occupied rooms or any place exposed to strong or foul odors,
but be kept covered in a cold place.


CHEESE.

Cheese is a product of milk prepared by separating the casein, with more
or less of the cream, according to the manner in which it has been
prepared, from the other ingredients of the milk. It is an article,
which, although possessing a large proportion, of nutritive material, is
very difficult of digestion, and the use of which is very questionable,
not only for this reason, but because it is very liable to contain a
poison called tyrotoxicon, capable of producing most violent and indeed
fatal results, according to the remarkable researches of Prof. Vaughan
of Michigan University. This poison is sometimes found in ice cream and
custards, cream-puffs, etc., made from stale milk or cream.

It is much better to use milk in its fresh, natural state than in any of
its products. Made into either butter or cheese, we lose some of its
essential elements, so that what is left is not a perfect food.


_RECIPES_

HOT MILK.--Milk is more easily digested when used hot. This is not
due to any marked chemical change in the milk, but to the stimulating
effect of heat upon the palate and stomach.

To prepare hot milk, heat it in a double boiler until a wrinkled skin
appears upon the surface. In the double boiler it may be kept at the
proper temperature for a long time without difficulty, and thus
prepared, it forms one of the most healthful of foods.

Milk, either cold or hot, should be taken a few sips only at a time, and
not be drank in copious draughts when used in connection with other
foods at mealtime. It will then coagulate in the stomach in small flakes
much more easily digested than the large mass resulting when a large
quantity is swallowed at a time.

DEVONSHIRE OR CLOTTED CREAM.--This is prepared as follows: Strain
the milk as it comes fresh from the cow into a deep pan which will fit
tightly over a kettle in which water can be boiled, and set away in a
cool well-ventilated place, where it should be allowed to remain
undisturbed from eight to twelve hours or longer. Then take the pan up
very carefully so as not to disturb the cream, place over a kettle of
water, heat to near the boiling point, or until a rim of bubbles half an
inch wide forms all around the dish of milk. It must not, however, be
allowed to boil, or the cream will be injured. Now lift the pan again
with equal care back to a cool place and allow it to stand from twelve
to twenty-four hours longer. The cream should be a compact mass of
considerable thickness, and may be divided with a knife into squares of
convenient size before skimming. It is delicious for use on fruit and
grains.

COTTAGE CHEESE.--This dish is usually prepared from milk which has
curdled from lack of proper care, or from long standing exposed to the
air, and which is thus in some degree decomposing. But the fact that the
casein of the milk is coagulated by the use of acids makes it possible
to prepare this dish in a more wholesome manner without waiting for
decomposition of the milk. Add to each four quarts of milk one cupful of
lemon juice; let it stand until coagulated, then heat slowly, but do not
boil, until the curd has entirely separated from the whey. Turn the
whole into a colander lined with a square of clean cheese cloth, and
drain off the whey. Add to the curd a little salt and cream, mix all
together with a spoon or the hands, and form into cakes or balls for the
table. The use of lemon gives a delicious flavor, which may be
intensified, if desired, by using a trifle of the grated yellow rind.

COTTAGE CHEESE FROM BUTTERMILK.--Place a pail of fresh buttermilk
in a kettle of boiling water, taking care to have sufficient water to
come up even with the milk in the pail. Let the buttermilk remain until
it is heated throughout to about 140°, which can be determined by
keeping a thermometer in the milk and stirring it frequently. When it is
sufficiently heated, empty the curd into strong muslin bags and hang up
to drain for several hours. If properly scalded and drained, the curd
will be quite dry and may be seasoned and served the same as other
cottage cheese. If scalded too much, it will be watery.

COTTAGE CHEESE WITH SOUR MILK.--Take a pan of newly-loppered thick
sour milk, and place it over a kettle of boiling water until the whey
separates from the curd, breaking and cutting the curd as the milk
becomes warmed, so as to allow the whey to settle. The milk should be
well scalded, but not allowed to boil, as that will render the curd
tough and leathery. Have ready a clean piece of cheese cloth spread
inside a colander, dip the curd into it, and leave it to drain. If
preferred, the corners of the cloth may be tied with a string, thus
forming a bag in which the cheese may be hung up to drain. When well
drained, remove the dry curd to a dish, rub it fine with the hands, add
salt, and season with sweet cream, beating it well through the curd with
a silver fork. It may be shaped into balls with the hands or pressed in
large cups or bowls.

FRENCH BUTTER.--Fill a large, wide-mouthed glass bottle or jar
about half full of thick sweet cream. Cork tightly, and with one end of
the bottle in each hand shake it vigorously back and forth until the
butter has separated from the milk, which it will generally do in a few
minutes. Work out the buttermilk, make into small pats, and place on ice
until ready to serve. As a rule this butter is not washed or salted, as
it is intended for immediate use.

SHAKEN MILK.--Fit a conical tin cup closely over a glass of milk
and shake it vigorously until all of a foam, after which it should be
slowly sipped at once; or a glass of milk may be put into a quart fruit
can, the cover tightly screwed on, and then shaken back and forth until
the milk is foamy.

EMULSIFIED BUTTER.--Boil the butter with water for half an hour to
destroy any germs it may contain; use plenty of water and add the butter
to it while cold. When boiled, remove from the fire and allow it to
become nearly cold, when the butter will have risen to the top and may
be removed with a skimmer, or it may be separated from the water by
turning the whole after cooling into a clean strainer cloth placed
inside a colander. The butter may be pressed in the cloth if any water
still remains. If hardened, reheat just sufficient to soften, and add to
it, while still liquid, but cooled to about blood heat, the yolk of one
egg for each tablespoonful of butter, and stir until very thoroughly
mingled.

Or, add to each tablespoonful of the liquid butter two level
tablespoonfuls of flour, rub together thoroughly, and cook until
thickened in a half cupful of boiling water. If cream is not obtainable
and butter must be used for seasoning, it is preferable to prepare it in
one of the above ways for the purpose, using the quantity given as an
equivalent of one cupful of thin cream. It will be evident, however,
that these preparations will not only season but thicken whatever they
are used in, and that additional liquid should be used on that account.




TABLE TOPICS.

    A little six-year-old boy went into the country visiting. About the
    first thing he got was a bowl of bread and milk. He tasted it, and
    then hesitated a moment, when his mother asked if he didn't like it;
    to which he replied, smacking his lips, "Yes, ma'am. I was only
    wishing that our milkman in town would keep a cow!"

    When Horace Greeley was candidate for the presidency, he at one time
    visited New Orleans, whose old creole residents gave him a dinner;
    and to make it as fine an affair as possible, each of the many
    guests was laid under contribution for some of the rarest wines in
    his cellar. When dinner was announced, and the first course was
    completed, the waiter appeared at Mr. Greeley's seat with a plate of
    shrimp. "You can take them away," he said to the waiter, and then
    added to the horrified French creole gentleman who presided, "I
    never eat insects of any kind." Later on, soup was served, and at
    the same time a glass of white wine was placed at Mr. Greeley's
    right hand. He pushed it quietly away, but not unobserved by the
    chief host. "Do you not drink wine?" he asked.

    "No," answered Mr. Greeley; "I never drink any liquors."

    "Is there anything you would like to drink with your soup?" the host
    then asked, a little disappointed.

    "If you've got it," answered Mr. Greeley, "and it isn't any trouble,
    I'd like a glass of fresh buttermilk."

    Said the host afterward in his broken English, "Ze idea of electing
    to ze presidency a man vot drink buttermilk vis his soup!"


    Old friendships are often destroyed by toasted cheese, and hard
    salted meat has often led to suicide.--_Sydney Smith._


    A German sitting beside a Spanish officer on board a Havana steamer,
    was munching Limberger cheese with evident satisfaction when it
    occurred to him that he ought to offer some to his neighbor, who
    very coolly declined. "You think it unhealthful to eat that?"
    inquired the German in polite astonishment. "_Unhealthful?_"
    exclaimed the Hidalgo, with a withering look and a gasp for a more
    adequate word; "No, sir: I think it an unnatural crime!"--_Oswald._


    Good for Dyspepsia.--"Really, don't you think cheese is good for
    dyspepsia?" said an advocate of the use of this common article of
    food. "Why, my uncle had dyspepsia all his life, and he took a bit
    of cheese at the close of every meal!"


    Mattieu Williams tells us, "When common sense and true sentiment
    supplant mere unreasoning prejudice, vegetables oils and vegetable
    fats will largely supplant those of animal origin in every element
    of our dietary."




EGGS

As will be seen from the analysis given below, an egg is particularly
rich in nitrogenous elements. It is indeed one of the most highly
concentrated forms of nitrogenous food, about one third of its weight
being solid nutriment, and for this reason is often found serviceable in
cases of sickness where it is desirable to secure a large amount of
nourishment in small bulk.

Composition of the white of an ordinary hen's egg.

    Nitrogenous matter..................... 20.4
    Fatty matter........................... 10.0
    Mineral matter.........................  1.6
    Water.................................. 68.0

Composition of the yolk.

    Nitrogenous matter.....................  1.0
    Fatty matter........................... 30.7
    Mineral matter.........................  1.3
    Water.................................. 52.0

The white of egg is composed mainly of albumen in a dissolved state,
inclosed in layers of thin membrane. When beaten, the membranes are
broken, and the liberated albumen, owing to its viscous or glutinous
nature, entangles and retains a large amount of air, thus increasing to
several times its original bulk.

The yolk contains all the fatty matter, and this, with a modified form
of albumen called vitellin, forms a kind of yellow emulsion. It is
inclosed in a thin membrane, which separates it from the surrounding
white.

The yolk, being lighter than the white, floats to that portion of the
egg which is uppermost, but is held in position by two membranous cords,
one from each end of the egg. The average weight of an egg is about two
ounces, of which ten per cent consists of shell, sixty of white, and
thirty of yolk.

HOW TO CHOOSE EGGS.--The quality of eggs varies considerably,
according to the food upon which the fowls are fed. Certain foods
communicate distinct flavors, and it is quite probable that eggs may be
rendered unwholesome through the use of filthy or improper food; hence
it is always best, when practicable, to ascertain respecting the diet
and care of the fowls before purchasing eggs.

On no account select eggs about the freshness of which there is any
reason to doubt. The use of stale eggs may result in serious
disturbances of the digestive organs.

An English gentleman who has investigated the subject quite thoroughly,
finds upon careful microscopical examination that stale eggs often
contain cells of a peculiar fungoid growth, which seems to have
developed from that portion of the egg which would have furnished
material for the flesh and bones of the chick had the process of
development been continued. Experiments with such eggs upon dogs produce
poisonous effects.

There are several ways of determining with tolerable accuracy respecting
the freshness of an egg. A common test is to place it between the eye
and a strong light. If fresh, the white will appear translucent, and the
outline of the yolk can be distinctly traced. By keeping, eggs become
cloudy, and when decidedly stale, a distinct, dark, cloud-like
appearance may be discerned opposite some portion of the shell. Another
test is to shake the egg gently at the ear; if a gurgle or thud is
heard, the egg is bad. Again, eggs may be tested by dropping into a
vessel containing a solution of salt and water, in the proportion of a
tablespoonful to a quart. Newly laid eggs will sink; if more than six
days old, they will float in the liquid; if bad, they will be so light
as to ride on the surface of the brine. The shell of a freshly laid egg
is almost full; but owing to the porous character of the shell, with age
and exposure to air a portion of the liquid substance of which the egg
is composed evaporates, and air accumulates in its place at one of the
extremities of the shell. Hence an egg loses in density from day to day,
and the longer the egg has been kept, the lighter it becomes, and the
higher it will rise in the liquid.

An egg that will float on the surface of the liquid is of too
questionable a character to be used without breaking, and is apt to be
unfit for use at all.

HOW TO KEEP EGGS.--To preserve the interior of an egg in its
natural state, it is necessary to seal the pores of the shell air-tight,
as the air which finds its way into the egg through the pores of the
shell causes gradual decomposition. Various methods are devised to
exclude the air and thus preserve the egg. A good way is to dip
perfectly fresh eggs into a thick solution of gum-arabic,--equal parts
of gum and water,--let the eggs dry and dip them again, taking care that
the shells are entirely covered with the solution each time. When dry,
wrap separately in paper and pack in a box of sawdust, bran, salt, or
powdered charcoal, and cover tightly to keep out the air.

There is a difference of opinion as to which end should be placed down
in packing; most authorities recommend the smaller end. However, an
experienced poultryman offers the following reasons for packing with the
larger end down: "The air-chamber is in the larger end, and if that is
placed down, the yolk will not break through and touch the shell and
thereby spoil. Another thing: if the air-chamber is down, the egg is not
so liable to shrink away."

It would be well for housekeepers to make the test by packing eggs from
the same lot each way and noting the result.

Melted wax or suet may be used to coat the shells. Eggs are sometimes
immersed and kept in a solution of lime water, a pound of lime to a
gallon of cold water, or simply packed in bran or salt, without a
previous coating of fat or gum. By any of these methods they will keep
for several weeks. Eggs, however, readily absorb flavors from
surrounding substances, and for that reason lime water or salt solution
are somewhat objectionable. Nothing of a disagreeable odor should be
placed near eggs.

Eggs for boiling may be preserved by placing in a deep pan, and pouring
scalding water over them. Let them stand half a minute, drain off the
water, and repeat the process two or three times. Wipe dry, and when
cool, pack in bran.

Eggs should be kept in a cool, not cold, place and handled carefully, as
rough treatment may cause the mingling of the yolk and white by
rupturing the membrane which separates them; then the egg will spoil
quickly.

The time required for the digestion of a perfectly cooked egg varies
from three to four hours.

It is generally conceded that eggs lightly cooked are most readily
digested. What is generally termed a hard-boiled egg is not easily acted
upon by the digestive juices, and any other manner of cooking by which
the albumen becomes hardened and solid offers great resistance to
digestion.

TO BEAT EGGS.--This may seem trivial, but no dish requiring eggs
can be prepared in perfection, unless they are properly beaten, even if
every other ingredient is the best. An egg-beater or an egg-whip is the
most convenient utensil for the purpose; but if either of these is not
to be had, a silver fork will do very well, and with this the beating
should be done in sharp, quick strokes, dipping the fork in and out in
rapid succession, while the egg should grow firmer and stiffer with
every stroke. When carelessly beaten, the result will be a coarse and
frothy instead of a thick and cream-like mass. Use a bowl in beating
eggs with an egg-beater, and a plate when a fork or egg-whip is
employed.

If the white and yolk are used separately, break the shells gently about
the middle, opening slowly so as to let the white fall into the dish,
while retaining the yolk in one half of the shell. If part of the white
remains, turn the yolk from the one half to the other till the white has
fallen. Beat the yolks until they change from their natural orange color
to a much lighter yellow. The whites should be beaten until firm and dry
enough not to fall from the bowl if turned upside down. The yolk should
always be beaten first, since, if the white is left to stand after being
beaten, a portion of the air, which its viscous nature allows it to
catch up, escapes and no amount of beating will render it so firm a
second time. Eggs which need to be washed before breaking should always
be wiped perfectly dry, that no water may become mingled with the egg,
as the water may dilute the albumen sufficiently to prevent the white
from becoming firm and stiff when beaten.

In cold weather, it is sometimes difficult to beat the whites as stiff
as desirable. Albumen is quite susceptible to temperature, and this
difficulty may be overcome by setting the dish in which the eggs are
beaten into warm water--not hot by any means--during the process of
beating. In very hot weather it is often advantageous to leave the eggs
in cold or ice water for a short time before beating. When a number of
eggs are to be used, always break each by itself into a saucer, so that
any chance stale egg may not spoil the whole. If the white or yolk of an
egg--is left over, it may be kept for a day or two if put in a cool
place, the yolk thoroughly beaten, the white unbeaten.


_RECIPES._

EGGS IN SHELL.--The usual method of preparing eggs for serving in
this way is to put them into boiling water, and boil or simmer until
they are considered sufficiently cooked. Albumen, of which the white of
the egg is composed, is easiest digested when simply coagulated. The
yolk, if cooked at all, is easiest digested when dry and mealy. Albumen
coagulates at 160°, and when the boiling point is reached, it becomes
hardened, tough, and leathery, and very difficult of digestion. If the
egg were all albumen, it might be easily and properly cooked by dropping
into boiling water, allowing it to remain for a few seconds, and
removing it, since the shell of the egg would prevent its becoming
sufficiently heated in so short a time as to become hardened; but the
time necessary to cook properly the white of the egg would be
insufficient for the heat to penetrate to and cook the yolk; and if it
is desirable to cook the yolk hard, the cooking process should be
carried on at a temperature below the boiling point, subjecting the egg
to a less degree of heat, but for a longer time. The most accurate
method is to put the eggs into water of a temperature of 160°, allowing
them to remain for twenty minutes and not permitting the temperature of
the water to go above 165°. Cooked in this way, the white will be of a
soft, jelly-like consistency throughout, while the yolks will be hard.
If it is desired to have the yolks dry and mealy, the temperature of the
water must be less, and the time of cooking lengthened. We have secured
the most perfect results with water at a temperature of 150°, and seven
hours' cooking. The temperature of the water can be easily tested by
keeping in it an ordinary thermometer, and if one possesses a kerosene
or gas stove, the heat can be easily regulated to maintain the required
temperature.

Another method, although less sure, is to pour boiling water into a
saucepan, draw it to one side of the range where it will keep hot, but
not boil, put in the eggs, cover, and let stand for twenty minutes. If
by either method it is desired to have the yolk soft-cooked, lessen the
time to ten minutes or so, according to the hardness desired. Eggs are
best served as soon as done, as the white becomes more solid by being
kept in a hot shell.

It should be remarked that the time necessary to cook eggs in the shell
will vary somewhat with the firmness of the shell, the size of the eggs,
and the number cooked together.

EGGS IN SUNSHINE.--Take an earthen-ware dish which will stand heat
and also do to use in serving the eggs. Oil it and break therein as many
eggs as desired; sprinkle lightly with salt, and put into the oven for
two or more minutes till the eggs are set. Have ready some hot tomato
sauce prepared as for Tomato Toast; pour the sauce over them, and serve.

EGGS POACHED IN TOMATOES.--Take a pint of stewed tomatoes, cooked
until they are homogeneous or which have been rubbed through a colander;
season with salt if desired, and heat. When just beginning to boil, slip
in gently a half dozen eggs, the shells of which have been so carefully
broken that the yolks are intact. Keep the tomato just below the boiling
point until the eggs are cooked. Lift the whites carefully with a fork
as they cook, until they are firm, then prick them and let the yellow
mix with the tomato and the whites. The whole should be quite soft when
done, but showing the red of the tomatoes and the white and yellow of
the eggs quite distinctly. Serve on toast. If the flavor is agreeable, a
little onion.

EGGS IN CREAM.--Put a half cupful or more of cream into a shallow
earthen dish, and place the dish in a kettle or pan of boiling water.
When the cream is hot, break in as many eggs as the bottom of the dish
will hold, and cook until well set, basting them occasionally over the
top with the hot cream. Or, put a spoonful or two of cream into
individual egg or vegetable dishes, break a fresh egg in each, and cook
in the oven or in a steamer over a kettle of boiling water until the
white of the egg is well set.

POACHED OR DROPPED EGGS.--Break each egg into a saucer by itself.
Have a shallow pan half filled with scalding, not boiling, water on the
stove. If desired, a little salt and a tablespoonful of lemon juice may
be added. Slip the eggs gently from the saucer upon the top of the
water, holding the edge of the saucer under water to prevent the eggs
from scattering; dip the water over them with a spoon and let them stand
five minutes, or until the yolk is covered with a film, and the white is
firm but not hardened; keep the water just below the boiling point. Take
out the eggs one by one on a skimmer, and serve in egg-saucers, or on
slices of nicely browned toast moistened with a little sweet cream, as
preferred. If one is especially particular to keep the shape of the
eggs, an egg poacher should be used, or a set of muffin-rings may be
laid in the bottom of the pan, and the eggs turned into the rings.

POACHED EGGS WITH CREAM SAUCE.--Poach eggs as in the foregoing, and
pour over them a sauce made according to direction on page 351.

QUICKLY PREPARED EGGS.--A good way to cook quickly a large number
of eggs, is to use a large-bottomed earthen dish, which will stand the
heat and in which the eggs may be served. Oil it well; break the
requisite number of eggs separately, and turn each carefully into the
dish; sprinkle lightly with salt; set the dish in the oven or in a
steamer over a kettle of boiling water for a few minutes until the eggs
are set, then serve.

SCRAMBLED EGGS.--Beat four eggs lightly, add a little salt if
desired, and half a cup of milk or cream. Have ready a hot, oiled
saucepan; turn the eggs in and cook quickly, stirring constantly until
firm, but soft.

STEAMED EGGS.--Break eggs into egg or vegetable dishes or
patty-pans, salt very lightly, and set in a steamer over a kettle of
boiling water until the whites are set and a film has formed over the
yolk. Serve the same as poached eggs, with or without toast.

WHIRLED EGGS.--Have a small kettle of water heated almost to
boiling, and with a wooden spoon, stir it rapidly round and round in the
same direction until a miniature whirlpool is produced. Have ready some
eggs broken in separate cups, and drop them carefully one at a time into
the whirling water, the stirring of which must be kept up until the egg
is a soft round ball. Remove with a skimmer, and serve on cream toast.


OMELETS.


_RECIPES._

PLAIN OMELET.--Beat the yolks of three eggs to a cream and beat the
whites to a stiff froth. Add to the yolks three tablespoonfuls of milk
or cream, one tablespoonful of finely grated bread crumbs, and season
lightly with salt; lastly, fold, not stir, the whites lightly in. An
omelet pan is the best utensil for cooking, but if that is not to be
had, an earthen-ware pudding dish which will stand the heat is good; an
iron spider will do, but a larger omelet would need to be prepared. A
tin saucepan is apt to cook the omelet so rapidly as to burn it in
spots. Whatever the utensil used, it should be hot, the fire clear and
steady, and all in readiness by the time the eggs are beaten.

Oil the dish well and gently pour in the omelet mixture; cover, and
place the pan on the range where the heat will be continuous. Do not
stir, but carefully, as the egg sets, lift the omelet occasionally by
slipping a broad-bladed knife under it, or with a fork by dipping in
here and there. It should cook quickly, but not so quickly as to burn.
From three to five minutes will generally be ample time. When the middle
of the omelet is set, it may be put into a hot oven to dry the top. As
soon as the center is dry, it should be removed immediately, as it will
be hard and indigestible if overdone. To dish, loosen from the pan by
running a knife under it, lay a hot platter, bottom upward, over the
pan, and invert the latter so as to shake out the omelet gently, browned
side uppermost; or if preferred, double one part over the other before
dishing. Serve at once, or it will fall.

An omelet of three eggs is sufficient for two or three persons; if more
is desired, a second omelet of three eggs may be made. Larger ones are
not so light nor so easily prepared. The dish used should be reserved
for that purpose alone, and should be kept as smooth and dry as
possible. It is better to keep it clean by wiping with a coarse towel
than by washing; if the omelet comes from the pan perfectly whole and
leaving no fragments behind.

FOAM OMELET.--Prepare as above, leaving out the white of one egg,
which must be beaten to a stiff froth and spread over the top of the
omelet after it is well set. Let this white just heat through by the
time the omelet is done. Fold the omelet together, and dish. The whites
will burst out around the edges like a border of foam.

FANCY OMELETS.--Various fancy omelets may be made by adding other
ingredients and preparing the same as for plain omelets. Two or three
tablespoonfuls of orange juice instead of milk, with a little grated
rind for flavor and three tablespoonfuls of sugar, may be combined with
the eggs and called an orange omelet.

A little cold cauliflower or cooked asparagus chopped very fine and
mixed in when the omelet is ready for the pan, may be denominated a
vegetable omelet.

SOFT OMELET.--Beat together thoroughly one quart of milk and six
eggs. Season with salt. Pour into a shallow earthen pudding dish, and
bake in the oven until well set.




TABLE TOPICS.

    The candidates for ancient athletic games were dieted on boiled
    grain, with warm water, cheese, dried figs, but no meat.

    An unpleasant reminder.--(Scene, Thanksgiving dinner, everybody
    commenting on the immense size of the turkey.) An appalling silence
    fell upon the crowd when Tommy cried out, "Mamma, is that the old
    sore-headed turkey?"

    The eminent Prof. Wilder was reared a vegetarian, having passed his
    earlier years without even knowing that flesh food was ever eaten by
    human beings. When six years old, he saw on the table for the first
    time, a roasted chicken, at which he gazed for some moments in great
    bewilderment, when he seemed to make a discovery, and in his
    astonishment burst out with the remark, "I'll bet that's a dead
    hen!"

    A story is told of a minister who was spending the day in the
    country, and was invited to dine. There was chicken for dinner, much
    to the grief of a little boy of the household, who had lost his
    favorite hen to provide for the feast. After dinner, prayer was
    proposed, and while the preacher was praying, a poor little lonesome
    chicken came running under the house, crying for its absent mother.
    The little boy shouted, "Peepy! Peepy! I didn't kill your mother!
    They killed her for that big preacher's dinner!" The "Amen" was said
    very suddenly.




MEATS

This is the term usually applied to the flesh and various organs of such
animals, poultry, and game as are used for food. This class of foods
contains representatives of all nutritive elements, but is especially
characterized by as excess of albuminous matter. But in actual nutritive
value flesh foods do not exceed various other food materials. A
comparison of the food grains with beefsteak and other flesh foods,
shows, in fact, that a pound of grain is equivalent in food value to two
or three pounds of flesh.

At present time there is much question in the minds of many intelligent,
thinking people as to the propriety of using foods of this class, and
especially of their frequent use. Besides being in no way superior to
vegetable substances, they contain elements of an excrementitious
character, which cannot be utilized, and which serve only to clog and
impede the vital processes, rendering the blood gross, filling the body
with second-hand waste material which was working its way out of the
vital domain of the animal when slaughtered. To this waste matter,
consisting of unexpelled excretions, are added those produced by the
putrefactive processes which so quickly begin in flesh foods exposed to
air and warmth.

That flesh foods are stimulating has been shown by many observations and
experiments.

Flesh foods are also specially liable to be diseased and to communicate
to the consumer the same disease. The prevalence of disease among
animals used for food is known to be very great, and their transmission
to man is no longer a matter of dispute. It has been abundantly proved
that such diseases as the parasitic, tuberculous, erysipelatous, and
foot and mouth diseases are most certainly communicable to man by
infected flesh. All stall and sty fed animals are more or less diseased.
Shut up in the dark, cut off from exercise, the whole fattening process
is one of progressive disease. No living creature could long retain good
health under such unnatural and unwholesome conditions. Add to this the
exhaustion and abuse of animals before slaughtering; the suffering
incident to long journeys in close cars, often without sufficient food
and water; and long drives over dusty roads under a burning sun to the
slaughter house, and it will be apparent to all thoughtful persons that
such influences are extremely liable to produce conditions of the system
that render the flesh unfit for food.

Thousands of animals are consumed each year which were slaughtered just
in time to save them from dying a natural death. It is a common thing
for cattle owners, as soon as an animal shows symptoms of decline, to
send it to the butcher at once; and when epidemics of cattle diseases
are prevalent, there can be no doubt that the meat markets are flooded
with diseased flesh.

There are few ways in which we can more effectually imperil our health
than in partaking freely of diseased animal food. This is no new theory.
The Jews have for ages recognized this danger, and their laws require
the most careful examination of all animals to be used as food, both
before and after slaughtering. Their sanitary regulations demand that
beast or fowl for food must be killed by bleeding through the jugular
vein, and not, according to custom, by striking on the head, or in some
violent way. Prior to the killing, the animal must be well rested and
its respiration normal; after death the most careful dissection and
examination of the various parts are made by a competent person, and no
flesh is allowed to be used for food which has not been inspected and
found to be perfectly sound and healthy. As a result, it is found in
many of our large cities that only about one in twenty of the animals
slaughtered is accepted as food for a Jew. The rejected animals are sold
to the general public, who are less scrupulous about the character of
their food, and who are in consequence more subject to disease and
shorter-lived than are Jews.

Trichinæ, tapeworms, and various other parasites which infest the flesh
of animals, are so common that there is always more or less liability to
disease from these sources among consumers of flesh foods.

Meat is by no means necessary for the proper maintenance of life or
vigorous health, as is proved by the fact that at least "four tenths of
the human race," according to Virey, "subsist exclusively upon a
vegetable diet, and as many as seven tenths are practically
vegetarians." Some of the finest specimens of physical development and
mental vigor are to be found among those who use very little or no
animal food. Says St. Pierre, a noted French author, "The people living
upon vegetable foods are of all men the handsomest, the most vigorous,
the lease exposed to disease and passion; and they are those whose lives
last longest."

The use of large quantities of animal food, however free from disease
germs, has a tendency to develop the animal propensities to a greater or
less degree, especially in the young, whose characters are unformed.
Among animals we find the carnivorous the most vicious and destructive,
while those which subsist upon vegetable foods are by nature gentle and
tractable. There is little doubt that this law holds good among men as
well as animals. If we study the character and lives of those who
subsist largely upon animal food, we are apt to find them impatient,
passionate, fiery in temper, and in other respects greatly under the
dominion of their lower natures.

There are many other objections to the use of this class of foods--so
many in fact that we believe the human race would be far healthier,
better, and happier if flesh foods were wholly discarded. If, however,
they are to be used at all, let them be used sparingly and prepared in
the simplest and least harmful manner. Let them be cooked and served in
their own juices, not soaked in butter or other oils, or disguised by
the free use of pepper, mustard, catsup, and other pungent sauces. Salt
also should be used only in the smallest possible quantities, as it
hardens the fiber, rendering it more difficult of digestion.

We can conceive of no possible stretch of hygienic laws which admits the
use of pork; so we shall give it and its products no consideration in
our pages.

Such offal as calves' brains, sheep's kidneys, beef livers, and other
viscera, is not fit food for any one but a scavenger. The liver and
kidneys are depurating organs, and their use as food is not only
unwholesome but often exceedingly poisonous.

Meat pies, scallops, sauces, fricassees, _pâtés_, and other fancy dishes
composed of a mixture of animal foods, rich pastry, fats, strong
condiments, etc., are by no means to be recommended as hygienic, and
will receive no notice in these pages.

In comparative nutritive value, beef ranks first among the flesh foods.
Mutton, though less nutritive, is more easily digested than beef. This
is not appreciable to a healthy person, but one whose digestive powers
are weak will often find that mutton taxes the stomach less than beef.

Veal or lamb is neither so nutritious nor so easily digested as beef or
mutton. Flesh from different animals, and that from various parts of the
same animal, varies in flavor, composition, and digestibility. The mode
of life and the food of animals influence in a marked manner the quality
of the meat. Turnips give a distinctly recognizable flavor to mutton.
The same is true of many fragrant herbs found by cattle feeding in
pastures.

THE SELECTION OF MEAT.--Good beef is of a reddish-brown color and
contains no clots of blood. A pale-pink color indicates that the animal
was diseased; a dark-purple color that the animal has suffered from some
acute febrile affection or was not slaughtered, but died with the blood
in its body.

Good beef is firm and elastic to the touch; when pressed with the
finger, no impression is left. It should be so dry upon the surface as
scarcely to moisten the fingers. Meat that is wet, sodden, and flabby
should not be eaten. Good beef is marbled with spots of white fat. The
suet should be dry and crumble easily. If the fat has the appearance of
wet parchment or is jelly-like, the beef is not good. Yellow fat is an
indication of old, lean animals.

Good beef has little or no odor. If any odor is perceptible, it is not
disagreeable. Diseased meat has a sickly odor, resembling the breath of
feverish persons. When such meat is roasted, it emits a strong,
offensive smell. The condition of a piece of beef may be ascertained by
dipping a knife in hot water, drying it, and passing it through the
meat. Apply to the nose on withdrawal, and if the meat is not good, a
disagreeable odor will be quite perceptible.

Good beef will not shrink greatly in cooking. In boiling or stewing, the
shrinkage is computed to be about one pound in four; in baking, one and
one fourth pounds in four. Beef of a close, firm fiber shrinks less than
meat of coarse fiber.

Good veal is slightly reddish or pink, and the fat should be white and
clear. Avoid veal without fat, as such is apt to be too young to be
wholesome.

Good mutton should be firm and compact, the flesh, fine-grained and
bright-red, with an accumulation of very hard and clear white fat along
the borders of the muscles.

Meat should not be kept until decomposition sets in, as by the
putrefaction of the albuminous elements certain organic poisons are
generated, and flesh partaken of in this condition is liable to result
in serious illness. Meat containing white specks is probably infested by
parasites and should not be used as food.

PRESERVATION OF MEAT.--The tendency of flesh foods to rapid
decomposition has led to the use of various antiseptic agents and other
methods for its preservation.

One of the most common methods is that of immersion in a brine made of a
solution of common salt to which a small portion of saltpeter has been
added. This abstracts the juice from the meat and also lessens the
tendency to putrefaction. Salt is used in various other ways for
preserving meat. It should be remarked, however, that cured and dried
meats are much more difficult to digest than fresh meat, and the nature
of the meat itself is so changed by the process as to render its
nutritive value much less.

Meat is sometimes packed in salt and afterward dried, either in the sun
or in a current of dry air. Both salting and smoking are sometimes
employed. By these means the juices are abstracted by the salt, and at
the same time the flesh is contracted and hardened by the action of
creosote and pyroligneous acid from the smoke.

What is termed "jerked" beef is prepared by drying in a current of warm
air at about 140°. This dried meat, when reduced to a powder and packed
in air-tight cans, may be preserved for a long time. When mixed with
fat, it forms the pemmican used by explorers in Arctic voyages.

Meat is also preserved by cooking and inclosing in air-tight cans after
the manner of canning fruit. This process is varied in a number of ways.

The application of cold has great influence in retarding decomposition,
and refrigeration and freezing are often employed for the preservation
of flesh foods.

All of these methods except the last are open to the objection that
while they preserve the meat, they greatly lessen its nutritive value.
It should also be understood that the decomposition of its flesh begins
almost the moment an animal dies, and continues at a slow rate even when
the flesh is kept at a low temperature. The poisons resulting from this
decomposition are often deadly, and are always detrimental to health.

THE PREPARATION AND COOKING OF MEAT.--Meat, when brought from the
market, should be at once removed from the paper in which it is wrapped,
as the paper will absorb the juices of the meat; and if the wrapping is
brown paper, the meat is liable to taste of it. Joints of meat should
not be hung with the cut surface down, as the juices will be wasted.

Meat kept in a refrigerator should not be placed directly on the ice,
but always upon plates or shelves, as the ice will freeze it or else
draw out its juices.

If meat is accidentally frozen, it should be thoroughly thawed in cold
water before cutting. Meat should not be cleaned by washing with water,
as that extracts the nutritive juices, but by thoroughly wiping the
outside with a damp cloth. The inside needs no cleaning.

Meat may be cooked by any of the different methods of cookery,--boiling,
steaming, stewing, roasting, broiling, baking, etc.,--according as the
object is to retain the nutriment wholly within the meat; to draw it all
out into the water, as in soups or broths; or to have it partly in the
water and partly in the meat, as in stews. Broiling is, however,
generally conceded to be the most wholesome method, but something will
necessarily depend upon the quality of the meat to be cooked.

Meat which has a tough, hard fiber will be made tenderest by slow,
continuous cooking, as stewing. Such pieces as contain a large amount of
gelatine--a peculiar substance found in the joints and gristly parts of
meat, and which hardens in a dry heat--are better stewed than roasted.

BOILING.--The same principles apply to the boiling of all kinds of
meats. The purpose to be attained by this method is to keep the
nutritive juices so far as possible intact within the meat;
consequently, the piece to be cooked should be left whole, so that only
a small amount of surface will be exposed to the action of the water.
Since cold water extracts albumen, of which the juices of the meat are
largely composed, while hot water coagulates it, meat to be boiled
should be plunged into boiling water sufficient to cover it and kept
there for five or ten minutes, by which time the albumen over the entire
surface will have become hardened, thus forming a coat through which
the juices cannot escape. Afterward the kettle, closely covered, may be
set aside where the water will retain a temperature of about 180°. A
small portion of albumen from the outer surface will escape into the
water in the form of scum, and should be removed.

Meat cooked in this way will require a longer time than when the water
is kept boiling furiously, but it is superior in every respect and more
digestible. Something depends upon the shape of the piece cooked, thin
pieces requiring less time than a thick, cubical cut; but approximately,
first allowing fifteen or twenty minutes for the heat to penetrate the
center of the meat, at which time the real process of cooking begins, it
will require from twelve to fifteen minutes for every pound cooked.

STEWING.--While the object in boiling is to preserve the juices
within the meat as much as possible, in stewing, the process is largely
reversed; the juices are to be partly extracted. Some of the juices
exist between the fibers, and some are found within the fibers. The
greater the surface exposed, the more easily these juices will be
extracted; hence meat for stewing should be cut into small pieces and
cooked in a small quantity of water. Since cold water extracts the
albuminous juices, while boiling water hardens them into a leathery
consistency, water used for stewing should be neither cold nor boiling,
but of a temperature which will barely coagulate the albumen and retain
it in the meat in as tender a condition as possible; _i.e.,_ about 134°
to 160°. To supply this temperature for the prolonged process of cooking
necessary in stewing, a double boiler of some form is quite necessary.
Put the pieces of meat to be stewed in the inner dish, add hot water
enough to cover, fill the outer boiler with hot water, and let this
outer water simmer very gently until the meat is perfectly tender. The
length of time required will be greater than when meat is stewed
directly in simmering water, but the result will be much more
satisfactory. The juices should be served with the meat.

STEAMING.--Meat is sometimes steamed over boiling water until it
is made very tender and afterward browned in the oven.

Another method of steaming, sometimes called smothering, is that of
cooking meat in a tightly covered jar in a moderate oven for an hour
(the moderate heat serves to draw out the juice of the meat), after
which the heat is increased, and the meat cooked in its own juices one
half hour for each pound.

ROASTING.--This method, which consists in placing meat upon a
revolving spit and cooking it before an open fire, is much less employed
now than formerly, when fireplaces were in general use. What is
ordinarily termed roasting is in reality cooking meat it in own juices
in a hot oven. In cooking meat by this method it is always desirable to
retain the juices entirely within the meat, which can be best
accomplished by first placing the clean-cut sides of the meat upon a
smoking-hot pan over a quick fire; press the meat close to the pan until
well scared and slightly browned, then turn over and sear the opposite
side in the same manner. This will form a coating of hardened albumen,
through which the interior juices cannot escape. Put at once into the
oven, arrange the fire so that the heat will be firm and steady but not
too intense, and cook undisturbed until tender.

Basting is not necessary if the roast is carefully seared and the oven
kept at proper temperature. When the heat of the oven is just right, the
meat will keep up a continuous gentle sputtering in the pan. If no
sputtering can be heard, the heat is insufficient. The heat is too great
when the drippings burn and smoke.

BROILING.--This is the method employed for cooking thin cuts of
meat in their own juices over glowing coals. When properly done, broiled
meat contains a larger amount of uncoagulated albumen than can be
secured by cooking in any other manner; hence it is the most wholesome.
For broiling, a bed of clear, glowing coals without flame is the first
essential. Coke, charcoal, or anthracite coal serves best for securing
this requisite.

In an ordinary stove, the coals should be nearly to the top of the
fire-box, that the meat may be held so as almost to touch the fire. No
utensil is better for ordinary purposes than a double wire broiler.
First, rub it well with a bit of suet, then put in the meat with the
thickest part in the center. Wrap a coarse towel around the hand to
protect it from the heat, hold the meat as near the fire as possible, so
as to sear one side instantly, slowly count ten, then turn and sear the
other side. Continue the process, alternating first one side and then
the other, slowly counting ten before each turning, until the meat is
sufficiently done. Successful broiling is largely dependent upon
frequent turning. The heat, while it at once sears the surface, starts
the flow of the juices, and although they cannot escape through the
hardened surface, if the meat were entirely cooked on one side before
turning, they would soon come to the top, and when it was turned over,
would drip into the fire. If the meat is seared on both sides, the
juices will be retained within, unless the broiling is too prolonged,
when they will ooze out and evaporate, leaving the meat dry and
leathery. Salt draws out the juices, and should not be added until the
meat is done. As long as meat retains its juices, it will spring up
instantly when pressed with a knife; when the juices have begun to
evaporate, it will cease to do this. Broiled meats should be served on
hot dishes.


BEEF.

ECONOMY AND ADAPTABILITY IN SELECTION.--While the greatest care
should be exercised in the selection of beef as regards its soundness
and wholesomeness, it must likewise be selected with reference to
economy and adaptability for cooking purposes, pieces from different
portions of the animal being suitable for cooking only in certain ways.
Ox beef is said to be best. That beef is most juicy and tender which has
fine streaks of fat intermingled with the lean. Beef which is
coarse-grained and hard to cut is apt to be tough. An economical piece
of beef to purchase is the back of the rump. It is a long piece with
only a small portion of bone, and weighs about ten pounds. The thickest
portion may be cut into steaks, the thin, end with bone may be utilized
for soups and stews, while the remainder will furnish a good roast. Only
a small portion of choice tender lean meat is to be found in one animal,
and these are also the most expensive; but the tougher, cheaper parts,
if properly cooked, are nearly as nutritious.


_RECIPES._

BROILED BEEF.--Beef for broiling should be juicy and have a tender
fiber. Steaks cut from three parts of the beef are in request for this
purpose,--tenderloin, porterhouse, and round steak. The last-named is
the more common and economical, yet it is inferior in juice and
tenderness to the other two. Steak should be cut three fourths of an
inch or more in thickness. If it is of the right quality, do not pound
it; if very tough, beat with a steak-mallet or cut across it several
times on both sides with a sharp knife. Wipe, and remove any bone and
superfluous fat. Have the fire in readiness, the plates heating, then
proceed as directed on page 398.

COLD-MEAT STEW.--Cut pieces of cold roast beef into thick slices
and put into a stewpan with six or eight potatoes, a good-sized bunch of
celery cut into small pieces; and a small carrot cut in dice may be
added if the flavor is liked. Cover with hot water, and simmer for three
fourths of an hour. Thicken with a little browned flour.

PAN-BROILED STEAK.--In the absence of the necessary appliances for
broiling over coals, the following method may be employed. Heat a clean
skillet to blue heat, rub it with a bit of suet, just enough to keep the
meat from sticking, but leave no fat in the pan. Lay in the steak,
pressing it down to the pan, and sear quickly on one side; turn, and
without cutting into the meat, sear upon the other. Keep the skillet hot
but do not scorch; cook from five to ten minutes, turning frequently, so
as not to allow the juices to escape. Add no salt until done. Serve on
hot plates. This method is not frying, and requires the addition of no
water, butter, or stock.

PAN-BROILED STEAK NO.2.--Take a smooth pancake-griddle, or in lieu
of anything better, a clean stove-griddle may be used; heat very hot and
sear each side of the steak upon it. When well seared, lift the steak
into a hot granite-ware or sheet-iron pan, cover, and put into a hot
oven for two or three minutes, or until sufficiently cooked.

ROAST BEEF.--The sirloin and rib and rump pieces are the best cuts
for roasting. Wipe, trim, and skewer into shape. Sear the cut surfaces
and proceed as directed on page 397, cooking twenty minutes to the
pound if it is to be rare, less half an hour deducted on account of
soaring. The application of salt and water has a tendency to toughen the
meat and draw out its juices; so if it is desired to have the meat juicy
and tender, it is better to cook without basting. Unless the heat of the
oven is allowed to become too great, when meat is cooked after this
manner there will be a quantity of rich, jelly-like material in the pan,
which with the addition of a little water and flour may be made into a
gravy.

SMOTHERED BEEF.--Portions from the round, middle, or face of the
rump are generally considered best for preparing this dish. Wipe with a
clean wet cloth, put into a smoking-hot skillet, and carefully sear all
cut surfaces. Put into a kettle, adding for a piece of beef weighing
about six pounds, one cup of hot water. Cover closely and cook at a
temperature just below boiling, until the meat is tender but not broken.
As the water boils away, enough more boiling water may be added to keep
the meat from burning. Another method of securing the same results is to
cut the beef into small pieces and put into a moderate oven inside a
tightly covered jar for an hour. Afterward increase the heat and cook
closely covered until the meat is tender. Thicken and season the juice,
and serve as a gravy.

VEGETABLES WITH STEWED BEEF.--Prepare the beef as directed for
Stewed Beef, and when nearly tender, add six or eight potatoes. Just
before serving, thicken the gravy with a little browned flour braided in
cold water, and add a cup of strained, stewed tomato and a teaspoonful
of chopped parsley.

STEWED BEEF.--The aitch-bone and pieces from the shin, the upper
part of the chuck-rib and neck of beef, are the parts most commonly used
for stewing. All meat for stews should be carefully dressed and free
from blood. Those portions which have bone and fat, as well as lean
beef, make much better-flavored stews than pieces which are wholly lean.
The bones, however, should not be crushed or splintered, but carefully
sawed or broken, and any small pieces removed before cooking. It is
generally considered that beef which has been previously browned makes a
much more savory stew, and it is quite customary first to brown the meat
by frying in hot fat. A much more wholesome method, and one which will
have the same effect as to flavor, is to add to the stew the remnants of
roasts or steak. It is well when selecting meat for a stew to procure a
portion, which, like the aitch-bone, has enough juicy meat upon it to
serve the first day as a roast for a small family. Cut the meat for a
stew into small pieces suitable for serving, add boiling water, and cook
as directed on page 396. Remove all pieces of bone and the fat before
serving. If the stew is made of part cooked and part uncooked meat, the
cooked meat should not be added until the stew is nearly done. The
liquor, if not of the proper consistency when the meat is tender, may be
thickened by adding a little flour braided in cold water, cooking these
after four or five minutes.


MUTTON.

The strong flavor of mutton is said to be due to the oil from the wool,
which penetrates the skin, or is the result, through heedlessness or
ignorance of the butcher, in allowing the wool to come in contact with
the flesh. There is a quite perceptible difference in the flavor of
mutton from a sheep which had been for some time sheared of its woolly
coat and that from one having a heavy fleece.

The smallest proportion of both fat and bone to muscle is found in the
leg; consequently this is the most valuable portion for food, and is
likewise the most economical, being available for many savory dishes. On
account of the disagreeable adhesive qualities of its fat when cold,
mutton should always be served hot.


_RECIPES._

BOILED LEG OF MUTTON.--Wipe carefully, remove the fat, and put into
boiling water. Skim, and cook as directed on page 395, twelve minutes
for each pound.

BROILED CHOPS.--The best-flavored and most tender chops are those
from the loins. Remove carefully all the pink skin above the fat,
scraping it off if possible without cutting into the lean. Wipe with a
wet cloth, and broil in the same manner as beefsteak over hot coals or
in a hot skillet, turning frequently until done; five or eight minutes
will suffice to cook. Sprinkle salt on each side, drain on paper, and
serve hot.

POT-ROAST LAMB.--For this purpose a stone jar or pot is best,
although iron or granite-ware will do; wipe the meat well and gash with
a sharp knife. If crowded closely in the pot, all the better; cover with
a lid pressed down firmly with a weight to hold it if it does not fit
tightly. No water is needed, and no steam should be allowed to escape
during the cooking. Roast four or five hours in a moderate oven.

ROAST MUTTON.--The best pieces for this purpose are those obtained
from the shoulder, and saddle, loin, and haunches. Wipe carefully, sear
the cut surfaces, and proceed as directed for roasting beef. Cook slowly
without basting, and unless desired rare, allow twenty-five or thirty
minutes to the pound. A leg of mutton requires a longer time to roast
than a shoulder. When sufficiently roasted, remove from the pan and
drain off all the grease.

STEWED MUTTON.--Pieces from the neck and shoulder are most suitable
for this purpose. Prepare the meat, and stew as directed for beef,
although less time is usually required.

STEWED MUTTON CHOP.--Wipe, trim off the fat, and remove the bone
from two or three pounds of chops. Put into the inner dish of a double
boiler with just enough hot water to cover; add a minced stalk of
celery, a carrot, and a white turnip cut in dice; cover, and cook until
the chops are tender. Sliced potato may be added if liked, when the meat
is nearly done. Remove the grease and thicken the liquor with a little
browned flour braided with thin cream.

STEWED MUTTON CHOP NO. 2.--Prepare the chops as in the preceding.
Place a layer of meat in a deep baking dish, and then a layer of sliced
potato, sprinkled with a little minced celery. Add two or more layers of
meat, alternating with layers of potatoes. Cover with boiling water and
bake closely covered in a very moderate oven two and a half hours.

VEAL AND LAMB.--Both veal and lamb should be thoroughly cooked;
otherwise they are not wholesome. They may be prepared for the tale in
the same way as beef or mutton, but will require longer time for
cooking.


POULTRY AND GAME.

Poultry and game differ from other animal foods in the relative quantity
of fat and the quality of their juices. The fat of birds is laid up
underneath the skin and in various internal parts of the body, while but
a small proportion is mingled with the fibers or the juices of the
flesh. The flesh of the chicken, turkey, and guinea-fowl is more
delicately flavored, more tender and easy to digest, than that of geese
and ducks. Chickens broiled require three hours for digestion; when
boiled or roasted, four hours are needed.

The flesh of poultry is less stimulating than beef, and is thus
considered better adapted for invalids. The flesh of wild fowl contains
less fat than that of poultry; it is also tender and easy of digestion.
Different birds and different parts of the same bird, vary considerably
in color and taste. The breed, food, and method of fattening, influence
the quality of this class of foods. Fowls poorly fed and allowed wide
range are far from cleanly in their habits of eating; in fact, they are
largely scavengers, and through the food they pick up, often become
infested with internal parasites, and affected with tuberculosis and
other diseases which are liable to be communicated to those who eat
their flesh.

SUGGESTIONS FOR THE SELECTION OF POULTRY AND GAME.--The first care
in the selection of poultry should be its freedom from disease. Birds
deprived of exercise, shut up in close cages, and regularly stuffed with
as much corn or soft food as they can swallow, may possess the requisite
fatness, but it is of a most unwholesome character. When any living
creature ceases to exercise, its excretory organs cease to perform their
functions thoroughly, and its body becomes saturated with retained
excretions.

A stall-fed fowl may be recognized by the color of its fat, which is
pale white, and lies in thick folds beneath the skin along the lower
half of the backbone. The entire surface of the body presents a more
greasy, uninviting appearance than that of fowls permitted to live under
natural conditions.

Never purchase fowls which have been sent to the market undrawn. All
animals intended for use as food should be dressed as quickly as
possible after killing. Putrefactive changes begin very soon after
death, and the liver and other viscera, owing to their soft texture and
to the quantity of venous blood they retain, advance rapidly in
decomposition. When a fowl or animal is killed, even if the large
arteries at the throat are cut, a large quantity of blood remains in and
around the intestines, owing to the fact that only through the
capillaries of the liver can the blood in the portal system find its way
into the large vessels which convey it to the heart, and which at death
are cut off from the general circulation at both ends by a capillary
system. This leaves the blood-vessels belonging to the portal
circulation distended with venous blood, which putrefies very quickly,
forming a virulent poison. The contents of the intestines of all
creatures are always in a more or less advanced state of putrescence,
ready to undergo rapid decomposition as soon as the preservative action
of the intestinal fluids ceases. It will readily be seen, then, that
the flesh of an undrawn fowl must be to a greater or less degree
permeated with the poisonous gases and other products of putrefaction,
and is certainly quite unfit for food.

Young fowls have soft, yellow feet, a smooth, moist skin, easily torn
with a pin, wings which will spring easily, and a breastbone which will
yield to pressure. Pinfeathers are an indication of a young bird; older
fowls are apt to have sharp scales, long hairs, long, thin necks, and
flesh with a purplish tinge.

Poultry should be entirely free from disagreeable odors. Methods are
employed for sweetening fowls which have been kept too long in market,
but if they need such attention, bury them decently rather than cook
them for the table.

Turkeys should have clear, full eyes, and soft, loose spurs. The legs of
young birds are smooth and black; those of older ones, rough and
reddish.

Geese and ducks, when freshly killed, have supple feet. If young, the
windpipe and beak can be easily broken by pressure of the thumb and
forefinger. Young birds also have soft, white fat, tender skin, yellow
feet, and legs free from hairs.

The legs of young pigeons are flesh-colored. When in good condition, the
breast should be full and plump, and if young, it is of a light reddish
color. Old pigeons have dark flesh; squabs always have pinfeathers.

Partridges, when young, have dark bills and yellow legs.

The breast of all birds should be full and plump. Birds which are
diseased always fall away on the breast, and the bone feels sharp and
protrudes.

TO DRESS POULTRY AND BIRDS.--First strip off the feathers a few at
a time, with a quick, jerking motion toward the tail. Remove pinfeathers
with a knife.

Fowls should be picked, if possible, while the body retains some warmth,
as scalding is apt to spoil the skin and parboil the flesh. When all the
feathers but the soft down have been removed, a little hot water may be
poured on, when the down can be easily rubbed off with the palm of the
hand. Wipe dry, and singe the hairs off by holding the bird by the legs
over the flame of a candle, a gas-jet, or a few drops of alcohol poured
on a plate and lighted. To dress a bird successfully, one should have
some knowledge of its anatomy, and it is well for the amateur first to
dress one for some dish in which it is not to be cooked whole, when the
bird may be opened, and the position of its internal organs studied.

Remove the head, slip the skin back from the neck, and cut it off close
to the body, take out the windpipe and pull out the crop from the end of
the neck. Make an incision through the skin a little below the
leg-joint, bend the leg at this point and break off the bone. If care
has been taken to cut only through the skin, the tendons of the leg may
now be easily removed with the fingers.

If the bird is to be cut up, remove the legs and wings at the joints.
Then beginning near the vent, cut the membrane down between the
breastbone and tail to the backbone on each side, and separate just
below the ribs. The internal organs can now been seen and easily
removed, and the body of the bird divided at its joints.

If desired to keep the fowl whole, after removing the windpipe and crop,
loosen the heart, liver, and lungs by introducing the forefinger at the
neck; cut off the oil-sack, make a slit horizontally under the tail,
insert the first and middle fingers, and after separating the membranes
which lie close to the body, press them along within the body until the
heart and liver can be felt. The gall bladder lies directly under the
left lobe of the liver, and if the fingers are kept up, and all
adhesions loosened before an effort is made to draw the organs out,
there will be little danger of breaking it. Remove everything which can
be taken out, then hold the, fowl under the faucet and cleanse
thoroughly.

TO TRUSS A FOWL OR BIRD.--Twist the tips of the wings back under
the shoulder and bend the legs as far up toward the breast as possible,
securing them in that position by putting a skewer through one thigh
into the body and out through the opposite thigh. Then bring the legs
down and fasten close to the vent.

TO STUFF A FOWL.--Begin at the neck, stuff the breast full, draw
the neck skin together, double it over on the back and fasten with a
darning needle threaded with fine twine. Put the remainder of the
stuffing into the body at the other opening.


_RECIPES._

BIRDS BAKED IN SWEET POTATOES.--Small birds, of which the breast is
the only suitable portion for eating, may be baked in the following
manner: Cut a sweet potato lengthwise; make a cavity in each half. Place
the breast of the bird therein; fit, and tie together carefully; bake
until the potato is soft. Serve in the potato.

BOILED FOWL.--After cleaning and dividing the fowl, put into
boiling water, and proceed as directed on page 395.

BROILED BIRDS.--Pluck and wipe clean with a damp cloth. Split down
the middle of the back, and carefully draw the bird. Proceed as directed
below.

BROILED FOWL.--A young bird well dressed and singed is best for
this purpose. Split down the middle of the back, wipe clean with a damp
cloth, twist the top of the wings from the second joint; spread out
flat, and with a rolling pin break the projecting breastbone so that the
bird will lie flat upon the broiler. When ready to cook, place it skin
uppermost and sear the under side by pressing it on a hot pan; then
broil the same as beefsteak over glowing coals.

CORN AND CHICKEN.--Clean and divide a chicken in joints. Stew in
milk or part milk and water until nearly tender; then add the grains and
juice from a dozen ears of corn. Cook slowly until the corn is done;
season lightly with salt, and serve with dry toast.

PIGEONS, QUAILS, AND PARTRIDGES may be half baked, then cooked as
directed for Smothered Chicken until tender.

ROAST CHICKEN.--Dress carefully, singe, wash, and wipe dry. Put
into a pan of the proper size, add a cup of boiling water, and cook very
slowly for the first half hour, then increase the heat, baste
frequently, turn occasionally so that no portion will brown too fast.
Cook from one to two hours according to size and age of the bird. It is
usually considered essential to stuff a fowl for roasting, but a
dressing compounded of melted fat and crumbs seasoned with herbs and
strong condiments is not to be recommended.

If a dressing is considered necessary, it may be made of a quart of
crumbs of rather stale whole-wheat bread, moistened with cream, to which
add a small handful of powdered and sifted sage leaves which have been
dried in the oven until crisp. Add salt as desired, a well-beaten egg,
and a little chopped celery.

ROAST TURKEY.--Pluck, singe, and dress the turkey; wash thoroughly
and wipe with a dry cloth. If dressing is to be used, stuff the body
full, sew up, and truss. Place in a dripping-pan, add a pint of boiling
water, and put in an oven so moderate that the turkey will not brown for
the first hour; afterward the heat may be somewhat increased, but at no
time should the oven be very hot. After the bird becomes brown, baste it
occasionally with the water in the pan, dredging lightly with flour.
Cook until the legs will separate from the body; three or four hours
will be necessary for a small turkey. One half hour to the pound is the
usual rule. When tender, remove the stuffing and serve it hot, placing
the turkey on a large hot platter to be carved. It may be garnished with
parsley or celery leaves and served with cranberry sauce.

Ducks and geese may be prepared and roasted in the same manner, but less
time will suffice for cooking, about one and one third hours for ducks
of ordinary size, and about three hours for a young goose.

A stuffing of mashed potato seasoned with onion, sage, and salt is
considered preferable for a goose. Equal parts of bread crumbs and
chopped apples moistened in a little cream are also used for this
purpose.

SMOTHERED CHICKEN.--Cut two chickens into joints and put in a
closely covered kettle with a pint of boiling water. Heat very slowly to
boiling, skim, keep covered, and simmer until tender and the water
evaporated; add salt, turn the pieces, and brown them in their own
juices.

STEAMED CHICKEN.--Prepare the chicken as for roasting, steam until
nearly tender, dredge with flour and a little salt; put into a
dripping-pan and brown in the oven. Other birds and fowls may be
prepared in the same way.

STEWED CHICKEN.--Divide a chicken into pieces suitable for serving,
and stew as directed for beef on page 400. Old fowls left whole and
stewed in this manner for a long time and afterward roasted, are much
better than when prepared in any other way. If a gravy is desired,
prepare as for stewed beef. Other poultry may be stewed likewise.





FISH.

Fish is a less stimulating article of food than other meats. Edible fish
are generally divided into two classes, those of white flesh and those
more or less red. The red-fleshed fish, of which the salmon is a
representative, have their fat distributed throughout the muscular
tissues, while in white fish the fat is stored up in the liver; hence
the latter class is much easier of digestion, and being less
stimulating, is to be recommended as more wholesome. Different kinds of
fish have different nutritive values. Their flavor and wholesomeness are
greatly influenced by the nature of their food and the condition of the
water in which they are caught; those obtained in deep water with strong
currents are considered superior to those found in shallow water. Fish
are sometimes poisonous, owing no doubt to the food they eat.

Like all animal foods, fish are subject to parasites, some of which take
up their abode in the human body when fish infected with them are eaten.
An eminent scientist connected with the Smithsonian Institution,
contributed an article to _Forest and Stream_ a few years ago, in which
he stated that in the salmon no less than sixteen kinds of parasitic
worms have been discovered, and undoubtedly many others remain unknown;
four species were tapeworms, and four, roundworms. The yellow perch is
known to be infested with twenty-three species of parasitic worms.

The pike carries with him at least twenty kinds, while many other
varieties of fish are equally infested.

Fish have been highly lauded as a food particularly suited to the
development of the brain and nervous system. This no doubt has arisen
from the fact that fish contain a considerable amount of phosphorus.
Phosphorus is also present in the human brain, and for this reason it
has been supposed that fish must be excellent nutriment for the brain;
but the truth is, there is no such thing as any special brain or nerve
food. What is good to build up one part of the body is good for the
whole of it; a really good food contains the elements to nourish every
organ of the body.

Salted fish, like salted meat, is deprived of most of its nutriment
during the curing process, and being rendered much more difficult of
digestion, possesses very little value as a food.

SHELL-FISH (OYSTERS, CLAMS, SCALLOPS, LOBSTERS, CRABS,
ETC.)--Although considered a luxury by epicures, shellfish are not
possessed of a high nutritive value. The whole class are scavengers by
nature and according to recent researches it appears that they are not
altogether safe articles of diet. Many cases of severe and extensive
sickness have been traced to the use of clams and oysters.
Investigations made to ascertain the cause show the poisonous part of
the mussel to be the liver. Rabbits and other small animals inoculated
with the poison died in one or two minutes. Not all mussels are thus
poisonous, but inasmuch as there is an abundance of wholesome food, it
would certainly seem the part of wisdom to discard shellfish altogether.

HOW TO SELECT AND PREPARE FISH.--The flesh of good, fresh fish is
firm and hard, and will respond at once to pressure with the fingers. If
the flesh feels soft and flabby, the fish is not fresh. The eyes should
be full and bright and the gills of a clear red color.

Fish should be cleaned as soon as possible after being caught. To do
this, lay the fish upon a board, and holding it by the tail, scrape off
the scales with a dull knife held nearly flat, working from the tail
toward the head. Scrape slowly, and rinse the knife frequently in cold
water. Cut off the head and fins, make an opening from the gills halfway
down the lower part of the body, scrape out the entrails and every
particle of blood. Remove the white part that lies along the backbone,
then thoroughly rinse and wipe dry.

Keep in a cool place until ready to cook, but do not place directly on
ice, as that will have a tendency to soften the flesh. Fresh fish should
never be allowed to soak in water. If salt fish is to be used, it should
be freshened by placing it skin-side up in cold water, and soaking for
several hours, changing the water frequently.

Frozen fish should be placed in cold water to thaw, and when thawed,
should be cooked immediately.

Fish is cooked by nearly all methods, but retains more nourishment when
broiled or baked. It should be thoroughly cooked, being both
indigestible and unpalatable when underdone.

Boiled fish is usually dependent for flavor upon some kind of rich sauce
so incompatible with healthy digestion that we do not recommend this
method.


_RECIPES._

BAKED FISH.--Select a perfectly fresh, properly dressed fish. Rinse
thoroughly and wipe dry. Fold it together and place in a dripping pan
with a cup of boiling water. Cook slowly and steadily until tender. A
fish weighing three or four pounds will require at least two hours. If
desired, the fish may be lightly dredged with flour, toward the last, as
it begins to brown.

BROILED FISH.--Thoroughly clean the fish, and if small, split down
the back. Fish of larger size should be cut into inch slices. Use a
double wire broiler well oiled with a bit of suet. Lay the fish, with
its thickest part next the center of the broiler, skin uppermost, and
broil over a bed of clear coals until the flesh-side is of an even
brown. The time required will vary, according to the size of the fish,
from five to twenty minutes; then turn and brown on the other side. If
the fish be very thick, when both sides are browned, put the broiler in
the oven over a dripping pan and cook until done.


MEAT SOUP.

Soups made from meat require first the preparation of a special material
called _stock_, a liquid foundation upon which to begin the soup.

Beef, veal, mutton, and poultry are all made into stock in the same
manner, so that general rules for its preparation will be sufficient for
all meat soups.

The principal constituents of meat and bones, the material from which
stock is compounded, are fiber, albuminous elements, gelatinous
substances, and flavoring matters. The albuminous elements are found
only in the flesh. The gelatinous substance found in bones, skin, and
tendons, is almost devoid of nutriment. In selecting material for stock,
therefore, it is well to remember that the larger the proportion of lean
meat used, the more nutritious will be the soup.

But little else than gelatine is obtained from the bones, and although
serviceable in giving consistency, a soup made principally from bones is
not valuable as a food. The amount of bone used for soup should never
exceed the flesh material in weight. The bones, trimmings, and remnants
of steaks, chops, and roasts may be advantageously utilized for soups.
Bits of roast meat and roast gravies are especially serviceable
material, since they are rich in the flavoring elements of meat. It
should be remembered, however, that these flavoring matters are chiefly
excrementitious or waste substances, derived from the venous blood of
the animal.

The greatest care must be observed to keep the scraps perfectly sweet
and fresh until needed, as stale meat is exceedingly unwholesome. If the
scraps are mostly cooked meats and bones, a small portion of raw, lean
meat should be used with them; it need not be of the choicest quality;
tough, coarse meat, when fresh and good, can be advantageously used for
soup stock.

If fresh material is to be procured, select for beef soups a piece from
the shin or lower round; the same choice of pieces may be made of veal;
of mutton, pieces from the forequarter and neck are best.

In preparing meat for soup, if it is soiled, scrub the outside
thoroughly with a clean cloth wet in cold water, or cut away the soiled
portion. Break the bones into as small pieces as convenient; cut the
meat into inch dice, remove the marrow from the bones, and put it aside.
If added to the stock, it will make it greasy.

Having selected proper material and prepared it for use, the next step
is to extract the juices. To do this put it into cold water, bring very
gradually to the boiling point,--an hour is not too long for
this,--then cook slowly but continuously. In the observation of these
simple measures lies the secret of success in stock-making.

The albuminous elements of the meat, which are similar in character to
the white of an egg, are readily dissolved in cold or tepid water, but
boiling water coagulates them. If the meat is put into boiling water,
the albumen coagulates, or hardens, forming a sort of crust on the
outside of the meat, which prevents the inner juices from escaping; on
the contrary, if the meat is put to cook in cold water, and is gradually
raised to the boiling point, the soaking and simmering will easily
extract and dissolve the juices.

Salt likewise hinders the extraction of the meat juices, and should not
be added to stock during its preparation.

The best utensil for use in the preparation of stock is a soup digester.
This is a porcelain-lined kettle, resting on standards, with a cover
fitting closely into a groove, so that no steam can escape except
through a valve in the top of the cover. In this the meat can be placed
and allowed to cook for hours without burning. An ordinary granite-ware
kettle with tightly fitting cover set on a stove ring or brick, answers
quite well. It should, however, be kept entirely for this purpose. A
double boiler is also suitable.

The correct proportion of water is to be used is about one quart to each
pound of meat and bones, though this will vary somewhat with the
material and the length of time required for cooking. The scum which is
thrown to the surface of the water during the cooking process is
composed of blood and other impurities, and should be removed as rapidly
as it rises. If allowed to remain after the water reaches the boiling
point, it will become incorporated into the stock and injure it in
flavor and wholesomeness.

If the meat and bones are well cut and broken, the juices ought to be
all extracted, with proper cooking, in three or four hours. Longer
cooking will render the stock thicker and more gelatinous but not more
nutritious, and too long cooking will detract from its flavor. As soon
as the meat will fall from the bones, the stock should be removed from
the pot and strained at once.

A good way to strain stock is to place a colander over an earthen crock
or jar (the colander should fit inside the jar), with a cloth strainer
within the colander. Then dip the contents of the stock kettle into the
colander, and leave it there to drain for fifteen or twenty minutes. Do
not squeeze the cloth, and when well drained, throw the scraps away.

[Illustration: Arrangement for Straining Stock.]

French cooks, with their propensity for economy, sometimes select a good
quality of beef, cook it so as to retain a portion of the juices in the
meat, and make it serve both for preparing the soup and for boiled beef
on the bill of fare. The meat is not cut up, but is heated quickly and
removed as soon as tender, so that only part of the juices are
extracted.

Set the stock where it will become cold. The more rapidly it cools, the
more delicate will be its flavor, and the better it will keep. The fat
will rise to the surface, and can be easily removed when desired. If the
quantity of fat in the material used was considerable, a solid cake will
cover the top. This fat, by excluding the air, helps keep the stock
sweet, and should not be removed until the stock is needed.

If only a portion is to be used at one time, the remainder with the fat
should be reheated and cooled, that a new crust may be formed. In
winter, stock may be kept several days, if care is thus taken to reheat
it. In summer, unless kept in a very cold place, it will spoil in a few
hours.

Soup should never be greasy, and hence, before using the stock, every
particle of the fat should be removed. To accomplish this, loosen the
cake of fat from the dish with a knife, and if solid, it will sometimes
come off whole; if soft, remove all that is possible without cutting
into the stock, and afterwards wipe the top of the jellied stock with a
cloth wrung out of very hot water, which will readily absorb any
lingering portion of fat. If the stock is not jellied, skim off all the
fat possible, and then turn the stock through a napkin wrung out of ice
water. This will harden the grease, which will adhere to the napkin. It
is always better to prepare stock long enough before it is needed to
allow it to become perfectly cold; if, however, it is necessary to use
the stock very soon after it is prepared, the fat may be quickly
hardened by turning the stock into a dripping pan or some other shallow
dish, and placing it on ice in a cool place; if there is no time for
this, strain several times through a napkin wrung out of ice-cold water,
removing the particles of fat each time and wringing the cloth anew
before straining again. A little cold water poured into hot stock will
also cause the grease to rise so that it can be easily skimmed off; but
this method weakens the stock.

Stock may be prepared from one kind of meat only, or from two or more
different kinds mixed together. Chicken stock is generally conceded to
be better if a small portion of beef is combined with the fowl. Beef and
veal are largely used together; but mutton on account of its strong
flavor is better used alone.

Stock, when prepared from a single kind of meat, is termed simple stock
or broth. When prepared from two or more kinds of flesh cooked together,
or when stock prepared separately from different kinds of meat are mixed
together, the result is termed compound stock or double broth. With
either of these stocks as a foundation, an innumerable variety of soups
may be prepared, either by serving them as plain broth or by the
addition of some of the various grains and vegetables, the distinctive
name of each soup being given it according to its principal solid
ingredient.

TO CLARIFY SOUP STOCK.--Having removed all the fat from the stock,
add to it before reheating, the shell of an egg, and the whole of one
egg well beaten, with a little cold water, for every three pints of
soup. Place the soup over the fire and stir it constantly to keep the
egg from setting until it is hot. Simmer for fifteen minutes, removing
the scum as it rises, and strain through a flannel cloth or napkin laid
in a colander. It is also a good plan to place a fine wire strainer on
the napkin to catch the shells and scum. Do not squeeze the cloth or
stir the liquid with a spoon to hasten the straining process. If the
cloth is clogged so that the stock does not run through well, carefully
change it in the colander so that the liquid will run down upon a clean
portion. When strained, it may be reheated, seasoned, and served as
clear soup.


_RECIPES._

ASPARAGUS SOUP.--This soup is prepared in every way like the one on
page 276, except that while stock made from veal is used instead of
milk. Green pea soup, celery soup, green corn soup, and green bean soup
may be prepared according to the recipes already given for these soups
by substituting for milk the same quantity of the stock of veal or
chicken.

BARLEY, RICE, SAGO, OR TAPIOCA SOUP.--Any kind of stock may be used
in making these soups, though chicken and mutton stock are generally
considered preferable. Prepare the grains, the sago, or the tapioca, by
steaming or boiling till well cooked, and add to the stock, which should
be at boiling temperature. Season and serve.

CARAMEL FOR COLORING SOUP BROWN.--Melt a half pint of sugar and one
tablespoonful of water in a saucepan over the fire; stir constantly
until it is of a dark brown color; then add a half pint of boiling
water, simmer ten minutes, strain, and put into an air-tight can or
bottle. When needed, mix such a quantity with the soup as will give the
desired degree of color.

JULIENNE SOUP.--Take an equal proportion of carrot, parsnip,
turnip, celery, and string beans, cut into thin pieces of inch lengths,
sufficient to make one pint. Simmer the vegetables gently in a small
quantity of water until tender, but not long enough to destroy their
shape. Heat a quart of clear stock to boiling, add vegetables, salt to
taste, and serve.

Other vegetables, as peas, asparagus, etc. may be used in the season.
Sometimes the vegetables are cut into dice or fancy shapes with a
vegetable cutter. It makes little difference about the shape, so that
the pieces are small and uniform in size. Such vegetables as potatoes,
carrots, or turnips, when used for soups, are easiest cut, after paring
in the usual manner, by taking the vegetable in the left hand, holding
it on the table or board between thumb and finger, and with the right
hand cutting downward in even slices not over one third of an inch wide,
to within a quarter of an inch of the bottom. Turn the vegetable and
repeat the process, cutting across the first slices. Again lay the
vegetable on its side, and make a third series of cuts, which will
divide it into cubes. If several kinds of vegetables are used, those
which require a longer time for cooking should be cut into smaller
pieces.

TOMATO SOUP.--Into two quarts of boiling beef stock stir a
teaspoonful of cornstarch well braided with a little cold water, and a
pint of strained, stewed tomatoes. Boil a few minutes, and serve. A
teaspoonful of sugar may also be added, if desired.

WHITE SOUP.--White soups are made from veal or chicken stock,
seasoned with cream, flavored with onion or celery, and thickened with
cornstarch or flour.

VERMICELLI OR MACARONI SOUPS.--Drop into boiling water and cook the
macaroni about one hour, the vermicelli ten minutes. Drain well, dash
cold water through them to separate the pieces, which are apt to stick
together, and add to boiling stock (beef and veal are preferable) in the
proportion of a pint of cooked macaroni or vermicelli to a quart of
soup. Salt to taste and serve.

PUREE WITH CHICKEN.--Take a quart of chicken stock from which the
fat has been removed. Add a stalk or two of celery cut into
finger-lengths, and a slice of onion, and put to boil. Beat together the
mashed yolk of two hard boiled eggs, and a half cup of sweet cream. Chop
the white meat of the chicken until fine as meal and beat with the egg
mixture. Add slowly a cup and a half of hot milk. Remove the celery and
onion from the hot stock, and stir all together. Boil up, salt to taste,
and serve. If too thick, a little more stock or milk can be added.

TAPIOCA CREAM SOUP.--Soak two tablespoonfuls of tapioca over night.
Heat a quart of stock prepared from the white meat of chicken, to
boiling, in a saucepan. Then stir the tapioca in gradually. Move the
saucepan to the side of the range where it will simmer till the tapioca
is transparent. Have ready in a large dish a mixture prepared by beating
together very thoroughly the yolks of three eggs and four tablespoonfuls
of sweet cream. When the tapioca is clear, remove the stock from the
range and pour it very gradually onto the egg mixture, stirring briskly
all the time, so that the egg will not curdle. Season with salt if
desired. The soup may be returned to the stove and warmed before serving
if necessary, but it must not be boiled or allowed to stand a long time.




TABLE TOPICS.

    Animal food is one of the greatest means by which the pure sentiment
    of the race is depressed.--_Alcott._

    An English medical author says, "It is no doubt true that the
    constant use of animal food disqualifies the mind for literary
    application. We can scarcely imagine a philosopher living on horse
    flesh like a Tartar, or on buffalo meat like an Indian; and it is a
    fact that these tribes appear incapable of civilization until they
    acquire the habit of using a less stimulating diet, and begin to
    cultivate the fruits of the earth for their own use. The difference,
    in the success of Christian missions, between such people and those
    whose chief sustenance is farinaceous food, is very striking and
    worthy of especial notice. In the East, and in Polynesia, literature
    and Christian doctrines are seized upon with avidity. But in vain
    were the most earnest labors of the best men to introduce reading
    and writing among the American Indians until they had first been
    taught to grow corn and to eat bread."

    An American gentleman traveling in the East met a Brahmin priest,
    who refused to shake hands with him for fear of pollution. The
    reason he assigned was that Americans eat hogs. Said the priest,
    "Why, I have heard that in America they put hogs' flesh in barrels
    and eat it after it has been dead six months! Horrible!"

    Pork is by no means a favorite food in Scotland. King James is said
    to have abhorred pork almost as much as he did tobacco. He said, "If
    I were to give a banquet to the devil, I would provide a loin of
    pork and a poll of ling, with a pipe of tobacco for digestion!"
    --_Scott._

    The Hindu would as soon think of becoming a cannibal as of eating
    swine's flesh. It is stated that the Indian mutiny so frightful in
    its results originated in a fear among the Sepoys that they would be
    forced to eat pork. A lady in India had an amusing experience which
    illustrates the Hindu sentiment on the subject of pig. Arriving late
    at a grand dinner, she and her husband saw the first course being
    carried in as they went down the hall. A row of khitmutgars was
    drawn up, waiting to follow the dish into the dining-room, and serve
    their respective employers; as a dish of ham was carried by, each
    man gravely and deliberately spat upon it! Needless to say, Mrs. B.
    and her lord waited for the second course.

    Both the ancient Syrians and Egyptians abstained from flesh-eating
    out of dread and abhorrence, and when the latter would represent any
    thing as odious or disagreeable by hieroglyphics, they painted a
    fish.

    Yes, Agassiz does recommend authors to eat fish because the
    phosphorus in it makes brains. So far you are correct. But I cannot
    help you to a decision about the amount you need to eat--at least
    with certainty. If the specimen composition you send is about your
    fair usual average, I should judge that perhaps a couple of whales
    would be all you want for the present; not the largest kind, but
    simply good, middling-sized whales!--_Mark Twain's Letter to a Young
    Author._




FOOD FOR THE SICK

[Illustration: Food for the Sick]

There is no branch of the culinary art which requires more skill than
that of preparing food for the sick and feeble. The purpose of food at
all times is to supply material for repairing--the waste which is
constantly be chosen with reference to its nutritive value. But during
illness and convalescence, when the waste is often much greater and the
vital powers less active, it is of the utmost importance that the food
should be of such a character as will supply the proper nutrition. Nor
is this all; an article of food may contain all the elements of
nutrition in such proportions as to render it a wholesome food for those
in health, and not be a proper food for the sick, for the reason that
its conversion into blood and tissue lays too great a tax upon the
digestive organs. Food for the sick should be palatable, nutritious and
easily assimilated. To discriminate as to what food will supply these
requisites, one must possess some knowledge of dietetics and physiology,
as well as of the nature of the illness with which the patient is
suffering; and such a knowledge ought to be part of the education of
every woman, no matter to what class of society she belongs.

There are no special dishes suitable alike for all cases. Hot buttered
toast, tea, rich jellies, and other dainties so commonly served to the
sick, are usually the very worst articles of diet of which they could
partake. As a general rule, elaborate dishes are not suitable.

Well-cooked gruel, a nicely broiled steak, a glass of milk, or some
refreshing drink often serve far better than foods which combine a
greater variety of ingredients, and require more extensive preparation.
The simplest foods are always the best, because the most readily
assimilated.

Scrupulous neatness and care in all the minute particulars of the
cooking and serving of food for invalids, will add much to its
palatableness. The clean napkin on the tray, the bright silver, and
dainty china plate, with perhaps a sprig of leaves and flowers beside
it, thinly sliced bread, toast or cracker, and the light cup partly
filled with hot gruel, are far more appetizing to the invalid than
coarse ware, thickly cut bread, and an overflowing cup of gruel, though
the cooking may be just as perfect. Anything that suggests excess or
weight fatigues the sick. The appearance of milk served in a bowl, water
in a mug, beef-tea in a saucer, though seemingly a trivial thing, is
often sufficient to remove all desire for food.

So far as practicable, the wants of the patient should be anticipated,
and the meal served, a surprise. The capricious appetite of an invalid
may sometimes be coaxed by arranging his simple food upon a tray so
planned that in the napery and service-ware used, some one particular
color predominates, and if this color be selected to accord or harmonize
as far as possible with the food allowed, the _tout ensemble_ presents a
pleasing fancy, which will tempt the eye, and through its influence, the
appetite of the patient. For example: an invalid whose dietary must
consist of fruit and grains, might be served to a "purple" dinner, with
bill of fare including a fresh, cool bunch of purple grapes, a glass of
unfermented grape juice, a saucer of blackberry mush, a plate of nicely
toasted wafers, Graham puffs or zwieback, with stewed prunes, or a
slice of prune toast served on dishes decorated with purple. Tie the
napkin with a bow of purple ribbon, and place a bunch of purple pansies
just within its folds. The monotonous regimen of a poor dyspeptic which
poached eggs, beaten biscuit, wheat gluten, eggnog, with, perhaps,
stewed peaches or an orange, are served on gilt-band china with a spray
of goldenrod, a bunch of marigolds, or a water-lily to give an
additional charm.

Foods which are ordered to be served hot, should be _hot,_ not merely
warm, when they reach the patient. To facilitate this, let the dish in
which the food is to be served, stand in hot water for a few moments;
take out, wipe dry, turn in the hot food, place on the tray, and serve.
An oil stove, alcohol lamp, or a pocket stove is very convenient for
warming gruels, broths and other similar foods, as either can be made
ready for use in a moment, and will heat the small quantity of food
necessary for an invalid in one fourth the time in which it could be
accomplished over the range, if necessary to reduce the fire.

In the preparation of food for the sick, a scrupulously clean dish for
cooking is of the first importance. It is a good plan in every household
to reserve one or two cooking utensils for this purpose, and not be
obliged to depend upon those in daily use. Utensils used for the cooking
of fruits, vegetables, meat, etc., unless cleaned with the utmost call
will sometimes impart a sufficiently unpleasant flavor to the food to
render it wholly unpalatable to an invalid whose senses are
preternaturally acute.


GRUELS

These simple foods, the base of which is usually some one of the grains,
play an important part in the dietary for the sick, if properly
prepared; but the sloppy messes sometimes termed gruel, the chief merit
of which appears to be that they "are prepared in ten minutes," are
scarcely better than nothing at all. Like other dishes prepared from the
grains, gruel needs a long, continuous cooking. When done, it should be
the very essence of the grain, possessing all its nutritive qualities,
but in such form as to be readily assimilated. For the making of gruels,
as for the cooking of grains for any other purpose, the double boiler is
the best utensil.

[Illustration: Gruel Strainer.]

If it is desirable to strain the gruel before serving, have a fine wire
strainer of a size to stand conveniently within a large bowl or basin,
turn the gruel into this, and rub it through with a wooden or silver
spoon, using a second spoon, if necessary, to remove that which hangs
beneath the sieve. On no account use the first spoon for the latter
operation, as by so doing one is apt to get some of the hulls into the
gruel and destroy its smoothness. When as much of the gruel as possible
has been rubbed through the sieve, pour the strained liquid into a clean
dish, reheat to boiling, and season as desired before serving. An
extension strainer which can be fitted over any sized dish is also
serviceable for straining gruels.

[Illustration: Extension Strainer.]

Gruels, like all other foods, should be retained in the mouth for proper
insalivation, and it is well to eat them with wafers or some hard food,
when solid food is allowed.


_RECIPES._

ARROWROOT GRUEL.--Rub a dessertspoonful of _pure_ arrowroot to a
thin paste in two tablespoonfuls of cold water, and stir it into a half
pint of boiling water, or, if preferred, a cup and a third of boiling
milk, and stir rapidly until thickened and clear. If desired, a little
lemon peel for flavoring may be infused in the water or milk, before
adding the arrowroot. Sweeten, if allowed, and serve.

BARLEY GRUEL.--Wash three heaping tablespoonfuls of pearl barley,
drop it into a pint of boiling water, and parboil five minutes. Pour
this water off and add a quart of fresh boiling water. Let it simmer
gently for three hours. Strain, season, and serve. A small piece of
lemon rind added to the gruel a half hour before it is done, gives it a
very agreeable flavor. Equal quantities of milk and barley gruel make a
very nourishing drink; the milk, however, should not be added to the
gruel until needed, as in a warm atmosphere it undergoes quite rapid
change, and is likely to ferment. A little lemon juice, with sugar to
sweeten to taste, is sometimes preferred as seasoning for barley gruel.

EGG GRUEL.--Heat a cup of milk to boiling, and stir into it one
well-beaten egg mixed with one fourth cup of cold milk. Stir constantly
for a few minutes till thickened, but do not allow it to boil again.
Season with a little salt, or if preferred and allowed, a little loaf
sugar.

EGG GRUEL NO. 2.--Boil the yolks of three eggs until dry and mealy,
mash perfectly smooth, then add a cup of boiling milk. Season with salt,
and serve.

FARINA GRUEL.--Moisten two table spoonfuls of farina with a very
little cold milk, and stir it into a cupful of boiling water. Boil until
it thickens, add a cupful of new milk, turn into a double boiler, and
cook again for twenty or thirty minutes. Strain if necessary, season
with salt or sugar, and serve.

FLOUR GRUEL.--Rub one heaping tablespoonful of whole-wheat flour to
a thin paste with three tablespoonfuls of cold milk, and stir it into a
pint of boiling milk. Cook for ten or twelve minutes. Season with salt,
strain if necessary, and while hot, stir in the beaten white of one egg.
The egg may be omitted if preferred; or the yolk of the egg and a little
sugar may be used instead, if the patient's condition will allow it.

GLUTEN GRUEL.--Stir two and one half tablespoonfuls of the wheat
gluten prepared by the Sanitarium Food Co., Battle Creek, Mich., into a
pint of boiling milk; boil until thickened, when it is ready to serve.

GLUTEN GRUEL NO. 2.--Into a pint of boiling water stir three
heaping tablespoonfuls of the prepared gluten. Boil until thickened, and
add a half cup of thin cream.

GLUTEN CREAM.--Heat a pint of thin cream to boiling, and stir into
it three tablespoonfuls of wheat gluten. When thickened, it is ready to
serve.

GLUTEN MEAL GRUEL.--Into a cup and a half of boiling water stir
four tablespoonfuls of gluten meal (prepared by the Sanitarium Food
Co.), let it boil for a moment, add six tablespoonfuls of rather thin,
sweet cream, and serve.

GRAHAM GRUEL.--Heat three cups of water in the inner dish of a
double boiler, and when vigorously boiling stir into it carefully, a
little at a time, so as not to check the boiling, one scant cup of
Graham flour which has been rubbed perfectly smooth in a cup of warm,
not hot, water. Stir until thickened, then place in the outer boiler and
cook for an hour or longer. When done, strain if necessary, season with
salt if desired, and a half cup of sweet cream.

GRAHAM GRITS GRUEL.--Cook three heaping tablespoonfuls of Graham
grits in a quart of boiling water, as directed in the chapter on Grains,
for three hours. Turn through a soup strainer to remove any lumps,
season with half a cup of cream, and salt if desired. Well cooked Graham
grits may be made into gruel by thinning with water or milk, straining
and seasoning as above.

GRUEL OF PREPARED FLOUR.--Knead a pint of flour with water into a
ball, and tie firmly in a linen cloth; put it into a granite-ware basin
or kettle, cover with boiling water, and boil slowly, replenishing with
boiling water as needed, for twelve hours. Put it before the fire to
dry. Afterward remove the cloth, and also a thick skin which will have
formed over the ball. Dry the interior again. When needed for use, rub a
tablespoonful of the prepared flour smooth with three spoonfuls of cold
milk, and stir it into a pint of boiling milk. Cook from three to five
minutes. Season with salt if desired.

INDIAN MEAL GRUEL.--Make a thin paste of one teaspoonful of flour,
two tablespoonfuls of best cornmeal, and a little water. Stir this into
a quart of boiling water, or milk and water in equal proportions, as
preferred. Boil until the meal has set, stirring constantly; then turn
into a double boiler and cook for an hour and half or two hours. Season
with salt, and strain. If too thick, thin with milk or cream.

LEMON OATMEAL GRUEL.--The United States Dispensary recommends the
following method of preparing oatmeal gruel for fever patients; "Rub one
heaping tablespoonful of fine oatmeal smooth in a little cold water;
stir this into three pints of boiling water. Cook until the quantity is
reduced to two pints; then strain, and let it cool and settle. When it
is quite cold, pour the clear gruel from the sediment, add the juice of
a lemon, and sugar to sweeten slightly. If desirable to serve it warm,
reheat before adding the lemon juice." Freshly cooked oatmeal may be
thinned with boiling water, strained and seasoned in the same manner.

MILK OATMEAL GRUEL.--Take a pint of milk and one of water, and heat
to boiling. Stir in three heaping table spoonfuls of oatmeal, and cook
in a double boiler for two or three hours.

MILK PORRIDGE.--Take one pint of milk and the same quantity of
water, and heat to boiling. Stir in two heaping tablespoonfuls of
cornmeal or Graham grits, boil, stirring continuously, until the meal
has set, then turn into a double boiler and cook for two hours or
longer. Season with salt, and a tablespoonful of sweet cream if allowed.

OATMEAL GRUEL.--Into one quart of boiling water stir two heaping
tablespoonfuls of fine oatmeal; let it boil until it thickens, stirring
all the time; then turn into a double boiler and cook for three and a
half or four hours. Strain before serving. A little cream may also be
added, unless contra-indicated by the patient's condition.

OATMEAL GRUEL NO. 2.--Pound one half cup of coarse oatmeal until it
is mealy. The easiest way to do this is to tie the oatmeal in a coarse
cloth and pound it with a wooden mallet. Put it in a pint bowl, and fill
the bowl with cold water. Stir briskly for a few moments until the water
is white, then allow the meal to settle. Pour off the water, being
careful to get none of the sediment. Fill the bowl a second time with
cold water, stir thoroughly, let settle, and pour off the water as
before. Do this the third time. Boil the liquid one half hour, strain,
and serve hot. If very thick, a little cream or milk may be added.

OATMEAL GRUEL NO, 3.--Add to one cup of well-cooked oatmeal while
hot two cups of hot milk, or one cup of hot milk and one of hot water.
Beat all thoroughly together, add a little salt if desired, strain, and
serve.

PEPTONIZED GLUTEN GRUEL.--Prepare the gruel as directed for Gluten
Gruel No. 1. Strain if needed, cook to lukewarm, and turn it into a
pitcher, which place in a dish containing hot water even in depth with
the gruel in the pitcher; add the peptonizing fluid or powder, stir
well, and let it stand in the hot water bath for ten minutes. The
temperature must not be allowed to rise over 130°. Put into a clean dish
and serve at once, or place on ice till needed. Other well-cooked gruels
maybe peptonized in the same way.

RAISIN GRUEL.--Stone and quarter two dozen raisins and boil them
twenty minutes in a small quantity of water. When the water has nearly
boiled away, add two cups of new milk. When the milk is boiling, add one
heaping tablespoonful of Graham or whole-wheat flour which has been
rubbed to a thin paste with a little cold milk. Boil until thickened,
stirring all the time; then turn into a double boiler and cook for
twenty minutes or half an hour. Season with salt and serve.

RICE WATER.--Wash half a cup of rice very thoroughly in several
waters. Put it into a saucepan with three cups of cold water and boil
for half an hour. Strain off the rice water, season with salt if
desired, and serve.


PREPARATIONS OF MILK.

MILK DIET.--An almost exclusive milk diet is sometimes a great
advantage in cases of sickness. It is usually necessary to begin the use
of the milk in moderate quantities, gradually withdrawing the more solid
food and increasing the quantity of milk. In the course of a week, all
other food should be withdrawn, and the quantity of milk increased to
three or four quarts a day. Milk is easily digested, and hence may be
taken at more frequent intervals than other food.


_RECIPES._

ALBUMINIZED MILK.--Shake together in a well-corked bottle or glass
fruit can, a pint of fresh milk and the well-beaten whites of two eggs,
until thoroughly mixed. Serve at once.

HOT MILK.--Hot milk is an excellent food for many classes of
invalids. The milk should be fresh, and should be heated in a double
boiler until the top is wrinkled over the entire surface.

JUNKET, OR MILK CURD.--Heat a cup of fresh milk to 85°, add one
teaspoonful of the essence of pepsin, and stir just enough to mix
thoroughly. Let it stand until firmly curded, and serve.

KOUMISS.--Dissolve one fourth of a two-cent cake of compressed
yeast, and two teaspoonfuls of white sugar, in three tablespoonfuls of
lukewarm water. Pour this into a quart bottle and add sufficient fresh,
sweet milk to nearly fill. Shake well, and place in a room of the
temperature of 70° to 80° F., and allow it to ferment about six hours.
Cork tightly and tie the cork in. Put in a cool place, act above 60° and
let it remain a week, when it will be ready for use. In making koumiss
be sure that the milk is pure, the bottle sound, and the yeast fresh.
Open the bottle with a champagne tap. If there is any curd or thickening
resembling cheese, the fermentation has been prolonged beyond the proper
point, and the koumiss should not be used.

MILK AND LIME WATER.--In cases where milk forms large curds, or
sours in the stomach, lime water prepared in the following manner may be
added to the milk before using:--

Into a gallon jar of water, put a piece of lime the size of one's fist.
Cover the jar and let the lime settle over night. In the morning, draw
the water off the top with a syphon, being careful not to move the jar
so as to mix again the particles of lime with the water.

Two tablespoonfuls of the lime water is usually sufficient for a pint
of milk.

PEPTONIZED MILK FOR INFANTS.--One gill of cows' milk, fresh and
unskimmed; one gill of pure water; two tablespoonfuls of rich, sweet
cream; two hundred grains of milk sugar, one and one fourth grains of
_extractum pancreatis_; four grains of sodium bicarbonate. Put the above
in a clean nursing bottle, and place the bottle in water so warm that
the whole hand cannot be held in it longer for one minute without pain.
Keep the milk at this temperature for exactly twenty minutes. Prepare
fresh just before using.


BEEF-TEA, BROTHS, ETC.

Beef tea and meat broths are by no means so useful as foods for the sick
as is generally supposed. The late Dr. Austin Flint used to say of these
foods, that "the valuation by most persons outside of the medical
profession, and by many within it, of beef tea or its analogues, the
various solutions, most of the extracts, and the expressed juice of
meat, is a delusion and a snare which has led to the loss of many lives
by starvation.

"The quantity of nutritive material in these preparations is
insignificant or nil, and it is vastly important that they should be
reckoned as of little or no value, except as indirectly conducive to
nutrition by acting as stimulants for the secretion of the digestive
fluids, or as vehicles for the introduction of the nutritive substances.
Furthermore, it is to be considered that water and pressure not only
fail to extract the alimentary principles of meat, but that the
excrementitious principles, or the products of destructive assimilation,
_are_ thereby extracted."

Vegetable broths prepared from grains and legumes possess a much higher
nutritive value, while they lack the objectionable features of meat
broths.


_RECIPES._

BEEF EXTRACT.--Take a pound of lean beef, cut it up into small
dice, and put into a glass fruit jar. Screw on the cover tightly, put
the jar into a vessel filled with cold water to a depth sufficient to
come to the top of contents of the jar, and set over a slow fire. As
soon as the water boils, set where it will keep just boiling, but no
more; and cook for an hour or an hour and a quarter. Then strain,
season, and serve. If preferred, a double boiler may be used for the
preparation of the extract.

BEEF JUICE.--Cut a thick slice of round steak, trim off every
particle of fat, and broil it over a clear fire just long enough to heat
it throughout. Next gash it in many places with a sharp knife, and with
the aid of a beef-juice press or lemon squeezer, press out all the juice
into a bowl set in hot water, salt but very slightly, remove all
globules of fat, and serve. This may also be frozen and given the
patient in small lumps, if so ordered.

BEEF TEA.--Take a pound of fresh, lean, juicy beef of good
flavor,--the top of the round and the back and middle of the rump are
the best portions for the purpose,--from which all fat, bones, and
sinews have been carefully removed; cut into pieces a quarter of an inch
square, or grind in a sausage-cutter. Add a quart of cold water, and put
into a clean double boiler. Place over the fire, and heat very slowly,
carefully removing all scum as it rises. Allow it to cook gently for two
or three hours, or until the water has been reduced one half. Strain,
and put away to cool. Before using, remove all fat from the surface, and
season. In reheating, a good way is to place a quantity in a cup, and
set the cup into hot water until the tea is sufficiently hot. This
prevents waste, and if the patient is not ready for the tea, it can be
easily kept hot.

BEEF TEA AND EGGS.--Beat the yolk of an egg thoroughly in a teacup
and fill the cup with boiling beef tea, stirring all the while. Season
with a little salt if desired.

BEEF BROTH AND OATMEAL.--Rub two tablespoonfuls of oatmeal smooth
in an equal quantity of cold water, and stir into a quart of boiling
beef broth. Cook in a double broiler for two hours, strain, and season
with salt and a little cream if allowed. Or, thin well-cooked oatmeal
mush with beef-tea; strain, reheat, season, and serve.

BOTTLED BEEF TEA.--Cut two pounds of round steak into small dice,
rejecting all skin and fat. Put it into a glass fruit jar with one cup
of cold water. Cover the can sufficiently tight to prevent any water
from boiling in, and place it on a wisp of straw or a muffin ring in a
kettle of cold water. Heat very gradually, and keep it just below the
boiling point for two or more hours; or, place the can in a deep dish of
hot water, and cook in a moderate oven for three hours. Allow the meat
to cook thus four or five hours, or until it appears white, by which
time it will have discharged all its juice. Turn the liquor off, strain
through a piece of muslin or cheese cloth laid in a colander, and cool;
then if any fat has been left, it will harden on the top, and can be
removed. When needed for use, reheat, season, and serve.

CHICKEN BROTH.--Take a well dressed, plump spring chicken, cut it
into half-inch pieces, cracking well all the bones; add cold water,--a
quart to the pound of meat and bones,--and cook the same as beef-tea.
Allow the broth to cool before using, and carefully skim off all
particles of fat before reheating. If allowed, a tablespoonful of
steamed rice may be added to the broth, or a well-beaten egg may be
stirred in while hot just before serving. Heat until the whole becomes
thickened, but do not boil.

If preferred, the broth may be prepared by using only the white portion
of the chicken in connection with lean beef. This is liked better by
some to whom the strong flavor of the chicken is not pleasant. Or,
prepare equal quantity of rich milk, season with salt, reheat, and
serve. The broth may be flavored with celery if allowed.

MUTTON BROTH.--Cut a pound of perfectly fresh, lean mutton or
lamb--the scrags of neck are best--into small dice. Add a quart of cold
water, and simmer gently for two or three hours. Strain, and when cold
skim off all fat. Reheat when needed for use.

If preferred, a tablespoonful of rice which has been soaked for an hour
in a little warm water, or a tablespoonful of cooked barley, may be
simmered in the broth for a half hour before serving. Season with salt
as desired.

VEGETABLE BROTH.--Put a cupful of well washed white beans into a
quart of cold water in a double boiler, and cook slowly until but a
cupful of the liquor remains. Strain off the broth, add salt, and serve
hot. If preferred, a few grains of powdered thyme may be added as
flavoring.

VEGETABLE BROTH NO. 2.--Pick over and wash a cup of dried Scotch
peas, and put to cook in a quart of cold water, cook slowly in a double
boiler or in a kettle placed on the range where they will just simmer,
until but a cupful of liquid remains. Strain off the broth, add salt and
one third of a cupful of the liquor, without pulp, from well-stewed
tomatoes. Serve hot.

MIXED VEGETABLE BROTHS.--Broths may be prepared as directed from
both black and white beaus, and combined in the proportion of one third
of the former to two thirds of the latter; or a broth of lentils may be
used instead of the black bean.


_RECIPES FOR PANADA._

BROTH PANADA.--Use beef or chicken broth in place of water, and
proceed the same as in Egg Panada, omitting the egg.

CHICKEN PANADA.--Take a cupful of the white meat of chicken,
pounded to a paste in a mortar, and half a cup of whole-wheat crust or
zwieback crumbs. Add sufficient chicken broth to make a thick gruel.
Season with salt, boil up for a few minutes, and serve hot.

EGG PANADA.--Put two ounces of light, whole-wheat crusts into a
pint of cold water in a granite-ware stewpan; simmer gently for three
quarters of an hour, stirring occasionally. Season with a spoonful of
sweet cream and a little salt, then stir in the well-beaten yolk of an
egg, and serve.

MILK PANADA.--Heat a pint of milk to boiling, then allow it to
cool. Add two ounces of nice, light, whole-wheat crusts, and simmer for
half an hour, stirring frequently. Season with a little sugar, if
allowed. Granola may be used in place of the crusts, if preferred.

RAISIN PANADA.--Boil a half cup of raisins in a half pint of water.
Break a slice of zwieback into fragments in a bowl. Add a well-beaten
egg and a teaspoonful of sugar. Pour in the raisins, water and all, and
beat very thoroughly.


GRAINS FOR THE SICK.

For invalids able to digest solid food, rice, cracked wheat, Graham
grits, oatmeal, barley, farina and other grains may be prepared and
cooked as previously directed in the chapter on Grains.

The various cooked preparations of grains--granola, wheatena, avenola,
wheat gluten and gluten meal--manufactured by the Sanitarium Food Co.,
Battle Creek, Mich., form excellent articles of diet for many invalids,
when served with hot milk or cream, or prepared in the form of mush.
Several recipes for their use have already been given in preceding
chapters; the following are a few additional ones:--


_RECIPES._

GLUTEN MUSH.--Heat together a cup of thin cream and three cups of
water; when boiling, sift in lightly with the fingers, stirring
continuously meanwhile, enough wheat gluten to make a mush of the
desired consistency. Boil up once and serve. A few blanched or roasted
almonds may be stirred in just before serving, if desired.

TOMATO GLUTEN.--Heat a pint of stewed tomato, which has been rubbed
through a fine colander to remove the seeds, to boiling, add salt to
season, and three tablespoonfuls of gluten meal. Boil together for a
moment until thickened, and serve hot.

TOMATO GLUTEN NO. 2.--Prepare the same as the preceding, using five
tablespoonfuls of the gluten meal, and seasoning with two tablespoonfuls
of rather thick, sweet cream.


MEATS FOR THE SICK.

All meats for the sick should be prepared in the very simplest way,
served with the plainest possible dressing, and without the use of
condiments other than salt.


_RECIPES._

BROILED STEAK.--Take a half pound of round steak and a slice of
tenderloin; wipe well with a clean, wet cloth. Have a clear fire; place
the meat in an open wire broiler or on a gridiron over the coals, and
cook, turning as often as you can count ten, for four or five minutes,
if the slices are about one inch thick; then with a lemon squeezer
squeeze the juice from the round steak over the tenderloin, season with
a little salt, and serve at once on a hot plate.

CHICKEN.--For an invalid, the breast of a tender chicken broiled
quickly over hot coals is best. For directions for broiling chicken see
page 406.

CHICKEN JELLY.--Dress a small chicken. Disjoint, break or pound the
bones, and cut the meat into half-inch pieces. Remove every particle of
fat possible. Cover with cold water, heat very slowly, and simmer gently
until the meat is in rags, and the liquid reduced about one half. Strain
off the liquor, cool, and remove all the fat. To make the broth more
clear, add the shell and white of an egg, then reheat slowly, stirring
all the time until hot. Strain through a fine cloth laid inside of a
colander. Salt and a little lemon may be added as seasoning. Pour into
small cups, and cool.

MINCED CHICKEN.--Stew the breast of a young chicken until tender;
mince fine with a sharp knife. Thicken the liquor in which it was stewed
with a little flour, add salt and a little cream if allowed, then the
minced chicken, and serve hot on zwieback, softened with cream as
directed in the chapter on Breakfast Dishes.

MUTTON CHOP.--Select a chop containing a large tenderloin: cut
thick, and broil for eight or ten minutes as directed for beef steak.
Season lightly with salt, and serve hot.

MINCED STEAK.--Mince some nice, juicy steak with a chopping knife,
or in a sausage-cutter, rejecting as much of the fiber as possible; make
into small cakes and broil the same as steak. Salt lightly when done,
and for dressing use a little beef juice prepared as directed on page
427. It may be thickened with a little flour as for gravy, if preferred.

SCRAPED STEAK.--Take a small piece of nice, juicy steak, and with a
blunt case-knife or tablespoon, scrape off all the pulp, being careful
to get none of the fibers. Press the pulp together in the form of
patties, and broil quickly over glowing coals. Salt lightly, and serve
hot. It is better to be as rare as the patient can take it. Instead of
butter, turn a spoonful or two of thick, hot beef juice over the steak,
if any dressing other than salt is required.


EGGS FOR THE SICK.


_RECIPES._

FLOATED EGG.--Separate the white from the yolk, and drop the yolk,
taking great care not to break it, into boiling, salted water. Cook
until hard and mealy. In the meantime, beat the white of the egg until
stiff and firm. When the yolk is cooked, remove it from the water with a
skimmer. Let the water cease to boil, then dip the beaten white in
spoonfuls on the top of the scalding water, allowing it to remain for a
second or two until coagulated, but not hardened. Arrange the white in a
hot egg saucer, and place the cooked yolk in the center, or serve on
toast. This makes a very pretty, as well as appetising dish, if care is
taken to keep the yolk intact.

GLUTEN MEAL CUSTARD.--Beat together thoroughly, one pint of rich
milk, one egg, and four tablespoonfuls of gluten meal. Add a little salt
if desired, and cook with the dish set in another containing boiling
water, until the custard has set. Or, turn the custard into cups, which
place in a dripping pan partly filled with hot water, and cook in a
moderate oven until the custard is set.

GLUTEN CUSTARD.--Into a quart of boiling milk stir four
tablespoonfuls of wheat gluten moistened with a little of the milk,
which may be reserved for the purpose. Allow it to cook until thickened.
Cool to lukewarm temperature, and add three well-beaten eggs, and a
trifle of salt, if desired. Turn into cups, and steam over a kettle of
boiling water until the custard is set.

STEAMED EGGS.--Break an egg into an egg saucer, sauce-dish, or
patty pan, salt very slightly, and steam until the white has just set.
In this way, it will retain its shape perfectly, and not be mixed with
the few drops of water so annoying to invalids, and so hard to avoid in
dishing a poached egg from water.

SOFT CUSTARD.--Boil some milk, then cool it to 180°, add three
whipped eggs to each quart of milk, and keep at the temperature of 180°
for fifteen or twenty minutes. The object is to coagulate the eggs
without producing the bad effect of exposure to a high temperature.

RAW EGGS.--Break a fresh egg into a glass, add a tablespoonful of
sugar, and heat to a stiff froth; a little cold water may be added if
liked.

WHITE OF EGG.--Stir the white of an egg into a glass of cold
water, or water as warm as it can be without coagulating the egg, and
serve.

WHITE OF EGG AND MILK.--The white of an egg beaten to a stiff froth
and stirred into a glass of milk, forms a nourishing food for persons of
weak digestion.


REFRESHING DRINKS AND DELICACIES FOR THE SICK.

In many fevers and acute diseases, but little food is required, and that
of a character which merely appeases hunger and quenches thirst, without
stimulation and without affording much nourishment.

Preparations from sago, tapioca, and other farinaceous substances are
sometimes serviceable for this purpose. Oranges, grapes, and other
perfectly ripened and juicy fruits are also most excellent. They are
nature's own delicacies, and serve both for food and drink. They should
not, however, be kept in the sick room, but preserved in some cool
place, and served when needed, as fresh and in as dainty a manner as
possible. Like all food provided for the sick, they should be arranged
to please the eye as well as the palate. The capricious appetite of an
invalid will often refuse luscious fruit from the hand of a nurse, which
would have been gladly accepted had it been served on dainty china, with
a clean napkin and silver.

The juice of the various small fruits and berries forms a basis from
which may be made many refreshing drinks especially acceptable to the
dry, parched mouth of a sick person.

Fruit juices can be prepared with but little trouble. For directions see
page 209.

Beverages from fruit juices are prepared by using a small quantity of
the juice, and sufficient cold water to dilute it to the taste. If it is
desirable to use such a drink for a sick person in some household where
fruit juices have not been put up for the purpose, the juice may be
obtained from a can of strawberries, raspberries, or other small fruit,
by turning the whole into a coarse cloth and straining off the juice; or
a tablespoonful of currant or other jelly may be dissolved in a tumbler
of warm water, and allowed to cool. Either will make a good substitute
for the prepared fruit juice, though the flavor will be less delicate.
The hot beverages and many of the cold ones given in the chapter on
Beverages will be found serviceable for the sick, as will also the
following additional ones:--


_RECIPES._

ACORN COFFEE.--Select plump, round, sweet acorns. Shell, and brown
in an oven; then grind in a coffee-mill, and use as ordinary coffee.

ALMOND MILK.--Blanch a quarter of a pound of shelled almonds by
pouring over them a quart of boiling water, and when the skins soften,
rubbing them off with a coarse towel. Pound the almonds in a mortar, a
few at a time, adding four or five drops of milk occasionally, to
prevent their oiling. About one tablespoonful of milk in all will be
sufficient. When finely pounded, mix the almonds with a pint of milk,
two tablespoonfuls of sugar, and a little piece of lemon rind. Place the
whole over the fire to simmer for a little time. Strain, if preferred,
and serve cold.

APPLE BEVERAGE.--Pare and slice very thin a juicy tart apple into a
china bowl. Cover with boiling water, put a saucer over the bowl, and
allow the water to get cold. Strain and drink. Crab apples may be used
in the same way.

APPLE BEVERAGE NO. 2.--Bake two large, sour apples, and when
tender, sprinkle a tablespoonful of sugar over them, and return to the
oven until the sugar is slightly browned. Break and mash the apples with
a silver spoon, pour over them a pint of boiling water; cover and let
stand until cold; then strain and serve.

APPLE TOAST WATER.--Break a slice of zwieback into small pieces,
and mix with them two or three well-baked tart apples. Pour over all a
quart of boiling water, cover, and let stand until cold, stirring
occasionally. When cold, strain, add sugar to sweeten if desired, and
serve.

BAKED MILK.--Put a quart of new milk in a stone jar, tie a white
paper over it, and let it stand in a moderately heated oven eight or ten
hours. It becomes of a creamy consistency.

BARLEY LEMONADE.--Put a half cup of pearl barley into a quart of
cold water, and simmer gently until the water has become mucilaginous
and quite thick. This will take from an hour to an hour and a half. The
barley will absorb most of the water, but the quantity given should make
a teacupful of good, thick barley water. Add to this two teaspoonfuls of
lemon juice and a tablespoonful of sugar. Let it get cold before
serving. By returning the barley to the stewpan with another quart of
cold water, and simmering for an hour or an hour and a half longer, a
second cap of barley water may be obtained, almost as good as the first.

BARLEY AND FRUIT DRINK.--Prepare a barley water as above, and add
to each cupful a tablespoonful or two of cranberry, grape, raspberry, or
any tart fruit syrup. The pure juice sweetened will answer just as well;
or a little fruit jelly may be dissolved and added.

BARLEY MILK.--Wash two tablespoonfuls of pearl barley in cold water
until the water is clear. Put it to cook in a double boiler, with a
quart of milk, and boil till the milk is reduced to a pint. Strain off
the milk, and sweeten if desired.

CRANBERRY DRINK.--Mash carefully selected, ripe cranberries
thoroughly in an earthen dish, and pour boiling water over them. Let the
mixture stand until cold, strain off the water, and sweeten to taste.
Barberries prepared in the same manner make a nice drink.

CURRANTADE.--Mash thoroughly a pint of ripe, red currants, and one
half the quantity of red raspberries; add sugar to sweeten and two
quarts of cold water. Stir, strain, cool on ice, and serve.

CRUST COFFEE.--Brown slices of Graham bread in a slow oven until
very ark in color. Break in pieces and roll fine with a rolling pin. A
quantity of this material may be prepared at one time and stored in
glass fruit cans for use. When needed, pour a cupful of actively boiling
water over a dessertspoonful of the prepared crumbs, let it steep for a
few moments, then strain and serve.

EGG CREAM.--Beat the white of an egg to a stiff froth, add one
tablespoonful of white sugar, then beat again. Next add the yolk, and
beat; then a tablespoonful of milk, one of cold water, and one of any
fruit juice desired.

EGG CREAM NO. 2.--Prepare as above, using two tablespoonfuls of
water instead of one of water and one of milk, and a teaspoonful of
lemon juice in place of other fruit juice.

EGG CREAM NO. 3.--Beat the yolk of a freshly laid egg with a
tablespoonful of sugar until it is light and creamy; add to this, one
half cup of hot milk and stir in lightly the stiffly beaten white of the
egg. Serve at once.

EGG LEMONADE.--Beat the white of an egg to a stiff froth, then mix
with it the juice of a small lemon, and one tablespoonful of sugar. Add
a half pint of cold water. Or, beat together with an egg beater a
tablespoonful of lemon juice, a teaspoonful of sugar, the white of an
egg and a cup of cold water, until thoroughly mingled, then serve at
once.

FLAXSEED TEA.--Take an ounce of whole flaxseed, half an ounce of
crushed licorice root, an ounce of refined sugar, and four
tablespoonfuls of lemon juice. Pour a quart of boiling water over them;
keep near the fire for four hours, and then strain off the liquid. The
flaxseed should not be crushed, as the mucilage is in the outer part of
the kernel, and if braised, the boiling water will extract the oil of
the seed, and render the decoction nauseous. Make fresh daily.

GUM ARABIC WATER.--Pour a pint of boiling water over an ounce of
clean gum arabic. When dissolved, add the juice of one lemon and a
teaspoonful of sugar, and strain.

HOT WATER.--Put good, fresh water into a perfectly clean
granite-ware kettle, already warmed; let it come to a boil very quickly,
and use at once. Do not leave it to simmer until it has become insipid
through the loss of the air which it contains.

HOT LEMONADE.--Put in a glass a thin slice of lemon and the juice
of half a small lemon, being careful to remove all seeds; mix with it
one dessertspoonful of white sugar, and fill the glass with boiling
water. Or, remove the peel of a lemon in very thin parings, turn one
pint of boiling water over them, letting it stand for a few moments
covered. Remove the peel, add the juice of a lemon and one tablespoonful
of sugar, and serve.

IRISH MOSS LEMONADE.--Soak one fourth of a cup of Irish moss in
cold water until it begins to soften; then work it free from sand and
tiny shells likely to be on it, and thoroughly wash. Put it in a
granite-ware basin, and pour over it two cups of boiling water. Leave on
the back of the range where it will keep hot, but not boil, for half an
hour; strain, add the juice of one lemon, and sugar to taste. Drink hot
or cold, as preferred.

ORANGEADE.--Rub lightly two ounces of lump sugar on the rind of two
nice, fresh oranges, to extract the flavor; put this sugar into a
pitcher, to which add the juice expressed from the oranges, and that
from one lemon. Pour over all one pint of cold water, stir thoroughly,
and serve.

PLAIN LEMONADE.--For one glass of lemonade squeeze the juice of
half a small lemon into the glass; carefully remove all seeds and
particles. Add a dessertspoonful of sugar, and fill the glass with cold
water.

SLIPPERY ELM TEA.--Pour boiling water over bits of slippery elm
bark or slippery elm powder, cool, and strain, if desired, a little
lemon juice and sugar may be added to flavor.

TOAST WATER.--Toast a pint of whole-wheat or Graham bread crusts
very brown, but do not burn. Cover with a pint of cold water. Let it
stand an hour, strain, and use. Sugar and a little cream may be added if
allowed.

TAMARIND WATER.--Boil four ounces of tamarinds and the same of
raisins slowly, in three quarts of water, for fifteen or twenty minutes,
or until the water is reduced nearly one fourth; strain while hot into a
bowl with a small slice of lemon peel in it. Set away until cold before
using.


BREAD.

For invalids who are able to partake of solid foods, the Breakfast
Rolls, Whole-wheat Puffs, Beaten Biscuit, Crisps, and other unfermented
breads, directions for the preparation of which are given in the chapter
on Bread, will be found excellent.

The various crackers, wafers, and invalid foods manufactured by the
Sanitarium Food Co., Battle Creek, Mich., are also to be recommended.
Zwieback, prepared as directed on page 289, will be found serviceable
and wholesome to be used with broths and gruels. It may be prepared so
as to look especially tempting by cutting off the crust of the bread,
and cutting the slice into fancy shapes with a cookie-cutter before
toasting. In cases where their use is allowable, many of the various
toasts given under the head of Breakfast Dishes will be relished.


_RECIPES._

DIABETIC BISCUIT.--Make a stiff dough of Graham or entire-wheat
flour and water. Knead thoroughly, and let it stand three hours; then
place on a sieve under a faucet, turn a stream of water over the dough,
and wash out the starch, kneading and working with the hands so that all
portions of the dough will be equally washed. When the starch has been
all washed out, as will be indicated by the water running off clear, the
dough will be a rubber-like, glutinous mass. It may then be cut into
long strips, and these divided into equal-sized pieces or cubes. Place
the pieces on shallow baking pans in a rather hot oven, which, after a
short time, should be allowed to cool to moderate heat, and bake for two
hours, when they should be of a dark, rich brown color and light and
crisp throughout. If tough, they need rebaking. If the oven is too hot,
the pieces will puff up, becoming mere hollow shells; if not
sufficiently hot, they will not rise properly.

DIABETIC BISCUIT NO. 2.--Prepare a dough and wash out the starch as
in the preceding. Add coarse middlings so that the dough can be rolled
into thin cakes, and bake.

GLUTEN MEAL GEMS.--Beat together one half cup of ice water, one
half cup of thick, sweet cream, and one egg; then add one cup and a
tablespoonful of the gluten meal prepared by the Sanitarium Food Co.
Turn into slightly heated gem irons, and bake in a moderately hot oven
from one half to three fourths of an hour.


JELLIES AND OTHER SIMPLE DESSERTS FOR THE SICK.

Invalids whose digestion will allow of other than the plainest foods
will find most of the desserts made with fruits and those with fruits
and grains given in the chapter on Desserts, excellent for their use.
The following are a few additional recipes of a similar character:--


_RECIPES._

ARROWROOT JELLY.--Rub two heaping teaspoonfuls of arrowroot smooth
in a very little cold water, and stir it into a cupful of boiling water,
in which should be dissolved two teaspoonfuls of sugar. Stir until
clear, allowing it to boil all the time; lastly, add a teaspoonful of
lemon juice. Serve cold, with cream and sugar if allowed.

ARROWROOT BLANCMANGE.--Rub two and a half tablespoonfuls of best
arrowroot smooth in half a cup of cold milk, and stir slowly into two
and one half cups of boiling new milk. When it begins to thicken, add
three fourths of a cup of sugar, and cook, stirring constantly for
several minutes. Turn into molds and cool. Serve with fruit juice or
fruit sauces.

CURRANT JELLY.--Soak an ounce of Cox's gelatine in half a pint of
cold water for fifteen minutes, then pour over it a teacupful of boiling
water; strain, and add one pint at currant juice, one tablespoonful of
sugar, and set on ice to cool.

ICELAND MOSS JELLY.--Wash about four ounces of moss very clean in
lukewarm water. Boil slowly in a quart of cold water. When quite
dissolved, strain it onto a tablespoonful of currant or raspberry jelly,
stirring so as to blend the jelly perfectly with the moss. Turn into a
mold, and cool.

ICELAND MOSS BLANCMANGE.--Substitute milk for the water, and
proceed as in the foregoing. Flavor with lemon or vanilla. Strain
through a muslin cloth, turn into a mold, and let stand till firm and
cold.

ORANGE WHEY.--Add the juice of one sour orange to a pint of sweet
milk. Heat very slowly until the milk is curded, then strain and cool.

WHITE CUSTARD.--Beat the whites of three eggs to a stiff froth, add
a little salt if desired, and two tablespoonfuls of sugar. A bit of
grated lemon rind may also be used for flavoring. Add lastly a pint of
new milk, little by little, beating thoroughly all the while. Bake in
cups set in a pan of hot water. When firm in the center, take out and
set in a cool place.




TABLE TOPICS.

    Regimen is better than physic.--_Voltaire._

    Many dishes have induced many diseases.--_Seneca._

    Dr. Lyman Beecher tells the following story of his aunt, which well
    illustrates a popular notion that sick people should be fed with all
    sorts of dainties, no matter what the nature of the disease. When a
    boy eight or nine years of age, he was one day suffering in the
    throes of indigestion, as the result of having swallowed a large
    amount of indigestible mince pie. His kind-hearted aunt noticed the
    pale and distressed look on his face, and said to him, with genuine
    sympathy in her voice, "Lyman, you look sick. You may go into the
    pantry and help yourself to a nice piece of fruit cake just warm
    from the oven."

    Fix on that course of life which is the most excellent, and custom
    will render it the most delightful.--_Pythagoras._

    A MERE indigestion can temporarily metamorphose the character. The
    eel stews of Mohammed II. kept the whole empire in a state of
    nervous excitement, and one of the meat-pies which King Philip
    failed to digest caused the revolt of the Netherlands.--_Oswald._

    Few seem conscious that there is such a thing as physical morality.
    Man's habitual words and acts imply that they are at liberty to
    treat their bodies as they please. The fact is, that all breaches of
    the laws of health are physical sins.--_Herbert Spencer._

    Practical right and good conduct are much more dependent on health
    of body than on health of mind.--_Prof. Schneider._

    Dr. Abernathy's reply to the Duke of York when consulted about his
    health was, "Cut off the supplies and the enemy will soon leave the
    citadel."




FOOD FOR THE AGED AND THE VERY YOUNG.

FOOD FOR THE AGED

One of the first requisites of food for the aged is that it shall be
easy of digestion, since with advancing age and decreasing physical
energy, digestion and assimilation may be taken with impunity at an
earlier period of life, overtax the enfeebled organs and prove highly
injurious. The fact that the vital machinery is worn and weakened with
age has led to the popular notion that old people require a stimulating
diet as a "support" for their declining forces. That this is an error is
apparent from the fact that stimulation either by drink or food lessens
instead of reinforces vital strength, thus defeating the very purpose
desired. Flesh food in quantities is a peculiarly unsuitable diet for
the aged, not alone because it is stimulating, but because it produces a
tendency to plethora, a condition which is especially inimical to the
health of old persons. Eminent authorities on diet also reason that the
loss of the teeth at this period, whereby thorough mastication of flesh
food is done with difficulty, even with the best artificial aids, should
be considered a sign that nature intends such foods to be discarded by
the old.

A milk, grain, and fruit diet is undoubtedly the one best suited to the
average person in old age. Vegetables and legumes in well-prepared soups
may also be used to advantage. Directions for such soups, as also for
cooking grains and grain products, will be found in the preceding pages.

The following bills of fare, one for each season of the year, will
perhaps serve to illustrate how a varied and appetizing regimen may be
provided without the use of flesh foods:--

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruits
    Graham Grits and Cream
    Prune Toast
    Graham Puffs
    Cream Crisps
    Strawberries
    Caramel Coffee or Hot Milk

    DINNER

    Vegetable Broth with Toasted Rolls
    Baked Potato with Pease Gravy
    Stewed Asparagus
    Cracked Wheat and Cream
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Canned Berries
    Manioca with Fruit
    Caramel Coffee or Hot Milk

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruits
    Rolled Oats and Cream
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Macaroni with Cream Sauce
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Peaches
    Caramel Coffee or Hot Milk

    DINNER

    Lentil Soup
    Baked Potato with Cream Sauce
    Escalloped Tomato
    Green Corn Pulp
    Browned Rice and Cream
    Fruit Bread
    Lemon Apple Sauce
    Prune Pie
    Caramel Coffee or Hot Milk

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruits
    Blackberry Mush and Cream
    Cream Toast
    Graham Crusts
    Blueberries
    Caramel Coffee or Hot Milk

    DINNER

    Green Pea Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Pearl Barley and Cream
    Cream Rolls
    Blackberries
    Stewed Fruit Pudding
    Caramel Coffee or Hot Milk

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruits
    Rolled Wheat and Cream
    Tomato Toast
    Corn Bread
    Graham Gems
    Stewed Prunes
    Caramel Coffee or Hot Milk

    DINNER

    Vegetable Oyster Soup
    Baked Sweet Potato
    Mashed Peas
    Steamed Rice with Fig Sauce
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Dried Fruit
    Apples
    Caramel Coffee or Hot Milk

In the selection of a dietary for elderly persons, much must depend
upon their physical condition, the daily amount of exercise to which
they are accustomed, their habits in earlier life, and a variety of
other circumstances.

The quantity as well as quality of food for the aged should receive
consideration. Diminished bodily activity and the fact that growth has
ceased, render a smaller amount of food necessary to supply needs; and a
decrease in the amount taken, in proportion to the age and the activity
of the subject, must be made or health will suffer. The system will
become clogged, the blood filled with imperfectly elaborated material,
and gout, rheumatism, apoplexy, or other diseased conditions will be the
inevitable result. The digestion of heavy meals is a tax upon vital
powers at any time of life, but particularly so as age advances; and for
him who has passed his first half-century, over-feeding is fraught with
great danger. Cornaro, an Italian of noble family, contemporary with
Titian in the sixteenth century, after reaching his eighty-third year
wrote several essays upon diet and regimen for the aged, in one of which
he says: "There are old lovers of feeding who say that it is necessary
that they should eat and drink a great deal to keep up their natural
heat, which is constantly diminishing as they advance in years; and that
it is therefore their duty to eat heartily and of such things as please
their palate, be they hot, cold, or temperate, and that if they were to
lead a sober life, it would be a short one. To this I answer; Our kind
Mother Nature, in order that old men may live to still greater age, has
contrived matters so that they may be able to subsist on little, as I
do; for large quantities of food cannot be digested by old and feeble
stomachs."

Cornaro lived to be one hundred years old, doubtless owing largely to
his simple, frugal habits.


DIET FOR THE YOUNG.

A very large share of the mortality among young children results from
dietetic errors which proper knowledge and care on the part of those who
have them in charge might commonly avoid. From infancy to the age of
twelve or eighteen months, milk is the natural and proper food. Milk
contains all the food elements except starch, which cannot be digested
by very young children, owing to the insufficient formation of digestive
elements of the salivary secretion during the first few months. If the
child is deprived of the milk provided by nature, the best artificial
food is cow's milk; it, however, requires very careful selection and
intelligent preparation. The animal from which the milk comes, should be
perfectly healthy and well cared for. The quality of her food should
also receive attention, as there is little doubt that disease is often
communicated to infants by milk from cows improperly fed and cared for.
An eminent medical authority offers the following important points on
this subject:--

"The cow selected for providing the food for an infant should be between
the ages of four and ten years, of mild disposition, and one which has
been giving milk from four to eight weeks. She should be fed on good,
clean grain, and hay free from must. Roots, if any are fed, should be of
good quality, and she should have plenty of good clean water from a
living spring or well. Her pasture should be timothy grass or native
grass free from weeds; clover alone is bad. She should be cleaned and
cared for like a carriage horse, and milked twice a day by the same
person and at the same time. Some cows are unfit by nature for feeding
infants."

Milk from the same animal should be used if possible. Changing from one
cow's milk to another, or the use of such milk as is usually supplied by
city milkmen, often occasions serious results. The extraction of the
heat from the milk immediately after milking and before it is used or
carried far, especially in hot weather, is essential. While the milk
itself should be clean and pure, it should also be perfectly fresh and
without any trace of decomposition. To insure all these requisites,
besides great care in its selection, it must be sterilized, and if not
intended for immediate use, bottled and kept in a cool place until
needed. It is not safe to feed young children upon unsterilized milk
that has stood a few hours. Even fresh milk from the cleanest cows,
unless drawn into bottles and sealed at once, contains many germs. These
little organisms, the cause of fermentation and decomposition, multiply
very rapidly in milk, and as they increase, dangers from the use of the
milk increase.

There is no doubt that cholera infantum and other digestive disturbances
common among young children would be greatly lessened by the use of
properly sterilized milk. Directions for sterilizing milk, and
additional suggestions respecting points to be considered in its
selection, are to be found in the chapter on Milk, etc.

Cow's milk differs from human milk in that it contains nearly three
times as much casein, but only two thirds as much fat and three fourths
as much sugar. Cow's milk is usually slightly acid, while human milk is
alkaline. The casein of cow's milk forms large, hard curds, while that
of breast milk forms fine, soft curds. These facts make it important
that some modification be made in cow's milk to render it acceptable to
the feeble stomach of an infant. Cases are rare where it is safe to feed
a child under nine months of age on pure, undiluted cow's milk. A common
method of preparing cow's milk so as to make it suitable for infant
feeding, is to dilute it with pure water, using at first only one third
or one fourth milk, the proportion of milk being gradually increased as
the child's stomach becomes accustomed to the food and able to bear it,
until at the age of four months the child should be taking equal parts
of milk and water. When sterilized milk is to be thus diluted, the water
should be first boiled or added before sterilizing. A small amount of
fine white sugar, or what is better, milk sugar, should be added to the
diluted milk. Barley water, and thin, well-boiled, and carefully
strained oatmeal gruel thoroughly blended with the milk are also used
for this purpose. A food which approximates more nearly the constituents
of mother's milk may be prepared as follows:--

ARTIFICIAL HUMAN MILK NO. 1.--Blend one fourth pint of fresh, sweet
cream and three fourths of a pint of warm water. Add one half ounce of
milk sugar and from two to ten ounces of milk, according to the age of
the infant and its digestive capacity.

ARTIFICIAL HUMAN MILK NO. 2.--Meigs's formula: Take two
tablespoonfuls of cream of medium quality, one tablespoonful of milk,
two of lime water, and three of water to which sugar of milk has been
added in the proportion of seventeen and three fourths drams to the
pint. This saccharine solution must be prepared fresh every day or two
and kept in a cool place. A child may be allowed from half a pint to
three pints of this mixture, according to age.

ARTIFICIAL HUMAN MILK NO. 3.--Prepare a barley water by adding one
pint boiling water to a pint of best pearl barley. Allow it to cool, and
strain. Mix together one third of a pint of this barley water, two
thirds of a pint of fresh, pure milk, and a teaspoonful of milk
sugar.--_Medical News._

Peptonized milk, a formula for the preparation of which may be found on
page 426, is also valuable as food for infants, especially for those of
weak digestion.

MUCILAGINOUS FOOD EXCELLENT IN GASTRO-ENTERITIS.--Wheat, one
tablespoonful; oatmeal, one half tablespoonful; barley, one half
tablespoonful; water, one quart. Boil to one pint, strain, and
sweeten.--_Dietetic Gazette._

PREPARED FOODS FOR INFANTS.--Of prepared infant foods we can
recommend that manufactured by the Sanitarium Food Co., Battle Creek,
Mich., as thoroughly reliable. There are hundreds of prepared infant
foods in the market, but most of them are practically worthless in point
of food value, being often largely composed of starch, a substance which
the immature digestive organs of a young child are incapable of
digesting. Hundreds of infants are yearly starved to death upon such
foods.

All artificial foods require longer time for digestion than the food
supplied by nature; and when making use of such, great care should be
taken to avoid too frequent feeding. It is absolutely essential for the
perfect health of an infant as well as of grown people, that the
digestive organs shall enjoy a due interval of rest between the
digestion of one meal and the taking of another. As a rule, a new-born
infant may be safely fed, when using human milk, not oftener than once
in every three or four hours. When fed upon artificial food, once in
five or six hours is often enough for feeding. The intervals between
meals in either case should be gradually prolonged as the child grows
older.

QUANTITY OF FOOD FOR INFANTS.--Dr. J.H. Kellogg gives the following
rules and suggestions for the feeding of infants:--

"During the first week of a child's life, the weight of the food given
should be 1/100 of the weight of the infant at birth. The daily
additional amount of food required for a child amounts to about one
fourth of a dram, or about one ounce at the end of each month. A child
gains in weight from two thirds of an ounce to one ounce per day during
the first five months of its life, and an average of one half as much
daily during the balance of the first year.

"From a series of tables which have been prepared, as the result of
experiments carefully conducted in large lying-in establishments, we
have devised this rule:--

"To find the amount of food required by a child at each feeding during
the first year of life, divide the weight of the child at birth by 100
and add to this amount 3/100 of the gain which the child has made since
birth. Take, for example, a child which weighs 7-1/2 lbs--at birth, or
120 ounces. Dividing by 100 we have 1.2 oz. Estimating the weight
according to the rule above given, the child at the end of nine months
will have gained 210 oz. Dividing this by 100 and multiplying by 3, we
have 6.3 oz. Adding to this our previous result, 1.3, we have 7.5 oz, as
the amount of food required at each feeding at the end of nine months by
a child which weighed 7-1/2 lbs. at birth. To save mothers the trouble
of making these calculations, we have prepared the following table,
which will be found to hold good for the average child weighing 7-1/2
lbs. at birth. This is rather more than the ordinary child weighs, but
we have purposely chosen a large child for illustration, as it is better
that the child should have a slight excess of food than too little.


                                                AGE OF CHILD.
                                       |1w.| 1m. |2m.|3m.|4m.|6m.|9m.|12m
    Amount of each feeding in ounces...|  1| 1½-2| 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 |7½ | 9
    Number of feedings.................| 10|  8  | 6 | 6 | 6 | 6 | 5 | 5
    Amount of food daily, in ounces....| 10|12-16|18 |24 |30 |36 |37½|45
    Interval between feedings, in hours|  2| 2½  | 3 | 3 | 3 | 3 |3½ |3½

"In the above table the first column represents quantities for the first
week, the second for the end of the second month, the third for the end
of the third month, etc. It need not be mentioned that the change in
quantity should be even more gradual than represented in the table.

"Attention should also be called to the fact that the time mentioned as
the interval for feeding at different ages, does not apply to the whole
twenty-four hours. Even during the first week, the child is expected to
skip two feedings during the night, making the interval four hours
instead of two. By the end of the second month, the interval between the
feedings at night becomes six hours, and at the end of the ninth month,
six and one half hours.

"From personal observation we judge that in many cases children will do
equally well if allowed a longer interval between feedings at night. The
plan of feeding five times daily instead of six, may be begun at as
early an age as six months in many instances."

MANNER OF FEEDING ARTIFICIAL FOODS.--All artificial foods are best
fed with a teaspoon, as by this method liability to over-feeding and
danger from unclean utensils are likely to be avoided. If a
nursing-bottle is used, it should be of clear flint glass so that the
slightest foulness may be easily detected, and one simple in
construction, which can be completely taken apart for cleaning. Those
furnished with conical black rubber caps are the best. Each time after
using, such a bottle should have the cap removed, and both bottle and
cap should be thoroughly cleansed, first with cold water, and then with
warm water in which soda has been dissolved in the proportion of a
teaspoonful to a pint of water. They should then be kept immersed in
weak soda solution until again needed, when both bottle and cap should
be thoroughly rinsed in clean boiled water before they are used. Neglect
to observe these precautions is one of the frequent causes of stomach
disturbances in young children. It is well to keep two bottles for
feeding, using them alternately.

DIET FOR OLDER CHILDREN.--No solid food or table-feeding of any
kind should be given to a child until it has the larger share of its
first, or milk teeth. Even then it must not be supposed that because a
child has acquired its teeth, it may partake of all kinds of food with
impunity. It is quite customary for mothers to permit their little ones
to sit at the family table and be treated to bits of everything upon the
bill of fare, apparently looking upon them as miniature grown people,
with digestive ability equal to persons of mature growth, but simply
lacking in, stomach capacity to dispose of as much as older members of
the family. The digestive apparatus of a child differs so greatly from
that of an adult in its anatomical structure and in the character and
amount of the digestive fluids, that it is by no means proper to allow a
child to eat all kinds of wholesome foods which a healthy adult stomach
can consume with impunity, to say nothing of the rich, highly seasoned
viands, sweetmeats, and epicurean dishes which seldom fail to form some
part of the bill of fare. It is true that many children are endowed with
so much constitutional vigor that they do live and seemingly thrive,
notwithstanding dietetic errors; but the integrity of the digestive
organs is liable to be so greatly impaired by continued ill-treatment
that sooner or later in life disease results. Till the age of three
years, sterilized milk, whole-wheat bread in its various forms, such of
the grains as contain a large share of gluten, prepared in a variety of
palatable ways, milk and fruit toasts, and the easily digested fruits,
both raw and cooked, form the best dietary. Strained vegetable soups may
be occasionally added for variety. For from three to six years the same
simple regimen, with easily digested and simply prepared vegetables,
macaroni, and legumes prepared without skins, will be all-sufficient. If
desserts are desirable, let them be simple in character and easily
digestible. Tea, coffee, hot bread and biscuit, fried foods of all
kinds, salted meats, preserves, rich puddings, cake, and pastries should
be wholly discarded from the children's bill of fare.

It is especially important that a dietary for children should contain an
abundance of nitrogenous material. It is needed not only for repairs,
but must be on deposit for the purpose of food. Milk, whole-wheat bread,
oatmeal, barley, and preparations of wheat, contain this element in
abundance, and should for this reason be given great prominence in the
children's dietary.

Flesh foods are in no way necessary for children, since the food
elements of which they are composed can be supplied from other and
better sources, and many prominent medical authorities unite in the
opinion that such foods are decidedly deleterious, and should not be
used at all by children under eight or ten years of age. Experiments
made by Dr. Camman, of New York, upon the dietary of nearly two hundred
young children in an orphan's home, offer conclusive evidence that the
death rate among children from gastro-intestinal troubles is greatly
lessened by the exclusion of meat from their dietary. Dr. Clouston, of
Edinburgh, an eminent medical authority, states that in his experience,
those children who show the greatest tendencies to instability of the
brain, insanity, and immoral habits are, as a rule, those who use animal
food in excess; and that he has seen a change of diet to milk and
farinaceous food produce a marked change in their nervous irritability.

Scores of other authorities corroborate. Dr. Clouston's observation, and
assert that children fed largely on flesh foods have capricious
appetites, suffer more commonly from indigestion in its various forms,
possess an unstable nervous system, and have less resisting power in
general.

Candy and similar sweets generally given to children as a matter of
course, may be excluded from their dietary with positive benefit in
every way. It is true, as is often stated in favor of the use of these
articles, that sugar is a food element needed by children; but the
amount required for the purpose of growth and repair is comparatively
small, and is supplied in great abundance in bread, grains, fruits, and
other common articles of food. If an additional quantity is taken, it is
not utilized by the system, and serves only to derange digestion, impair
appetite, and indirectly undermine the health.

Children are not likely to crave candy and other sweets unless a taste
for such articles has been developed by indulgence in them; and their
use, since they are seldom taken at mealtime, helps greatly to foster
that most pernicious habit of childhood--eating between meals. No food,
except at their regular mealtimes, should be the universal rule for
children from babyhood up; and although during their earliest years they
require food at somewhat shorter intervals than adults, their meal hours
should be arranged for the same time each day, and no piecing permitted.
Parents who follow the too common practice of giving their little ones a
cracker or fruit between meals are simply placing them under training
for dyspepsia, sooner or later. Uninterrupted digestion proceeds
smoothly and harmoniously in a healthy stomach; but interruptions in the
shape of food sent down at all times and when the stomach is already at
work, are justly resented, and such disturbances, if long continued, are
punished by suffering.

The appetite of a child is quite as susceptible of education, in both a
right and wrong direction, as are its mental or moral faculties; and
parents in whose hands this education mainly rests should give the
subject careful consideration, since upon it the future health and
usefulness of their children not a little devolve. We should all be
rulers of our appetites instead of subject to them; but whether this be
so or not, depends greatly upon early dietetic training. Many a loving
mother, by thoughtless indulgence of her child, in season and out of
season, in dainties and tidbits that simply serve to gratify the palate,
is fostering a "love of appetite" which may ruin her child in years to
come. There are inherited appetites and tendencies, it is true; but even
these may be largely overcome by careful early training in right ways of
eating and drinking. It is possible to teach very young children to use
such food as is best for them, and to refrain from the eating of things
harmful; and it should be one of the first concerns of every mother to
start her children on the road to manhood and womanhood, well trained in
correct dietetic habits.




TABLE TOPICS.

     "The wanton taste no flesh nor fowl can choose,
     For which the grape or melon it would lose,
     Though all th' inhabitants of earth and air
     Be listed in the glutton's bill of fare."

    --_Cowley._

    Jean Jacques Rousseau holds that intemperate habits are mostly
    acquired in early boyhood, when blind deference to social precedents
    is apt to overcome our natural antipathies, and that those who have
    passed that period in safety, have generally escaped the danger of
    temptation. The same holds good of other dietetic abuses. If a
    child's natural aversion to vice has never been wilfully perverted,
    the time will come when his welfare may be intrusted to the
    safe-keeping of his protective instincts. You need not fear that he
    will swerve from the path of health when his simple habits,
    sanctioned by nature and inclination, have acquired the additional
    strength of long practice. When the age of blind deference is past,
    vice is generally too unattractive to be very dangerous.--_Oswald._

    That a child inherits certain likes and dislikes in the matter of
    food cannot be questioned, and does not in the least forbid the
    training of the child's taste toward that which is healthful and
    upbuilding; it merely adds an element to be considered in the
    training.--_Sel._

    Prevention is better than cure. It is worth a life effort to lift a
    man from degradation. To prevent his fall is better.--_Gough._


    A cynical French writer of the last century intending a satire upon
    the principles of vegetarianism adopted by Phillippe Hecquet, puts
    into the mouth of one of the characters in his book what, in the
    grossly voluptuous life of that country and time, the author no
    doubt imagined to be the greatest absurdities conceivable in
    reference to diet, but which, in the light of present civilization
    are but the merest hygienic truths. A doctor had been called to a
    gouty and fever-stricken patient. "Pray what is your ordinary diet?"
    asked the physician.

    "My usual food," replied the patient, "is broth and juicy meat."

    "Broth and juicy meat!" cried the doctor, alarmed. "I do not wonder
    to find you sick; such dishes are poisoned pleasures and snares that
    luxury spreads for mankind, so as to ruin them the more
    effectually.... How old are you, pray?"

    "I am in my sixty-ninth year," replied the patient.

    "Exactly," ... said the physician; "if you had drunk nothing else
    than pure water all your life, and had been satisfied with simple
    nourishment,--such as boiled apples for example,--you would not now
    be tormented with the gout, and all your limbs would perform their
    functions with ease."

    Dr. Horace Bushnell says: "The child is taken when his training
    begins in a state of naturalness as respects all the bodily tastes
    and tempers, and the endeavour should be to keep him in that key, to
    let no stimulation of excess or delicacy disturb the simplicity of
    nature, and no sensual pleasure in the name of food become a want or
    expectation of his appetite. Any artificial appetite begun is the
    beginning of distemper, disease, and a general disturbance of
    natural proportion. Nine tenths of the intemperate drinking begins,
    not in grief and destitution, as we so often hear, but in vicious
    feeding."

    Always let the food be simply for nourishment--never more, never
    less. Never should food be taken for its own sake, but for the sake
    of promoting bodily and mental activity. Still less should the
    peculiarities of food, its taste or delicacy ever become an object
    in themselves, but only a means to make it good, pure, wholesome
    nourishment; else in both cases the food destroys
    health.--_Froebel._

     Since what need mortals, save twain things alone,
     Crushed grain (heaven's gift), and steaming water-draught?
     Food nigh at hand, and Nature's aliment--
     Of which no glut contents us.
     Pampered taste hunts out device of other eatables.

    --_Euripides._




FRAGMENTS & LEFT-OVER FOODS

Economy, one of the cardinal principles of success in the details of
housekeeping, as in all other occupations in life, consists not alone in
making advantageous use of fresh material, but in carefully preserving
and utilizing the "left-over" fragments and bits of food which accrue in
every household. Few cooks can make such perfect calculation respecting
the desires and needs of their families as to provide just enough and no
more, and the improvident waste of the surplus thus prepared, is in many
homes fully equal to one half the first cost of the meal. Scarcely
anything need ever be wasted--certainly nothing which was at first well
cooked. There are ways of utilizing almost every kind of cooked food so
that it will be quite as appetizing and nutritious as when first
prepared.

All left-over foods, as grains, vegetables, or others of a moist
character, should be removed to clean dishes before putting away. Unless
this precaution is observed, the thin smears and tiny bits about the
edges of the dish, which become sour or moldy much sooner than the
larger mass, are apt to spoil the whole. They should also be set on ice
or be kept in a cool, dry place until needed. Left-over foods of any
kind, to be suitable again for use, must be well preserved. Sour or
moldy fragments are not fit for food.

USES OF STALE BREAD.--If properly made from wholesome and
nutritious material and well preserved, there are few other foods that
can be combined into more varied and palatable dishes than left-over
bread. To insure the perfect preservation of the fragments, the loaf
itself should receive good care. Perfectly sweet, light, well-baked
bread has not the same propensity to mold as a poorer loaf; but the best
of bread is likely to become musty if its surroundings are not entirely
wholesome. The receptacle used for keeping the loaves should be
frequently washed, scalded, and well dried. Crumbs and fragments should
be kept in a separate receptacle and as thoroughly cared for. It is well
in cutting bread not to slice more than will be needed, and to use one
loaf before beginning on another. Bread grows stale much faster after
being cut.

Whole or half slices of bread which have become too dry to be palatable
may be utilized for making zwieback, directions for the use and
preparation of which are given on page 289.

Broken pieces of bread not suitable for zwieback, crusts, and trimmings
of the loaf make excellent _croutons_, a most palatable accompaniment
for soups, gruels, hot milk, etc. To prepare the _croutons_ cut the
fragments as nearly uniform in size as possible,--half-inch cubes are
convenient,--and place them on tins in a warming oven to dry. Let them
become crisply dry, and lightly browned, but not scorched. They are
preferable to crackers for use in soups, and require so little work to
prepare, and are so economical withal, that one who has once tried them
will be likely to keep a supply on hand. The crumbs and still smaller
fragments may be utilized for thickening soups and for various dressings
and puddings, recipes for many of which are given in preceding chapters.

If crumbs and small bits of bread accumulate more rapidly than they can
be used, they may be carefully dried, not browned, in a warming oven,
after which put them in a mortar and pound them, or spread them upon an
old bread board, fold in a clean cloth and roll them with a rolling pin
until fine. Prepared thus, stored in glass fruit cans and put away in a
dry place, they will keep almost indefinitely, and can be used when
needed. For preparing escalloped vegetables of all kinds, these prepared
crumbs are excellent; they give a fine, nutty flavor to the dish, which
fresh crumbs do not possess.

LEFT-OVER GRAINS.--Left-over grains, if well kept, may be reheated
in a double boiler without the addition of water, so as to be quite as
palatable as when freshly cooked. Small quantities of left-over grains
can be utilized for preparing various kinds of desserts, where the
ingredients require previous cooking. Rice, barley, pearl wheat, and
other whole grains can be satisfactorily used in soups in which a whole
grain is required; oatmeal, rolled oats, corn meal, grits, etc., with
the addition of a little milk and cream, may be made into delicious
gruels; they may also be used advantageously in the preparation of
vegetable soups, many of which are even improved by the addition of a
few spoonfuls of well-kept cooked oatmeal or rolled oats. The left-over
grains may also be utilized in a variety of breads, directions for the
preparation of which are given in the chapter on Bread.

LEFT-OVER VEGETABLES.--Left-over portions of most varieties of
vegetables can be best utilized for soups as stated on page 275. Cold
mashed potato may be made into potato cakes as directed on page 237 of
the chapter on Vegetables, where will also be found many other recipes,
suited to the use of these left-over foods.

LEFT-OVER MEATS.--Most cook books offer numerous recipes for
croquettes, hashes, and fried dishes prepared from remnants of meat and
fish, which, although they serve the purpose of using up the fragments,
are not truly economical, because they are generally far from wholesome.
Most fragments of this character are more digestible served cold as a
relish, or utilized for soups and stews, than compounded into fancy
dishes requiring to be fried and highly seasoned or served with rich
sauces.

LEFT-OVER MILK.--Small quantities of unsterilized milk or cream
left over should always be carefully scalded, then cooled at once to a
temperature of 60,° and put in a cool place, in order to keep it sweet
and fresh until the next meal.




TABLE TOPICS.

    "Care preserves what Industry gains. He who attends to his business
    diligently, but _not_ carefully, throws away with one hand what he
    gathers with the other."--_Colton._

    "What does cookery mean?"

    It means the knowledge of all fruits and herbs and balms and
    spices--it means carefulness, and inventiveness, and watchfulness,
    and willingness, and readiness of appliance. It means the economy of
    your great grandmothers and the science of modern chemists,--it
    means much tasting and no wasting.--_Ruskin._

     A penny saved is two pence clear
     A pin a day's a groat a year.

    --_Franklin._

    Bad cooking is waste--waste of money and loss of comfort. Whom God
    has joined in matrimony, ill-cooked joints and ill-boiled potatoes
    have very often put asunder.--_Smiles._

    Never sacrifice the more precious things--time, health, temper,
    strength--in attempting to save the less precious--money.

    --_Sel._

    Learn by how little life may be sustained and how much nature
    requires. The gifts of Cerea and water are sufficient nourishment
    for all peoples.--_Pharsalia._




THE ART OF DINING

Human nature is so susceptible to externals, while good digestion is so
dependent upon interior conditions, that all the accessories of pleasant
surroundings--neatness, cheeriness, and good breeding--should be brought
into requisition for the daily gathering of the family at mealtime. The
dining room should be one of the airiest, choicest rooms in the house,
with a pleasant outlook, and, if possible, with east windows, that the
morning sun may gladden the breakfast hour with its cheering rays. Let
plants, flowers, birds, and pictures have a place in its appointments,
that the association with things bright and beautiful may help to set
the keynote of our own lives in cheerful accord. A dark, gloomy,
ill-ventilated room brings depression of spirits, and will make the most
elaborate meal unsatisfactory; while the plainest meal may seem almost a
feast when served amid attractive surroundings. Neatness is an important
essential; any home, however humble, may possess cleanliness and order,
and without these, all charms of wealth and art are of little account.

A thorough airing each morning and opening of the windows a few minutes
after each meal to remove the odor of food, are important items in the
care of the dining room. The furnishing may be simple and
inexpensive,--beauty in a home is not dependent upon expense,--but let
it be substantial, tasteful, harmonious in color and soft in tone,
nothing gaudy or showy. Use no heavy draperies, and have no excess of
ornament and bric-a-brac to catch dust and germs. A hard-finished wood
floor is far superior to a carpet in point of healthfulness, and quite
as economical and easy to keep clean. The general furnishing of the
room, besides the dining table and chairs, should include a sideboard,
upon which may be arranged the plate and glassware, with drawers for
cutlery and table linen; also a side-table for extra dishes needed
during the service of a meal.

An open fireplace, when it can be afforded, aids in ventilation as well
as increases the cheerful aspect of the room.

A moveable china closet with glass encasements for keeping the daintier
china, glass, or silver ware not in common use is often a desirable
article of furniture in small homes; or a shallow closet may be built in
the wall of the dining-room for this purpose. A good size for such a
closet is twelve inches deep and three feet wide. Four shelves, with one
or more drawers below, in which may be kept the best table napery,
afford ample space in general. The appearance of the whole may be made
very pleasing by using doors of glass, and filling in the back and sides
of the shelves with velvet paper in dark-brown, dull-red, or any shade
suitable for background, harmonizing with the general furnishing of the
room. The shelves should be of the same material and have the same
finish as the woodwork of the room. The upper side may be covered with
felt if desired; and such artistic taste may be displayed in the
arrangement of the china as to make the closet ornamental as well as
convenient.

TABLE-TALK.--A sullen, silent meal is a direct promoter of
dyspepsia. "Laugh and grow fat" is an ancient adage embodying good
hygienic doctrine. It has long been well understood that food digests
better when seasoned with agreeable conversation, and it is important
that unpleasant topics should be avoided. Mealtime should not be made
the occasion to discuss troubles, trials, and misfortunes, which rouse
only gloomy thoughts, impair digestion, and leave one at the close of
the meal worried and wearied rather than refreshed and strengthened. Let
vexatious questions be banished from the family board. Fill the time
with bright, sparkling conversation, but do not talk business or discuss
neighborhood gossip. Do not let the food upon the table furnish the
theme of conversation; neither praise nor apology are in good taste.
Parents who make their food thus an especial topic of conversation are
instilling into their children's minds a notion that eating is the best
part of life, whereas it is only a means to a higher end, and should be
so considered. Of all family gatherings the meals should be the most
genial and pleasant, and with a little effort they may be made most
profitable to all. It is said of Dr. Franklin that he derived his
peculiarly practical turn of mind from his father's table talk.

Let themes of conversation be of general interest, in which all may take
a part. If there are children, a pleasant custom for the breakfast hour
is to have each in turn relate something new and instructive, that he or
she has read or learned in the interval since the breakfast hour of the
previous day. This stimulates thought and conversational power, while
music, history, adventure, politics, and all the arts and sciences offer
ample scope for securing interesting items.

Another excellent plan is the selection of a special topic for
conversation for each meal or for the meals of a day or a week, a
previous announcement of the topic being made, that all, even the
youngest, may have time to prepare something to say of it. The benefits
from such social intercourse around the board can hardly be
over-estimated; and if thus the mealtime is prolonged, and too much
appears to be taken out of the busy day, be sure it will add to their
years in the end, by increasing health and happiness.

TABLE MANNERS.--Good breeding and true refinement are nowhere more
apparent than in manners at table. These do not relate alone to the
proper use of knife and fork, napkin and spoon, but to habits of
punctuality, neatness, quietness, order, and that kind thoughtfulness
and courteous attention which spring from the heart--"in honor
preferring one another." The purpose of eating should not be merely the
appeasement of hunger or the gratification of the palate, but the
acquiring of strength for labor or study, that we may be better fitted
for usefulness in the world. Consequently, we should eat like
responsible beings, and not like the lower orders of animals.

Good table manners cannot be put on for special occasions and laid aside
like a garment. Persons not wont to observe the rules of politeness in
the every-day life of their own households can never deceive others into
thinking them well bred on "company" occasions. Ease and refinement of
manners are only acquired by habitual practice, and parents should early
accustom their children by both precept and example to observe the
requirements of good behavior and politeness at table. Elaborate details
are not necessary. We subjoin a few of the more simple rules governing
table etiquette:--

1. Eat slowly, never filling the mouth very full and avoiding all
appearance of greediness.

2. Masticate thoroughly, keeping the lips closed. Eating and drinking
should be noiseless.

3. Never speak with the mouth full, nor interrupt another when talking.
Any remark worthy of utterance will keep.

4. Do not express a choice for any particular portion or dish, unless
requested to do so; and do not find fault with the food. If by chance
anything unpleasant is found in it, do not call the attention of others
to the fact by either remark or manner.

5. Sit conveniently near the table, but not crowded up close against it;
and keep the hands, when not in use to convey food to the mouth, in the
lap, beneath the table, never resting upon the table, toying with knife,
fork, or spoon.

6. Do not tilt back your chair, or lean upon the table with the elbow,
or drum with the fingers.

7. It is contrary to good breeding to shovel one's food into the mouth
with a knife. Everything which can be eaten with a fork should be taken
with that utensil alone. If necessary, use the knife for dividing the
food, and afterward the fork to convey it to the mouth. Use a spoon for
soups and juicy foods.

8. Bread should be broken, not cut. In eating large fruits, like apples
or pears, divide with a knife, and take in small portions, holding the
knife by the handle rather than the blade.

9. Soup is eaten from the side of the spoon, which is filled without
noisily touching the plate.

10. Seeds or stones to be rejected should be taken from the lips with a
spoon, never with the fingers. The mouth should not go to the food, but
the food to the mouth.

11. Do not crumble food about your plate, nor in any avoidable way soil
the table linen.

12. Do not hang the napkin about the neck like a bib, but unfold and lay
across the lap in such a manner that it will not slide to the floor.
Carefully wipe the mouth before speaking, and as often at other times as
may keep the lips perfectly clean of food and drink. At the close of a
meal, if at home, fold the napkin neatly and place it in the ring. If at
a hotel or away from home, leave the napkin unfolded by your plate.

13. Do not appear impatient to be served, and ordinarily at the home
meals wait until all are served before commencing to eat. At a public
table where waiters are provided, it is proper to begin eating as soon
as the food is served. This is admissible because the wants of other
guests are supposed to be similarly looked after.

14. Never reach across a neighbor's plate for anything. If something
beyond him is needed, ask to have it passed to you.

15. Do not tilt your plate or scrape it for the last atom of food.

16. Drink very sparingly, if at all, while eating, and then do not pour
the liquid down the throat like water turned from a pitcher.

17. Children should not be allowed to use their fingers to aid
themselves in eating. If their hands are too small or too awkward to
use a fork, a piece of bread or cracker may be held in the left hand to
aid in pushing the food upon the fork or spoon.

18. To help one's self to butter or any other food from a common dish
with one's own knife or spoon is a gross breach of table etiquette.

19. Never use the handkerchief unnecessarily at the table, and do not
cough or sneeze if avoidable.

20. It is not considered proper to pick the teeth at table. If this
becomes absolutely necessary, a napkin should be held before the mouth.

21. When a meal or course is finished, lay the knife and fork side by
side upon the plate.

22. Except at a hotel or boarding house, it is not proper to leave the
table before the rest of the family or guests, without asking the
hostess to excuse you.

23. If a guest declines a dish, he need give no reason. "No, I thank
you," is quite sufficient. The host or hostess should not insist upon
guests' partaking of particular dishes, nor put anything upon their
plates which they have declined.

THE TABLE.--None will deny that the appearance of the table affects
one's enjoyment of the food upon it. A well-appointed table with its
cloth, though coarse in texture, perfectly clean and neatly laid, its
glass and china bright and shining, and the silver showing by its
glistening surface evidence of frequent polishings, gives far more
comfort and enjoyment than one where little attention is given to
neatness, order, or taste. In many families, effort is made to secure
all these important accessories when guests have been invited; but for
common use, anything is considered "good enough for just one's own
folks." This ought not to be, and mothers who permit such a course, need
not be surprised if their children exhibit a lack of self-respect and
genuineness as well as awkwardness and neglect of manners.

The table around which the family meals are taken, ought to be at all
times the model of what it should be when surrounded by guests. As a
writer has well said, "There is no silent educator in the household
that has higher rank than the table. Surrounded each day by the family
who are eager for refreshment of body and spirit, its impressions sink
deep; and its influences for good or ill form no mean part of the warp
and woof of our lives. Its fresh damask, bright silver, glass, and
china, give beautiful lessons in neatness, order, and taste; its damask
soiled, rumpled, and torn, its silver dingy, its glass cloudy, and china
nicked, annoy and vex us at first, and then instill their lessons of
carelessness and disorder. An attractive, well-ordered table is an
incentive to good manners, and being a place where one is incited to
linger, it tends to control the bad habits of fast eating; while, on the
contrary, an uninviting, disorderly table gives license to bad manners,
and encourages the haste which is proverbial among Americans. The woman,
then, who looks after her table in these particulars, is not doing
trivial work, for it rests with her to give silently these good or bad
lessons in manners and morals to her household as they surround the
daily board."

A well-appointed table requires very little time and labor. No pretense
or ostentation is necessary; neatness and simplicity are far more
pleasing.

SETTING THE TABLE.--Lay a piece of double-faced canton flannel
underneath the tablecloth. Even coarse napery will present a much better
appearance with a sub-cover than if spread directly upon the table. It
will likewise lessen noise in changing courses and the likelihood of
injury to the table from hot dishes. Spread the tablecloth evenly,
without wrinkles, and so that the center fold shall be exactly in the
middle, parallel with the sides of the table. Mats, if used, should be
placed exactly straight and with regularity. If meat is served, spread a
large napkin with points toward the center of the table at the carver's
place, to protect the tablecloth. Place the plates upon the table, right
side up, at even distances from each other and straight with the cloth
and the edge of the table. Lay the napkins directly in front or at the
right of each plate. Place the fork at the left, the knife on the right
with the edge toward the plate, beyond this the soup spoon and two
teaspoons, and at the front of these set the glass, cream glass, and
individual butter plate if these are used.

A center piece consisting of a vase of freshly cut flowers, a pot of
ferns, a jar of small plants in bloom, a dish of well-polished red
apples, peaches, or other seasonable fruit, will add a touch of beauty
and attractiveness. If the serving is to be done from the table by
members of the family, place large spoons near dishes to be served, also
the proper number and kind of separate dishes for the purpose. If fruit
is to be served, a finger bowl should be placed for each person. If the
service is by course, the extra dishes, knives, forks, and spoons
needed, also the finger bowls, water service, and cold foods in reserve
for a renewed supply or for other courses, should be made ready and
arranged upon the sideboard.

The soup ladle should be placed in front of the lady of the house, who
always serves the soup; and if meat is served, the carving knife and
fork must, of course, be placed before the carver's place. The necessary
dishes for each course should be brought on with the food, those for the
first course being placed upon the table just a moment before dinner is
announced.

The arrangement of all dishes and foods upon the table should be
uniform, regular, and tasteful, so as to give an orderly appearance to
the whole. The "dishing up" and arranging of the food are matters of no
small importance, as a dull appetite will often be sharpened at the
sight of a daintily arranged dish, while the keenest one may have its
edge dulled by the appearance of a shapeless mass piled up with no
regard to looks. Even the simplest food is capable of looking its best,
and the greatest care should be taken to have all dishes served neatly
and tastefully.

The table should not be set for breakfast the night before nor kept so
from one meal to another, unless carefully covered with a cloth thick
enough to prevent the dust from accumulating upon the dishes. The plates
and glasses should then be placed bottom-side up and turned just before
mealtime. No food of any kind should ever be allowed to remain uncovered
upon the table from one meal to another. The cloth for covering the
table should be carefully shaken each time before using, and always used
the same side up until washed.

Plates and individual meat dishes should be warmed, especially in
winter; but the greatest care should be taken that no dish becomes hot,
as that not only makes it troublesome to handle, but is ruinous to the
dishes.

THE SERVICE OF MEALS.--There are few invariable rules for either
table-setting or service. We will offer a few suggestions upon this
point, though doubtless other ways are equally good. A capital idea for
the ordinary home meal, when no servant is kept, especially if in the
family there are older children, is to make different members of the
family responsible for the proper service of some dish or course. The
fruit, which should be the first course at breakfast, may be prepared
and placed upon fruit plates with the proper utensils for
eating--napkins and finger bowls at each place before the meal is
announced. If apples or bananas are served, a cracker should be placed
upon each plate to be eaten in connection with the fruit. Oranges and
grapes are, however, to be preferred when obtainable; the former may be
prepared as directed on page 180. The hot foods may be dished, and the
dishes placed on a side table in a _bain marie_, the hot water in which
should be as deep as the food within the dishes. The foods will thus be
in readiness, and will keep much better than if placed upon the table at
the beginning of the meal. When the fruit is eaten, some member of the
family may remove the fruit plates, and bring the hot grains, toasts,
and other foods, placing them, together with the necessary individual
dishes, before those who have their serving in charge. One member may be
selected to pass the bread, another to dish the sauce, etc.; and thus
each child, whether boy or girl--even those quite young--may contribute
to the service, and none be overburdened, while at the same time it will
be a means of teaching a due regard for the comfort and enjoyment of
others.

If the meal is dinner, usually consisting of three courses, after the
soup has been eaten, it may be the duty of some member of the family to
remove the soup plates and place the vegetables, grains, and meats if
any are to served, before those chosen to serve them. At the close of
this course, another may remove the dishes and food, crumb the cloth,
and place the dessert, with the proper dishes for serving, before the
lady of the house or her oldest daughter, one of whom usually serves it.

If a servant is employed, the following is an excellent plan of service:
The soup plates or bowls should be placed hot upon the table, with the
tureen of soup before the lady of the house, and the glasses filled
before the dinner is announced.

Grace having been said, the servant removes the cover of the soup
tureen, and standing at the left of the lady, takes up with her left
hand a soup plate, which she changes to the palm of her right hand and
holds at the edge of the soup tureen until the lady has filled it, then
carries it, still holding it upon the palm of the hand, and places it
before the head of the table. In the same manner all are served to soup.
If bowls instead of plates are used, a small silver or lacquered tray
may be used on which to carry the bowl. While the soup is being eaten,
the servant goes to the kitchen and brings in the hot dishes and foods
for the next course, and places them upon the side table. When the soup
has been finished, beginning with the one who sits at the head of the
table, the servant places before each person in turn a hot dinner plate,
at the same time removing his soup plate to the sideboard or pantry.
After changing all the plates, she removes the soup tureen, and if meat
is to be served, places that before the carver with the individual
plates, which, when he has placed a portion thereon, she serves to each
in turn; then she takes the potato and other vegetables upon her tray,
and serves them, going to the left of each person when passing them a
dish, but placing individual dishes at the right; next she passes the
bread, refills the glasses, taking each one separately to the sideboard,
and then serves the grains.

When every one has finished the course, she begins the clearing of the
table by first removing all large dishes of food; after that the plates
and all soiled dishes, mats, and all table furniture except the glasses,
napkin rings, and center-pieces. Lastly she removes all crumbs with a
brush or napkin. When done, she places in front of each person a plate
with a doily and finger bowl upon it, and then brings the dessert and
dessert dishes, placing them before the lady of the house, and passes
these for her as in the other courses. If the dessert is pudding, a
spoon or fork should be placed on the plate at one side of the finger
bowl. If the dessert is fruit, a fruit napkin may be used in place of
the doily, the real purpose of which is to prevent the bowl from sliding
about the plate in moving it. A fork and silver knife, or knife and
spoon as the fruit may require, should be served with it.

GENERAL SUGGESTIONS FOR WAITERS.--In serving a dish from which
people are expected to help themselves, always go to the left side.

Soup, food in individual dishes, clean plates, and finger bowls should
be set down before people at their right hand.

When removing soiled dishes after a course, always exchange them for
clean ones, remembering that the only time when it is allowable to leave
the table without plates is when it is being cleared for the dessert.

In serving grains either dish them in small dishes before serving or
pass clean saucers at the same time for each to help himself, and in all
cases see that each person is served to cream, sugar, and a teaspoon,
with grains.

Pass the bread two or three times during each meal, and keep careful
watch that all are well supplied.

Pour hot milk and all beverages on the side table; fill only three
fourths full, and serve the same as anything else in individual dishes,
placing the glass at each person's right hand.

Waiters should be noiseless and prompt, and neatly attired in dress
suitable to their occupation.

SUGGESTIONS CONCERNING DINNER PARTIES.--Much of the success of a
dinner party depends upon the guests selected; and the first point for
consideration by the lady who decides upon entertaining her friends
thus, should be the congeniality of those whom she desires to invite,
remembering that after the first greetings the guests see very little of
their hostess, and consequently their enjoyment must largely depend upon
each other. It is customary to issue invitations in the name of the host
and hostess, from five to ten days in advance of the occasion. Printed
or written invitations may be used. The following is a proper form:--

         _Mr. and Mrs. George Brown_
          _request the pleasure_
                  _of_
    _Mr. and Mrs. Henry Clark's company_
               _at dinner_
       _December 5th, at four o'clock._
           _24 Maple Avenue._

If the dinner is given in especial honor to some stranger, a second card
is inclosed on which is written:--

    _To meet_

          _Mrs. Harold Brooks of Philadelphia._

Invitations to a dinner should be promptly accepted or declined, and if
accepted, the engagement should on no account be lightly broken.

Unless one has a large establishment, and is very sure of good service,
the bill of fare selected should not be an elaborate one, and the choice
of dishes should be confined to those which one is used to preparing,
and which in cost will not exceed one's means. It is the quality of the
dinner which pleases, and not the multiplicity of dishes. Small dinners
for not less than six or more than ten guests are always the most
pleasant, and for those of moderate means or those unaccustomed to
dinner-giving are by far the most suitable.

The arrangement and adornment of the table afford an opportunity for the
display of much artistic taste and skill. An expensive outlay is by no
means necessary, as highly pleasing effects may be produced by the
addition of a few choice, well-arranged flowers or blossoming plants to
a table already well laid with spotless linen, bright silver, and clean
glass and china ware. A profusion of ornament should be avoided, large
pieces of plate, and high, elaborate designs of flowers or fruit should
not be used, as they obstruct the intercourse of the guests.

A center piece of flowers, with a small bouquet tied with ribbon for
each guest, is quite sufficient. Low dishes filled with violets or
pansies; a basket filled with oranges, mingled with orange leaves and
blossoms; bowls of ferns and roses; a block of ice wreathed in ferns,
with an outer circle of water lilies; dishes of vari-colored grapes
resting amid the bright leaves of the foliage plant, are some of many
pleasing designs which may be employed for the adornment of the dinner
table. The amount of space occupied with decorations must depend upon
the style of service employed. If no calculation need be made for
placing the different dishes composing the dinner, a strip of colored
plush or satin bordered with ivy, smilax, or some trailing vine, is
quite frequently used for the decoration of a long table.

A very pleasing custom consists in selecting some especial color for the
decorations with which the table napery, dishes, and even the food to be
served shall accord; as, for example, a "pink" dinner, with roses as the
chief flower, strawberries, pink lemonade, and other pink attractions;
or a "yellow" luncheon, served on napery etched with yellow, with vases
of goldenrod for center pieces, and dainty bouquets of the same tied
with yellow ribbon at each plate, while yellow tapers in golden
candlesticks cast a mellow light over all, during the serving of a bill
of fare which might include peaches and cream, oranges, pumpkin pie, and
other yellow comestibles.

The menu cards afford much opportunity for adding attractiveness to a
company dinner. If one possesses artistic skill, a floral decoration or
a tiny sketch, with an appropriate quotation, the guest's name, and date
of the dinner, make of the cards very pleasing souvenirs. A proper
quotation put after each dish is much in vogue as a means of promoting
conversation. The quotations are best selected from one author.

There are no absolute rules for the service of company dinners, much
depending upon social conditions and established customs. Two modes are
in general use,--placing the dishes upon the table to be dished by the
host and hostess, and placing all food upon the side table to be dished
and served by a waiter. When the latter method is used, it is quite
customary to place the plates of soup upon the table before dinner is
announced. As many knives, forks, and spoons as will be needed for the
courses may be placed beside each plate, or they may be brought in with
the course, as preferred. Clean plates are necessary for every course.
The manner of serving is essentially like that already described.

Care should be taken to have the dining room at an agreeable
temperature, neither too warm nor too cold.

At large dinner parties, each gentleman, as he enters, receives a card
upon which is written the name of the lady he is to take in to dinner,
to whom the hostess at once presents him. When dinner is announced, the
host leads the way with the oldest or most distinguished lady or the one
to whom the dinner is given, while the hostess follows last, with the
most honored gentleman. The host places the lady whom he escorts on his
right. If the number is small, the host indicates the places the guests
should occupy as they enter the room; if the party is large, the menu
card at each plate bears the name of the guest for whom it is designed.
The lady escorted by the host should be the first one served.

Soup is always taken and tasted, whether liked or not; after the first
course, it is proper to accept or refuse a dish, as preferred.

No well-bred hostess ever apologizes for the food upon her table or
urges anything upon her guests when once declined. No orders should be
given to servants during the meal; everything that will contribute to
the proper serving of the dinner should be arranged beforehand, and all
necessary instructions given.

At the close of the dinner, the hostess gives the sign for retiring.




TABLE TOPICS.


     A meal--what is it? Just enough of food
     To renovate and well refresh the frame,
     So that with spirits lightened, and with strength renewed,
     We turn with willingness to work again.

    --_Sel._

    Do not bring disagreeable things to the table in your conversation
    any more than you would in your dishes.--_Sel._

    Courtesy in the mistress of the house consists in feeding
    conversation; never in usurping it.--_Mme. Swetchine_

    Good humor and good health follow a good meal; and by a good meal we
    mean anything, however simple, well dressed in its way.--_Smiles._

    Unquiet meals make ill digestion.--_Shakespeare._

    Eat slowly and do not season your food with care.--_Sel._

    To rise from the table _able_ to eat a little more is a proverbially
    good rule for every one. There is nothing more idiotic than forcing
    down a few mouthfuls, because they happen to remain on one's plate
    after hunger is satisfied, and because they may be "wasted" if left.
    It is the most serious waste to overtax the stomach with even half
    an ounce more than it can take care of.--_Sel._

    I pray you, O excellent wife! cumber not yourself and me to get a
    curiously rich dinner for this man and woman who have just alighted
    at our gate.... These things, if they are desirous of them, they can
    get for a few shillings at any village inn; but rather let that
    stranger see, if he will, in your looks, accents, and behavior, your
    heart and earnestness, your thought and will, that which he cannot
    buy at any price in any city, and which he may travel miles and dine
    sparely and sleep hardly to behold.--_Emerson._




AFTER MEAL TIME

To no other department of domestic work perhaps is so little thought
given or so little science applied as to the routine work of clearing
the table and washing the dishes after mealtime. Any way to accomplish
the object, seems to be the motto in very many households. But even for
these prosaic tasks there is a best way, which, if employed, may make of
an otherwise irksome service a really pleasurable one.

CLEARING THE TABLE.--First of all, put back the chairs, and brush
up the crumbs from the floor, then collect all untouched foods and store
them away in clean dishes; next gather the silver, place it handles
upward in pitchers or other deep dishes, and pour hot water over it. For
gathering the silver a compartment tray in which knives, forks, and
spoons may be placed separately is important. Many of the scratches and
marks on their silver ware, which housekeepers deplore, come from the
careless handling together of forks, knives, and spoons. Now in a deep
basin upon a tray, collect all the refuse and partly eaten foods,
carefully emptying cups, glasses, finger bowls, etc., and scraping all
dishes which contained food as clean as possible; for no crumbs or
particles of food should be introduced into the dishwater. Pile the
dishes as fast as cleaned upon a second tray in readiness for washing.
It saves much liability of breakage in transferring from the dining room
to the kitchen, if each kind of soiled dishes is packed by itself.

Wipe carefully, if not needing to be washed, and replenish all salts,
granola cups, and sugar bowls before putting away. Gather the soiled
napkins for the laundry, and put those clean enough to be used again in
their proper places. Especial care must be taken, however, so to
designate those reserved for future use that each shall receive the same
again, as nothing is more disgusting to a sensitive person than to be
tendered a napkin which has been used by some one else. Some form of
napkin holder should be considered an essential part of the table
furnishing. If rings cannot be afforded, ordinary clothes pins, gilded
and decorated with a bit of ribbon, make very pretty substitutes.

Brush the tablecloth, fold in its creases, also the sub-cover of canton
flannel, and lay both away until again needed.

_Washing the Dishes._--Plenty of hot water and clean towels are the
essential requisites for expeditious and thorough dish-washing. A few
drops of crude ammonia added to the water will soften it and add to the
luster of the silver and china. Soap may be used or not according to
circumstances; all greasy dishes require a good strong suds. There
should also be provided two dish drainers or trays, unless there is a
stationary sink with tray on which to drain the dishes. For washing
glassware and fine china, _papier-maché_ tubs are preferable to anything
else, as they are less liable to occasion breakage of the ware. If many
dishes are to be washed, frequent changes of water will be necessary as
the first becomes either cold or dirty. Perfectly sweet, clean dishes
are not evolved from dirty dishwater. The usual order given for the
washing of dishes is, glasses, silver, fine china, cups, saucers,
pitchers, plates and other dishes. This is, however, based upon the
supposition that cups and saucers are used for beverages, and plates are
soiled by the use of various greasy foods; but in families where tea
and coffee and animal foods are dispensed with, and saucers are used for
grains with cream dressing, the plates are often cleaner than the
saucers and should be washed first.

The general rule to be followed is always to wash the dishes least
soiled first, and all of one kind together. The latter item is specially
important, since much of the nicking of dishes and breaking of handles
from cups, covers, and pitchers is the result of piling dishes
promiscuously together while washing.

It is quite as easy to finish washing one kind before beginning on
another as to do it in any less safe and systematic way, and if wiped in
the same order, it does away with the need of sorting when putting the
dishes away.

If for any reason the dishes must wait for a time before being washed,
the best plan is to pack them carefully into large pans, cover with warm
water, and let them soak. When ready to wash them, prepare hot suds and
clear water for rinsing in additional pans. Do not use too hot water, as
a high temperature will break glass and "check" the enamel of ordinary
ware. The law of expansion holds good with both china and glassware, and
all glass and glazed wares should be dipped into hot water in such a
manner that all its surfaces may receive the heat and expand together.

All dishes used for milk should be first thoroughly rinsed in cold water
before being washed in hot water or suds.

Be sure that the inside of all cups and pitchers is thoroughly clean. It
is a good plan to have a mop made by fastening finger-lengths of coarse
cotton twin to a suitable handle, for washing the inside of pitchers.

In cleaning forks, spoons, or cups, which have been employed in beating
or eating eggs, rinse them in cold water before putting them into hot
suds, as hot water cooks the egg and causes it to adhere. Common table
salt is said to be excellent for removing the egg tarnish from silver.
Clean Dover egg beaters by beating a dish of cold water, or by holding
under a stream of cold water from the faucet, then carefully rinse and
wipe perfectly dry. Do not put the upper part of the beater into hot
water, as it will remove the oil from the wheels so that they will not
work easily.

Grain-boilers and mush-kettles should be allowed to cool, then filled
with cold water and allowed to soak during the meal hour, when they can
be easily cleaned.

Tin dishes should be washed with hot suds as soon as possible after
using.

[Illustration: Wire Dishcloth]

For cleaning; iron pots, use soft water and soap or washing-soda with a
wire dishcloth or kettle scraper. If the food adheres to the sides, fill
with cold water and soak. Kettles and all dishes placed over a fire
should be cleaned on the outside as well as the inside. To remove the
soot, rub first with pieces of dry paper and afterward with damp paper;
then wash with hot suds and a cloth. Kettles and saucepans burned on the
inside may he cleaned by putting a little cold water and ashes in them
and allowing them to soak on the range until the water is warm.
Porcelain-lined and granite-ware utensils stained from food burning on,
may be cleaned after soaking for a time in a solution of sal-soda, which
may be prepared by pouring boiling water over the soda in the proportion
of two pints of water to one pound of sal-soda, and stirring until
dissolved. It may be prepared in quantity and stored in a stone jar
until needed.

Wash wooden ware and bread boards with cold water and sand soap. In
scraping dough from the bread board, always scrape with the grain of the
wood and be careful not to roughen the surface.

Steel knives and forks with ivory or wooden handles should not be put
into dishwater. Hot water will expand the steel and cause the handles to
crack. Wash them thoroughly with the dishcloth, scour with bath brick,
and wipe dry.

All tin and iron dishes should be thoroughly dried before putting away,
to prevent rusting.

If draining is considered preferable to wiping dishes, a good plan, if
one has not a patent dish drainer, is to fold an old tablecloth in
several thicknesses and spread upon the table. Wash the dishes carefully
and rinse in hot water. Place a cup or bowl bottom upward, lay a plate
on each side, then one between and above them, with two more on the
outside, and so on, not permitting them to touch more than necessary.

DISHCLOTHS AND TOWELS.--No dishes or utensils can be well cared for
without good, clean dishcloths and towels, and plenty of them. An
excellent dishcloth may be either knit or crocheted in some solid stitch
of coarse cotton yarn. Ten or twelve inches square is a good size.
Several thicknesses of cheese-cloth basted together make good
dishcloths, as do also pieces of old knitted garments and Turkish
toweling. If a dish mop is preferred, it may be made as follows: Cut a
groove an inch from the end of a stick about a foot in length and of
suitable shape for a handle; cut a ball of coarse twine, into nine-inch
lengths, and lay around the stick with the middle of the strands against
the groove; wind a fine wire or cord around the twine to fasten it in
the groove; then shake down the twine, so it will lie all one way like a
mop, and fasten it to the handle by tying a second cord around it on the
outside.

Towels for drying dishes should be of three different grades,--fine ones
without lint for glass, silver, and fine china; coarser ones for the
ordinary table ware, and still another quality for pans, kettles, and
other kitchen ware. The right size is a yard in length and half as wide,
with the ends hemmed. As to material, fine checked linen is usually
employed for glass and silver towels, and crash for ordinary dishes, for
iron and tinware towels which have become somewhat worn, or a coarse bag
opened and hemmed, may be used. Old, half-worn tablecloths may be cut
into excellent dish towels.

It is of the greatest importance that all dishcloths, mops, and towels
be kept perfectly sweet and clean. Greasy dishcloths and sour towels are
neither neat nor wholesome and are a most fertile source of germs, often
breeding disease and death. After each dish washing, the dishcloth,
towels, and mops should be thoroughly washed in hot water with plenty of
soap, well rinsed and hung up to dry either upon a line out of doors or
a rack made for the purpose near the kitchen range. If care is always
taken to clean the dishes as much as possible before washing and to
change the suds as often as they become dirty, the towels will not be
hard to keep clean and sweet-smelling. Those used during the week should
go into the wash as regularly as other household articles. Dish towels
are also much better for being ironed. It gives them a "surface" which
facilitates the drying operation.

THE CARE OF SILVER, GLASS, ETC.--If silver is well washed in hot
water containing a few drops of ammonia, and carefully dried with a
fine, soft towel, it will keep bright for a long time without other
cleaning. If special cleaning is necessary, try the following: Place the
silver in a pan of hot water, then with a soft cloth, soaped and
sprinkled with powdered borax, scour the silver well; afterward rinse in
clear cold water, and dry with a clean cloth. If a more thorough
cleaning is needed, apply moistened Spanish whiting with a silver brush
and soft flannel, afterward polishing with dry whiting and chamois skin.
Frequent scouring should be avoided by careful washing, as too much
rubbing wears out plated ware and dulls the best of silver. Silver ware
and plate which is not in ordinary use can be kept from tarnishing by
varnishing with collodion, a solution of gun-cotton in ether. The
articles should be carefully brushed in this colorless varnish with an
elastic brush, taking care that the entire surface is covered. The film
of collodion will protect the underlying metal from the action of the
sulphurous vapors to which is due the blackening of silver.

Tinware which has become blackened may be made to look bright and
shining again by rubbing with a damp cloth dipped in sal-soda. Afterward
wipe dry. Sand soap or sapolio may be used for the same purpose.

Cut-glass ware which has become in any way blurred or tarnished can be
restored by polishing it with a soft piece of newspaper. First rub well
with a piece slightly moistened and afterward repeat the process with
dry paper. Rubbing with a soft brush dipped in fine, soft whiting is
another method often employed for the same purpose. Cut-glass
water-bottles dim or stained on the inside are best cleaned by rinsing
with dilute muriatic acid, then carefully rinsing several times in clear
cold water to remove all trace of the acid, which is a poison.

All fine china should be handled carefully in washing and drying. There
will be less danger of breakage if the china is gradually heated by
allowing it to stand in a pan of warm water before being put into hot
water. The same is true of all table ware, and is of especial importance
in cold weather.

Brass faucets and other brass or copper articles may be cleaned by
rubbing with whiting wet with aqua ammonia.

Yellowed ivory handles may be restored to their original whiteness by
rubbing with sandpaper and emery; mineral soap or pumice stone may be
used for the same purpose. Nice table cutlery packed away for a season
may be kept from rusting by covering the metal portion with a thin
coating of paraffine. Rust may be removed from steel by scouring with
emery and oil; but if there is much corrosion, some weak muriatic acid
will be needed. This, however, will take some of the metal with the
rust, and must be washed off quickly.

Trays and japanned goods should never have boiling water poured over
them, as it will make the varnish crack and peel. If a tray is badly
soiled, wet with a sponge moistened in warm water and soap, and rub with
a dry cloth; if it looks smeary, dust on a little flour and rub again.
Marks and scratches may sometimes be removed by rubbing with a flannel
cloth dipped in sweet oil.

CARE OF THE TABLE LINEN.--Much of the attractiveness of the table
depends upon the linen used; if this is not well cared for, the finest
table ware cannot make up for the defect.

Stains upon table linen made by acids and vinegar may be removed by
simply washing in clear water; berry stains are easily taken out by
pouring boiling water over them; peach stains are best removed by
soaking for some time in cold water and then washing with soap before
allowing warm water to touch them. Chlorine water or a solution of
chloride of lime will remove fruit stains, and vegetable colors. Coffee
stains rubbed with a mixture of warm water and the yolk of egg, are said
to disappear when the mixture is washed off with clean warm water. Sour
buttermilk well rubbed into the material, dried in, and afterward washed
out in several waters, is said to be effectual in removing tea stains.
All stains should be removed as soon as possible after being made, and
always before putting the linen into the wash.

In washing table linen, housekeepers should remember that hard rubbing
is the worst wear which it can receive. If soaked over night, a gentle
squeezing will usually be quite sufficient to remove all soil, or if a
little borax (a handful to ten gallons of water) or household ammonia in
the proportion of two tablespoonfuls to a pail of water be added, two or
three hours' soaking will suffice. Care should also be taken in hanging
and fastening properly upon the line. Fold the cloth over the line six
or eight inches at least, and in such a manner as to keep the thread
straight, and fasten with three or more clothes pins. Table linen is
often sadly frayed at the corners by being pinned so that all strain
comes upon the corners, and if left to whip in the wind, is soon ruined.
Napkins in summer are much nicer if dried upon the grass. Only the
merest trifle of starch, if any, should be used for table linen.

Table linen should be taken from the line while still damp, folded
evenly lengthwise with the selvage together, then folded lengthwise
again, rolled tight, and wrapped in damp towels so that the outside will
not become dry, and ironed the same day. The irons should be heavy and
as hot as possible without danger of scorching, and the board should be
well padded with several thicknesses of flannel. Iron the linen in
single folds, keeping a damp cloth over portions which will not be
immediately reached. When the entire surface has been ironed, fold
evenly lengthwise and with the selvage edges toward the ironer, again go
over the entire upper side; then fold with the just completed portion
inside, iron again, and so continue until the whole is ironed and
folded. Both napkins and tablecloths are ironed in this way. They
should be thoroughly dried with the iron and well aired before being
laid away, in order to bring out the patterns well and to give them the
desirable glossy finish.

Colored table linen should be washed in tepid water containing a little
powdered borax, which serves to set the color. Very little, if any, soap
should be used. Rinse in tepid water containing a small quantity of
boiled starch; dry in the shade, and iron while yet damp.

Table linen should be carefully darned at once when it begins to wear
and become thin, and may thus be preserved for a long time. When new, it
should be washed before being made up, and the threads raveled or drawn,
so as to make the ends exactly straight. Napkins should be washed before
being cut apart. When not required for regular use, the linen should be
folded loosely, and laid away without ironing in some place where it
will not be subjected to pressure. When needed, it can be quickly
dampened and ironed.

THE GARBAGE.--What to do with the waste accumulating from
preparation of foods is a question of no small importance. The too
frequent disposition of such material is to dump it into a waste-barrel
or garbage box near the back door, to await the rounds of the scavenger.
Unless more than ordinary precautions in regard to cleanliness are
observed, such a proceeding is fraught with great danger. The bits of
moist food, scraps of meat, vegetables, and other refuse, very quickly
set up a fermentative process, which, under the sun's rays, soon breeds
miasm and germs; especially is this true if the receptacle into which
the garbage is thrown is not carefully cleaned after each emptying.

A foul-smelling waste-barrel ought never to be permitted under any
circumstances. The best plan is to burn all leavings and table refuse as
fast as made, which may be done without smell or smoke by opening all
the back drafts of the kitchen range, and placing them on the hot coals
to dry and burn. Some housekeepers keep in one end of the sink a wire
dish drainer into which all fruit and vegetable parings are put. If
wet, the water quickly drains from them, and they are ready to be put
into the stove, where a very little fire soon reduces them to ashes. All
waste products which cannot well be burned, may be buried at a distance
from the house, but not too much in one spot, and the earth should be
carefully covered over afterward. Under no circumstances should it be
scattered about on the surface of the ground near the back door, as
heedless people are apt to do.

If the table refuse must be saved and fed to animals, it should be
carefully sorted, kept free from all dishwater, sour milk, etc., and
used as promptly as possible. It is a good plan to have two tightly
covered waste pails of heavy tin to be used on alternate days. When one
is emptied, it may be thoroughly cleansed and left to purify in the air
and sunshine while the other is in use. Any receptacle for waste should
be entirely emptied and thoroughly disinfected each day with boiling
suds and an old broom. This is especially imperative if the refuse is to
be used as food for cows, since the quality of the milk is more or less
affected by that of the food.




TABLE TOPICS.

    A woman cannot work at dressmaking, tailoring, or any other
    sedentary employment, ten hours a day, year in and out, without
    enfeebling her constitution, impairing her eyesight, and bringing on
    a complication of complaints; but she can sweep, cook, wash, and do
    the duties of a well-ordered house, with modern arrangements, and
    grow healthier every year. The times in New England when all women
    did housework a part of every day, were the times when all women
    were healthy.--_Harriet Beecher Stowe._


    The best ways are commonly the easiest ways and those that give most
    comfort to the household. _Know how_ is a great labor-saving
    invention, on which there is no patent.--_Sel._

     Who sweeps a room as for God's law
     Makes that and th' action fine.

    --_George Herbert._




A YEAR'S BREAKFASTS & DINNERS

What to get for the family meals is frequently a most perplexing
problem, especially when one remembers the many important points that
should enter into the arrangement of the daily bill of fare. A
well-arranged menu should be composed of articles which supply the
requisite amount of food elements for proper nutrition, palatably
prepared. These should be adapted to the season and also to the family
purse. There should be an agreeable and pleasing change from day to day,
with never too great variety at one meal, and no incongruous association
of foods that do not harmonize, upon the same bill of fare. The amount
of time and strength available for the preparation of the meal must also
receive consideration. The problem would be easier of solution could one
select her menu wholly from fresh material each time; but in most
households the odds and ends and "left-over" foods must be utilized, and
if possible compounded into dishes that will not have the savor of
yesterday's breakfast or dinner.

The making of a bill of fare offers opportunity for thought and study
under all circumstances; but it is often particularly difficult for the
housewife long accustomed to the use of foods of a different character,
to make up a menu of hygienic dishes properly adapted to all
requirements. For such of our readers as need aid in this direction, we
give in this chapter bills of fare for fifty-two weeks' breakfasts and
dinners. Not that we presume to have arranged a model dietary which
every one can adopt,--individual preferences, resources, and various
other conditions would preclude that,--but we have endeavored to prepare
a list of menus suitable for use should circumstances admit, and which
we trust may be found helpfully suggestive of good, hygienic living.

We have given meats no place upon these bills of fare, as we wished
particularly to illustrate how good, substantial menus of appetizing
variety can be provided without their use; but such of our readers as
desire this class of foods will have no difficulty in supplementing the
bills we have arranged by adding such meats as accord with their tastes
and purses, while our chapter on Meats will give them all needed
information as to their preparation.

In arranging the bills of fare it has been presupposed that the
housewife has provided herself with at least a moderate allowance of
canned or dried vegetables and fruits during their season, for use
throughout the year. Effort has also been made to suggest an ample
variety of seasonable and wholesome articles and to make provision for
any probable left-over foods; and to illustrate how by planning and
thinking beforehand the same material may be used to form the base of
two different dishes for successive days, enough of which for both may
often be cooked at the same time, thus economizing in time and fuel.

No particular year has been taken, as we desired the menus to be adapted
to all years, and as no dates could be given, we have taken even weeks,
ending each with a Sabbath menu, beginning with the first month of the
year.

A third meal, if desired, whether it be luncheon or supper, should, for
health's sake, be so simple in character that we have not deemed it
necessary to give bills of fare. Breads, fruits, and grains, with milk,
cream, and some simple relish, tastefully served, offer ample provision
for a healthful and nourishing repast.

No mention has been made of beverages upon the bills of fare. If any are
used, hot milk or caramel coffee are to be preferred. Cooked fruit,
either fresh, dried, or canned, is desirable for every meal, but the
kind--as also of the fresh fruit upon the breakfast bill--may be
arranged according to individual preferences and resources. The use of
cream, sugar, and other accessories should be suited to circumstances.

It is intended that croutons be served with the soups, and in arranging
the variety of breads, an effort has been made to provide one of harder
texture for use with grains and other soft foods. The wafers mentioned
are the whole-wheat and gluten wafers manufactured by the Sanitarium
Food Co., which by many families are considered more convenient for
general use as a hard bread than the crisps, sticks, etc., which upon
some of the menus are designed for the same purpose.

Less variety may be used, and changes made to suit the taste and
circumstances of those providing and partaking of the meals; but
whatever is subtracted should still leave upon the bill of fare the more
nutritious articles, like grains, whole-wheat bread, and other foods
rich in nerve and muscle forming elements.

Whether the housewife follows the bills of fare given with such
modifications as are best suited to the needs of her household, or
provides some of her own choosing, she will find it a great saving of
vexation and trouble to make them out for several days or a week ahead,
at one time, rather than from day to day or from meal to meal. She can
then plan her work and her resources so as the more nearly to make "both
ends meet," and can provide a more varied fare, while if changes are
needed, they can be easily made by substituting one article for another,
as circumstances demand.

In the arrangement of her menus she will find it well to select first
the grain and breads to be used, since being among the most nutritious
of all foods, they may well form the chief and staple food, around
which all other articles upon the bill of fare are grouped. If the grain
chosen be rice, farina, or one largely composed of starch, the remainder
of the menu should include some foods rich in nitrogenous elements, such
as macaroni, whole-wheat or Graham breads, the legumes, eggs, etc. If
the choice of grain be one containing a high percentage of nitrogenous
material, less of this element will be required in the accompanying
foods. As an aid in determining the nutritive value of any given food
substance, the following table, presenting the results of the chemical
analysis of the more common articles used as food, which we have
compiled from the most recent scientific authorities, will be found
helpful:--

TABLE SHOWING THE NUTRITIVE VALUES OF COMMON FOOD SUBSTANCES.

    (1)Water.
    (2)Albuminous elements.
    (3)Starch.
    (4)Grape Sugar.
    (5)Cane Sugar.
    (6)Free Fat.
    (7)Free Acid.

    GRAINS.
    FOOD SUBSTANCES  (1)    (2)   (3)    (4)  (5)   (6)   (7)
    Wheat, Poland   13.2   21.5      61.9      X    1.5    X
     Mich. White    12.8   11.6      71.       X    1.3    X
      "    Diehle   12.2   13.8      72.2      X     X     X
     Japanese       12.4   16.5      65.1      X    1.6    X
    Rye, Winter      8.7   11.       74.6      X    1.9    X
     German          8.    14.       78.       X     X     X
    Barley          24.    10.5      66.7      X    2.     X
     So. Russian     4.    12.7      70.9      X     X     X
    Oats            12.    10.7      58.3      X    7.8    X
    Corn, Flint     13.1   10.2      68.5      X    4.8    X
     Dent           13.4    9.4      68.5      X    5.     X
     Sweet          13.4   11.4      62.7      X    7.8    X
    Rice            12.6    6.7      78.5      X     .9    X
    Millet          11.8   10.5      68.2      X    4.2    X
    Buckwheat       12.7   10.       71.8      X    1.4    X
    Iceland Moss    16.    22.       36.3      X    1.4    X

    FLOUR.
    FOOD SUBSTANCES  (1)    (2)   (3)    (4)  (5)   (6)   (7)
    Graham          13.    11.7      69.9      X    1.7    X
    Wheat           11.6   11.1      75.4      X    1.1    X
    Rye             13.7   11.6      69.7      X    2.     X
    Barley          14.8   11.4      71.2      X    1.5    X
    Oat              7.7   15.1      67.2      X    7.1    X
    Corn            14.2    9.7      69.5      X    3.8    X
    Buckwheat       13.5    8.9      74.3      X    1.6    X
    Bean            10.3   23.2      59.4      X    2.1    X
    Pea             11.4   25.2      57.2      X    2.     X
    Banana          14.9    2.9      77.9      X     .5    X
    Arrowroot       18.      X       82.       X     X     X

    BREADS.
    FOOD SUBSTANCES  (1)    (2)   (3)    (4)  (5)   (6)   (7)
    Barley          12.4    9.4  64.4    4.7        1.     X
    Whole Wheat     13.     8.7  60.     4.         6.     X
    White           45.1    5.3  46.     2.3         .8    X
    Rye             42.3    6.1  46.9    2.3         .4    X
    Swedish Speise  12.    10.   72.3    3.1        1.6    X
      Brod
    Zwieback, White 13.3    8.5  73.3    1.8        1.     X
    Rye             11.6    9.3  67.2    3.6        1.     X
    Macaroni        13.1    9.   76.8     X          .3    X
    Manna           15.3    1.9  18.1   49.[2]       X     X

    FRESH FRUITS.
    FOOD SUBSTANCES  (1)    (2)   (3)    (4)  (5)   (6)   (7)
    Apple           84.8     .4    X       7.2       X    .8
    Apricot         81.2     .5    X       4.6       X   1.2
    Blackberry      86.4     .5    X       4.1       X    .2
    Banana          73.     1.9    X        X        .6   X
    Cherry          79.8     .7    X      10.2       X    .9
    Cranberry       89.6     .1    X       1.5       X   3.3
    Currant         84.7     .5    X       6.4       X   2.3
    Grape           78.2     .6    X      14.3       X    .8
    Gooseberry      85.7     .5    X       7.1       X   1.4
    Pear            83.2     .4    X       8.2       X    .2
    Prune           81.2     .8    X       6.2       X    .8
    Plum            84.9     .4    X       3.6       X   2.5
    Peach           80.      .7    X       4.5       X    .9
    Raspberry       85.7     .4    X       3.9       X   1.4
    Strawberry      87.6    1.1    X       6.3       .5   .9
    Whortleberry    78.4     .8    X       5.        X   1.6

    DRIED FRUITS.
    FOOD SUBSTANCES  (1)    (2)   (3)    (4)  (5)   (6)   (7)
    Prune           29.3    2.3    .2   44.5   .5    X    2.7
    Pear            29.4    2.   10.8   29.1   .4    X     .8
    Apple           27.9    1.3   5.6   42.8   .8    X    3.6
    Cherry          49.8    2.     X    31.2   X     .3    X
    Raisin          32.     3.4    X    54.6   X     .6    X
    Fig             31.2    4.     X    49.8   X     X     X
    Date            33.     9.     X      X  58.     X     X

    NUTS.
    FOOD SUBSTANCES  (1)    (2)   (3)    (4)  (5)   (6)   (7)
    Chestnut         7.3   14.6  69.      X    X    2.4    X
    Walnut           7.2   15.8  13.      X    X   57.4    X
    Hazelnut         7.1   17.4   7.2     X    X   62.6    X
    Sweet Almond     6.2   23.5   7.8     X    X   53.     X
    Peanut           6.5   26.3   1.8     X    X   46.2    X
    Cocoanut        46.5    5.6   8.      X    X   35.9    X

    Syrup           24.6     X     X    26.2 44.9    X     X
    Honey           20.6     .8    X    72.8  1.8    X     X

    VEGETABLES.
    FOOD SUBSTANCES  (1)    (2)   (3)    (4)  (5)   (6)   (7)
    Carrot          85.8    1.2    X        X        .3    X
    Winter Cabbage  80.     4.     X       1.2       .9    X
    Red Cabbage     90.     1.8    X       1.7       .2    X
    White Cabbage   90.     1.9    X       2.3       .2    X
    Spinach         38.5    3.5    X        .1       .6    X
    Celery          84.1    1.5    X        .8       .4    X
    Head Lettuce    94.3    1.4    X        X        .3    X
    Potato          75.     2.2    X        X        .2    X
    White Turnip    92.5    1.5    X        X        .2    X
    Beet            87.5    1.3    X        X        .1    X
    Sugar Beet      71.6    2.     X      12.6       .5    X
    Parsnip         82.     1.2    X        X        .6    X
    Sweet Potato    71.8    1.     X        X        .2    X
    Cucumber        95.2    1.2    X       1.        X     X
    Asparagas       93.7    1.8    X        .4       .3    X
    Cauliflower     90.9    2.3    X       1.2       .3    X
    Melon           90.4    1.     X       2.2       .3    X
    Squash          90.3    1.1    X       1.4       .1    X
    Onion           86.     1.7    X       2.8       .1    X
    Pumpkin         90.3    1.1   5.1      1.5       .1    X
    Tomato          92.4    1.6    X       2.5       .3   1.8
    Peas,
      green, garden 78.4    6.4  12.    X      X     .5    X
      small         10.3   24.6       52.6     X    3.5    X
      African        6.5   23.4       57.8     X    6.     X
      green shelled 12.7   21.7       57.7     X    1.9    X
    Beans, field    13.5   25.        48.3     X    1.7    X
      French or
       Kidney       11.    23.7       55.6     X    2.2    X
      white         15.    26.9       48.8     X    3.     X
      Lima           9.    21.9       60.6     X    1.6    X
    String beans    88.7    2.7        5.5    1.2    .1    X
    Lentils         12.3   25.9       53.      X    1.9    X
      German        11.7   33.        30.3     X    8.7    X

    MILK AND BUTTER.                          Milk
    FOOD SUBSTANCES  (1)    (2)   (3)    (4)  Sug.  (6)   (7)
    Mother's milk   89.2     .9    X      X   5.4   3.2    X
    Cows'     "     86.     4.1    X      X   5.2   3.9    X
    Cream           66.     2.7    X      X   2.8  26.7    X
    Swedish Butter  13.8     .6    X      X    .6  84.4    X
    French    "     12.6     X     X      X    .2  86.4    X
    Cheese, Stilton 32.    26.2    X      X  34.5   3.3    X
    Skimmed milk    88.      .4    X      X   3.8   1.8    X
    Buttermilk      88.     4.1    X      X   3.6    .7    X
    Milk of Cow     58.     1.7    X     2.8   X   35.2    X
    Tree

    MEATS.
    FOOD SUBSTANCES  (1)    (2)   (3)    (4)  (5)   (6)   (7)
    Lean Beef       72.    19.3    X      X    X    3.6    X
    Lean Mutton     72.    18.3    X      X    X    4.9    X
    Veal            63.    16.3    X      X    X   15.8    X
    Pork            39.     9.8    X      X    X   49.9    X
    Poultry         74.    21.     X      X    X    3.8    X
    White Fish      78.    18.1    X      X    X    2.9    X
    Salmon          77.    16.1    X      X    X    5.5    X
    Entire Egg      74.    14.     X      X    X   10.5    X
    White of Egg    78.    20.4    X      X    X     X     X
    Yolk of Egg     52.    16.     X      X    X   30.7    X



    (8)Pectose.
    (9)Non-Nitrog. Substances.
    (10)Salts.
    (11)Cellulose.
    (12)Propor. Carbon to Nitrogenous.
    (13)Total Nutritive Value.

    GRAINS.
    FOOD SUBSTANCES   (8)   (9)   (10)   (11)  (12)  (13)
    Wheat, Poland      X     X     1.9    X    2.9   86.8
     Mich. White       X     X     1.6   1.7   6.2   85.5
      "    Diehle      X     X     1.8    X    5.2   87.8
     Japanese          X     X     1.5   2.9   4.    84.7
    Rye, Winter        X     X     2.3   1.5   6.9   89.8
     German            X     X      X     X    5.5   92.
    Barley             X     X     2.6   3.8   6.5   82.2
     So. Russian       X     X     2.4    X    5.5   86.
    Oats               X     X     3.3  17.9   5.2   86.7
    Corn, Flint        X     X     1.4   1.7   7.1   84.9
     Dent              X     X     1.5   2.2   7.8   84.4
     Sweet             X     X     1.8   2.9   6.1   83.7
    Rice               X     X      .8    .5  11.8   86.9
    Millet             X     X     2.8   2.5   6.9   85.7
    Buckwheat          X     X     1.9   1.7   7.3   85.6
    Iceland Moss       X     X     1.4   2.9   2.6   81.1

    FLOUR.
    FOOD SUBSTANCES   (8)   (9)   (10)   (11)  (12)  (13)
    Graham             X     X     1.8   1.9   6.1   85.1
    Wheat              X     X      .6    .2   6.8   88.2
    Rye                X     X     1.4   1.6   6.1   84.7
    Barley             X     X      .6    .5   6.3   84.7
    Oat                X     X     2.     .9   4.9   91.4
    Corn               X     X     1.3   1.5   7.5   84.3
    Buckwheat          X     X     1.     .7   8.5   83.8
    Bean               X     X     3.3   1.7   2.6   88.
    Pea                X     X     2.9   1.3   2.3   87.3
    Banana             X     X     2.2   1.6  27.    83.5
    Arrowroot          X     X      X     X   82.    82.

    BREADS.
    FOOD SUBSTANCES   (8)   (9)   (10)   (11)  (12)  (13)
    Barley             X     X    3.8    4.3   7.4   83.3
    Whole Wheat        X     X    3.     5.3   8.    81.7
    White              X     X     .5     X    9.2   54.9
    Rye                X     X    1.5     .5   8.1   57.2
    Swedish Speise     X     X     X     1.    7.    87.
      Brod
    Zwieback, White    X     X     .6    1.5   9.    83.2
    Rye                X     X    2.1    4.7   7.7   83.7
    Macaroni           X     X     .8     X    8.5   86.9
    Manna              X    5.6    X    10.1  67.    72.7

    FRESH FRUITS.
    FOOD SUBSTANCES   (8)   (9)   (10)   (11)  (12)  (13)
    Apple             4.8    X     .5    1.5  18.    13.7
    Apricot           5.4    X     .8    5.3   9.2   13.5
    Blackberry        1.4    X     .4    7.    6.2    8.1
    Banana             X   23.9   1.      .3    .3   26.7
    Cherry            1.8    X     .7    5.9  14.5   14.8
    Cranberry          X     X     .2    6.3  15.     4.1
    Currant            .9    X     .7    4.6  12.8   10.7
    Grape             2.     X     .5    3.6  13.8   18.2
    Gooseberry        1.4    X     .4    3.5  14.2   10.8
    Pear              3.3    X     .3    4.4  20.5   12.4
    Prune             4.9    X     .7    5.5   7.7   13.4
    Plum              4.6    X     .7    4.3   9.    10.8
    Peach             7.1    X     .7    6.1   6.4   13.9
    Raspberry          .7    X     .5    7.4   9.7    6.9
    Strawberry         .5    X     .8    2.3   6.1   10.1
    Whortleberry       .9    X    1.    12.3   6.2    9.3

    DRIED FRUITS.
    FOOD SUBSTANCES   (8)   (9)   (10)   (11)  (12)  (13)
    Prune             4.3  13.4   1.4    1.5  19.6   69.2
    Pear              4.5  14.9   1.7    6.9  19.9   63.7
    Apple             4.8   6.5   1.6    5.1  37.8   67.
    Cherry             X   14.3   1.6    2.4  15.7   47.8
    Raisin             X    7.5   1.2    1.7  23.    66.3
    Fig                X     X    2.9   12.1  12.4   36.7
    Date               X     X     X      X    6.4   67.

    NUTS.
    FOOD SUBSTANCES   (8)   (9)   (10)   (11)  (12)  (13)
    Chestnut           X     X    3.3    3.4   4.8   89.3
    Walnut             X     X    2.     4.6   4.4   88.2
    Hazelnut           X     X    2.5    3.2   4.    89.7
    Sweet Almond       X     X    3.     6.5   2.6   87.3
    Peanut             X     X    3.3   13.9   1.7   79.6
    Cocoanut           X     X    1.     2.9   7.8   50.5

    Syrup              X    2.    2.3     X   71.    75.4
    Honey              X    3.8    .2     X   91.    78.1

    VEGETABLES.
    FOOD SUBSTANCES   (8)   (9)   (10)   (11)  (12)  (13)
    Carrot             X    9.2   1.     1.5    .2   11.7
    Winter Cabbage     X   10.4   1.6    1.9    .5   18.1
    Red Cabbage        X    4.2    .8    1.3   1.     8.7
    White Cabbage      X    2.6   1.2    1.8   1.3    8.2
    Spinach            X     4.3  2.     1.     .2   10.5
    Celery             X    11.    .8    1.4    .8   14.5
    Head Lettuce       X     2.2  1.      .8   1.8    4.9
    Potato             X    21.   1.      .6    .1   24.4
    White Turnip       X     3.    .7    2.1    .1    5.4
    Beet               X     9.   1.1    1.     .1   11.5
    Sugar Beet         X      .7  1.    11.6  21.5   23.3
    Parsnip            X     7.2  1.     8.     .5   10.
    Sweet Potato       X    25.3   .7    1.     .2   27.2
    Cucumber           X     1.4   .4     .8    .8    4.
    Asparagas          X     2.3   .5    1.     .4    5.3
    Cauliflower        X     3.4   .8     .9    .6    8.2
    Melon              X     4.    .7    1.4   2.1    3.8
    Squash             X     5.2   .7    1.2   1.3    8.5
    Onion              X     8.    .7     .7   1.7   13.3
    Pumpkin            X      X    .7    1.2   6.     8.5
    Tomato             X      X    .6     .8   1.8    6.8
    Peas,
      green, garden    X      X    .8    1.9   2.    19.7
      small            X      X   2.6    6.4   2.2   83.3
      African          X      X   3.     3.3   2.7   90.2
      green shelled    X      X   2.8    3.2   2.7   84.1
    Beans, field       X      X   3.5    8.    2.    78.5
      French or
       Kidney          X      X   3.7    3.8   2.4   85.2
      white            X      X   3.5    2.8   1.9   82.2
      Lima             X      X   2.9    4.    3.1   93.
    String beans       X      X    .6    1.2   2.5   10.1
    Lentils            X      X   3.     3.9   2.1   83.8
      German           X      X   2.7   13.6   1.2   74.7

    MILK AND BUTTER.
    FOOD SUBSTANCES   (8)   (9)   (10)   (11)  (12)  (13)
    Mother's milk      X      X    .4     X     X      X
    Cows'     "        X      X    .8     X    2.2   14.
    Cream              X      X   1.8     X   11.    34.
    Swedish Butter     X      X    .6     X  141.    86.2
    French    "        X      X    .8     X   86.6   87.4
    Cheese, Stilton    X      X   4.      X    1.4   68.
    Skimmed milk       X      X    .8     X    1.4   10.4
    Buttermilk         X      X    .8     X    1.     9.2
    Milk of Cow        X      X    .5     X    2.2   40.2
    Tree

    MEATS.
    FOOD SUBSTANCES   (8)   (9)   (10)   (11)  (12)  (13)
    Lean Beef          X      X   5.1     X     .18  28.
    Lean Mutton        X      X   4.8     X     .26  28.
    Veal               X      X   4.7     X     .93  37.
    Pork               X      X   2.3     X     .49  61.
    Poultry            X      X   1.2     X     .18  26.
    White Fish         X      X   1.      X     .16  22.
    Salmon             X      X   1.4     X     .34  23.
    Entire Egg         X      X   1.5     X     .75  26.
    White of Egg       X      X   1.6     X     X    22.
    Yolk of Egg        X      X   1.3     X    1.9   48.


[Footnote 1: Chiefly sugar and starch.]

[Footnote 2: Mannite]

BILLS OF FARE FOR EVERY DAY IN THE YEAR.

In the following pages will be found a breakfast and dinner bill of fare
for every day in the year, beginning with January 1. We would
particularly recommend a trial of their use by the young and
inexperienced matron just entering upon housekeeping, whose desire
should be to begin right--provide simple and healthful as well as
palatable food for her family. To many such we trust that our "year's
breakfasts and dinners" may come like the grateful suggestions of a
helpful friend. An explanation of the bills of fare has been given in
the preceding pages, and need not be repeated here.

    FIRST WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Gravy Toast
    Corn Puffs
    Breakfast Rolls
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Vegetable Oyster Soup
    Baked Potato with Tomato Cream Sauce
    Mashed Peas
    Baked Squash
    Rolled Rye
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Cream Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Pop Corn Pudding


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine
    Snowflake Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Swiss Potato Soup
    Baked Potato and Pease Gravy
    Macaroni with Kornlet
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Pearl Barley
    Corn Cake
    Cream Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Cracked Wheat Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Fig Sauce
    Cream Toast
    Breakfast Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lima Bean Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Scalloped Vegetable Oysters
    Hominy
    Graham Puffs
    Oatmeal Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Simple Custard Pie


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Hominy Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Sweet Potatoes with Tomato Gravy
    Celery
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato Cream Soup
    Boiled Potatoes with Cream Sauce
    Mashed Peas
    Baked Chestnuts
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Rice
    Stewed Fruit
    Stewed Fruit Pudding


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Mixed Mush
    Browned Sweet Potato
    Macaroni with Cream Sauce
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Graham Bread
    Corn Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Mashed Potatoes
    Baked Cabbage
    Stewed Corn
    Pearl Wheat
    Zwieback
    Current Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Tart

    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits
    Toasted Wafers
    Celery Toast
    Raised Biscuit
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Corn Soup
    Baked Squash
    Mashed Beans
    Rolled Rye
    Beaten Biscuit
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Meringue Desert


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Oranges
    Oatmeal
    Prune Toast
    Baked Sour Apples
    Breakfast Rolls
    Fruit Bread
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Macaroni Soup
    Canned Green Peas
    Scalloped Potato
    Steamed Rice
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Plain Buns
    Zwieback
    Stewed Fruit
    Fresh Fruit and Nuts


    SECOND WEEK.

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush with Dates
    Cream Toast
    Toasted Rolls
    Fruit Bread
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Combination Soup
    Boiled Potato with Cream Sauce
    Pease Cakes
    Stewed Celery
    Cracked Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Sally Lunn Gems
    Zwieback
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Tapioca


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Plum Porridge
    Strawberry Toast
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Graham Crisps
    Pop Overs
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Celery Soup No. 2.
    Mashed Squash
    Mashed Potato
    Chopped Turnip
    Rolled Wheat
    Graham Crisps
    Rye Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Cream Rice Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Fruit Mush
    Corn Cake
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Puffs
    Boiled Macaroni
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Swiss Potato Soup
    Baked Sweet Potato
    Boiled Beets, Sliced
    Succotash
    Graham Grits
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Rolls
    Stewed Fruit
    Cornstarch Meringue


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Snowflake Toast
    Toasted Wafers
    Currant Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Oatmeal Soup
    Mashed Sweet Potato
    Scalloped Tomatoes
    Farina
    Graham Fruit Bread
    Crusts
    Zwieback
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Pie


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Apple Mush
    Gravy Toast
    Breakfast Rolls
    Graham Fruit Bread
    Macaroni with Kornlet
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Vegetable Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Cabbage Salad
    Mashed Peas with Tomato Sauce
    Pearl Barley
    Toasted Wafers
    Vienna Bread
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Mold with Fruit Sauce


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Orange Rice
    Blackberry Toast
    Currant Puffs
    Graham Crisps
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Potato Puffs
    Baked Beets
    Stewed Corn and Tomatoes
    Pearl Wheat
    Parker House Rolls
    Zwieback
    Corn Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Prune Pudding


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Grape Toast
    Toasted Wafers
    Fruit Bread
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Cup Custard
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Stewed Potato
    Canned Okra and Tomato
    Browned Rice
    Beaten Biscuits
    Graham Crackers
    Fruit Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Prune Pie with Granola Crust


    THIRD WEEK.

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush with Raisins
    Gravy Toast
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Baked Potato with Celery Sauce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Baked Bean Soup
    Steamed Potatoes with Pease Gravy
    Scalloped Vegetable Oysters
    Mashed Parsnip
    Graham Grits
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Rye Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Bread Custard Pudding


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Peach Toast
    Cottage Cheese
    Hoe Cake
    Graham Wafers
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lentil and Parsnip Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Celery
    Hulled Corn
    Scalloped Tomato
    Macaroni with Raisins
    Raised Corn Bread
    Cream Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Blancmange


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal Porridge
    Celery Toast
    Potato Cakes
    Cream Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Zwieback
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Rice Soup
    Boiled Potato with Brown Sauce
    Stewed Cabbage
    Mashed Split Peas
    Boiled Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Rolls
    Currant Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Corn Meal Pudding


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Rye
    Apricot Toast
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Corn Puffs
    Granola
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Cabbage Hash
    Stewed Vegetable Oysters
    Graham Mush
    Graham Puffs
    Buns
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Cornstarch with Raisins


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Fig Sauce
    Graham Gruel
    Lentil Toast
    Beaten Biscuits
    Graham Gems
    Zwieback
    Baked Potato with Cream Gravy
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Mixed Potato Soup
    Macaroni with Kornlet
    Baked Beans
    Graham Grits
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Sally Lunn Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Fig Pudding with Orange Sauce


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Brewis
    Blackberry Toast
    Toasted Wafers
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Canned Green Pea Soup
    Boiled Potato
    Corn and Tomato
    Mashed Lentils and Beans
    Farina
    Graham Crusts
    Zwieback
    Cream Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice and Tapioca Pudding


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Fruit Mush
    Grape Toast
    Graham Fruit Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Baked Sour Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Canned Corn Soup
    Creamed Potatoes
    Mashed Peas
    Cold Boiled Beets, sliced
    Steamed Rice
    Graham Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Raised Jelly Cake
    Fresh Fruit


    FOURTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine Flakes
    Snowflake Toast
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Corn Puffs
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Baked Potatoes with Brown Sauce
    Cabbage Salad
    Parsnips with Egg Sauce
    Cracked Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Rye Gems
    Sticks
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice and Stewed Apple Dessert


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Prune Toast
    Pop Overs
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Cream Rolls
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Vegetable Oyster Soup
    Boiled Potato with Lentil Gravy
    Turnips in Juice
    Celery with Tomato
    Cracked Wheat
    Toasted Rolls
    Raised Biscuit
    Oatmeal Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Tapioca and Fig Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush with Dates
    Gravy Toast
    Hoe Cake
    Graham Sticks
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Boiled Macaroni
    Baked Chestnuts
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Celery Soup No. 2
    Mashed Sweet Potato
    Chopped Beets
    Succotash
    Graham Grits
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Currant Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Banana Dessert


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Apple Toast
    Graham Puffs
    Zwieback
    Graham Bread
    Baked Bananas
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Parsnip Soup No. 2
    Scalloped Potatoes
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Macaroni with Egg Sauce
    Farina
    Graham Crisps
    Crescents
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Prune Dessert


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine Cakes
    Gravy Toast
    Bean Gems
    Graham Crisps
    Fruit Bread
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Vegetable Soup
    Baked Potato with Tomato Cream Sauce
    Stewed Parsnip with Celery
    Mashed Peas
    Pearl Wheat
    Toasted Wafers
    Fruit Bread
    Graham Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Lemon Pie


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal Porridge
    Cream Toast
    Breakfast Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Corn Puffs
    Macaroni with Raisins
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Stewed Potato
    Hulled Corn
    Chopped Turnip
    Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Molded Cracked Wheat with Fruit Sauce


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Rye
    Prune Toast
    Pulled Bread
    Fruit Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Citron Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lentil Soup
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Stewed Corn
    Steamed Rice
    Cream Crisps
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Caramel Custards
    Fruit and Nuts


    FIFTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Plum Porridge
    Tomato Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Rolls
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Canned Okra and Tomato Soup
    Baked Sweet Potatoes
    Mashed Cabbage
    Pease Cakes
    Boiled Wheat
    Oatmeal Crisps
    Graham Gems
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Carrot Pudding


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal Porridge
    Banana Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Zwieback
    Rye Bread
    Browned Sweet Potato
    Baked Sour Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Potato Soup
    Potatoes Stewed with Celery
    Egg Macaroni
    Stewed Carrots
    Hominy
    Rye Bread
    Sticks
    Currant Buns
    Stewed Fruit
    Prune Whip


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Corn Meal Mush
    Snowflake Toast
    Hominy Gems
    Sticks
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Brown Soup
    Baked Potato with Cream Sauce
    Scalloped Turnip
    Mashed Chestnuts
    Lentil Puree with Lemon
    Graham Grits
    Graham Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Rye Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Cream Rice Pudding


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Apple Mush
    Blackberry Toast
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Black Bean Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Scalloped Tomatoes
    Stewed Vegetable Oysters
    Pearl Wheat
    Sally Lemon Gems
    Graham Bread
    Zwieback
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Tart


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Vegetable Oyster Toast
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Corn Cake
    Baked Sweet Potato
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Vegetable Soup
    Baked Potato
    Stewed Beans
    Kornlet
    Chopped Beets
    Browned Rice
    Rye Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Orange Pudding


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Boiled Oats
    Strawberry Toast
    Graham Gems
    Hoe Cakes
    Toasted Wafers
    Macaroni with Kornlet
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Vermicelli Soup
    Browned Potato
    Cabbage Salad
    Baked Squash
    Mashed Peas
    Rice
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Baked Corn Meal Pudding


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Lemon Rice
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Fruit Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Graham Crackers
    Baked Sour Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Canned Pea Soup
    Chopped Sweet Potatoes
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Celery
    Boiled Wheat
    Beaten Biscuit
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Squash Pie


    SIXTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush with Dates
    Poached Eggs on Toast
    Corn Cakes
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Hominy Soup
    Potato Rice
    Turnips with Cream Sauce
    Mashed Parsnips
    Baked Barley
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Cream Graham Rolls
    Stewed Fruit
    Plain Fruit Pudding


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Fig Sauce
    Gravy Toast
    Toasted Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Crescents
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Swiss Lentil Soup
    Baked Potato
    Boiled Beets
    Stewed Cabbage
    Mashed Squash
    Cracked Wheat
    Graham Raised Biscuit
    Cream Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Blancmange with Mock Cream


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Cream Crisps
    Graham Puffs
    Lemon Apples
    Macaroni with Cream Sauce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Velvet Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Mashed Peas
    Vegetable Hash
    Graham Grits
    Graham Bread Sticks
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Cracked Wheat Pudding


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Corn Meal Mush
    Gravy Toast
    Toasted Wafers
    Currant Puffs
    Baked Sour Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Boiled Potato with Cream Sauce
    Browned Parsnips
    Baked Turnip
    Pearl Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Almond Cornstarch Pudding


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Corn Meal Porridge
    Cream Toast
    Zwieback
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Macaroni with Egg Sauce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Plain Rice Soup
    Potato Snowballs
    Carrots with Egg Sauce
    Mashed Beans
    Rolled Wheat
    Fruit Loaf
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Tart


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Prune Toast
    Graham Rolls
    Fruit Bread
    Bean Gems
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Vegetable Broth
    Baked Potato
    Scalloped Vegetable Oysters
    Hulled Corn
    Pearl Barley
    Toasted Wafers
    Zwieback
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Floating Islands
    Oranges


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat with Raisins
    Blackberry Toast
    Graham Raised Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Breakfast Rolls
    Stewed Fruit
    Baked Sour Apples

    DINNER

    Canned Green Corn Soup
    Stewed Potato
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Rice
    Buns
    Toasted Wafers
    Beaten Biscuit
    Stewed Fruit
    Bread Custard
    Almonds


    SEVENTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine Flakes
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Rolls
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Steamed Potatoes with Cream Sauce
    Baked Parsnips
    Scalloped Beans
    Browned Rice
    Toasted Wafers
    Whole Wheat Puffs
    Graham Crisps
    Stewed Fruit.
    Cocoanut Blancmange or Fresh Fruit


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Lentil Gravy
    Snowflake Toast
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Corn Puffs
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Combination Soup
    Baked Potato
    Mashed Squash
    Turnips in Juice
    Graham Grits
    Graham Crisps
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Zwieback
    Stewed Fruit
    Orange Float


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Lentil Toast
    Granola
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Puffs
    Creamed Potatoes
    Celery
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Tomato Soup
    Mashed Potatoes
    Scalloped Vegetable Oysters
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Cracked Wheat
    Corn Bread
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Crackers
    Stewed Fruit
    Apples or Bananas


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Corn Meal Mush
    Apple Toast
    Rye Bread
    Pop Overs
    Toasted Wafers
    Roasted Almonds
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Brown Soup
    Baked Potatoes
    Carrots with Egg Sauce
    Mashed Peas
    Corn Meal Cubes with Hot Cream
    Rye Bread
    Graham Sticks
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Fruit Mold


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Corn Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Rye Bread
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Boiled Potato with Brown Sauce
    Baked Cabbage
    Stewed Corn
    Rolled Rye
    Currant Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Date Pudding with Lemon Sauce


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal Porridge
    Snowflake Toast
    Zwieback
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Crescents
    Boiled Macaroni
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Corn Soup
    Steamed Potatoes with Cream Sauce
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Baked Beets
    Pearl Wheat
    Vienna Bread
    Graham Crisps
    Oatmeal Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Manioca or Fresh Fruit


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Tomato Toast
    Currant Buns
    Toasted Wafers
    Citron Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Canned Pea Soup
    Stewed Potato
    Succotash
    Graham Grits
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Rolls with Fruit Jelly
    Stewed Fruit
    Bananas


    EIGHTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Plum Porridge
    Peach Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Granola
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Vegetable Soup
    Potato Rice
    Scalloped Tomatoes
    Mashed Parsnips
    Boiled Wheat
    Zwieback
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Sally Lunn Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Oranges and Nuts


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Fig Sauce
    Gravy Toast
    Hoe Cake
    Toasted Wafers
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lima Bean Soup
    Boiled Potatoes
    Mashed Turnips
    Canned Green Peas
    Pearl Barley
    Fruit Loaf
    Beaten Biscuit
    Farina Blancmange with Fruit Sauce
    Stewed Fruit


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Banana Toast
    Corn Puffs
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lentil and Parsnip Soup
    Scalloped Potato
    Chopped Cabbage
    Hulled Corn
    Graham Apple Mash
    Graham Puffs
    Fruit Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Grape Apples


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Brewis
    Cream Toast
    Macaroni with Cream sauce
    Corn Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Dates

    DINNER

    Tomato and Macaroni Soup
    Potato Puffs
    Stewed Split Peas
    Sliced Beets
    Crusts
    Graham Bread
    Fruit Rolls
    Molded Cracked Wheat with Fruit Juice
    Stewed Fruit
    Bananas


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits
    Prune Toast
    Peas Puree
    Fruit Rolls
    Rye Gems
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Potato Soup with Vermicelli
    Boiled Potato with Brown Sauce
    Mashed Squash
    Baked Beans
    Pearl Wheat
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Granola Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Tart


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Wheat Porridge
    Gravy Toast
    Graham Puffs
    Hoe Cake
    Toasted Wafers
    Lemon Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Steamed Potato
    Stewed Corn
    Macaroni Baked with Granola
    Graham Grits
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Bean Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Orange Custard


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Orange Rice
    Strawberry Toast
    Beaten Biscuit
    Fruit Bread
    Roasted Almonds
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Creamed Corn Soup
    Creamed Potatoes
    Macaroni with Tomato
    Baked Wheat
    Beaten Biscuit
    Fruit Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Cocoanut Layer Cake
    California Grapes


    NINTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush with Dates
    Gravy Toast
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Brown Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Baked Beets
    Graham Grits
    Graham Gems
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Graham Crackers
    Stewed Fruit
    Snowball Custard or Fresh Fruit


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits Gruel, with Croutons
    Apple and Prune Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Lemon Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lima Bean and Tapioca Soup
    Beet Hash
    Stewed Vegetable Oysters
    Mashed Peas with Tomato Sauce
    Rice with Raisins
    Raised Biscuit
    Cream Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Rose Cream


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Tomato Toast
    Raised Biscuits
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Scalloped Potatoes
    Cabbage Celery
    Stewed Tomato
    Baked Squash
    Pearl Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Graham Crackers
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Fruit Pudding


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Apple Toast
    Breakfast Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Black Bean Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Scalloped Potato
    Baked Parsnips
    Rolled Rye
    Toasted Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Currant Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Baked Apple Loaf


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Snowflake Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Date Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Granola
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Parsnip Soup
    Baked Potato with Cream Sauce
    Mashed Lentils with Beans
    Boiled Macaroni
    Farina
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Cream Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple and Fig Tapioca


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Corn Meal Mush
    Lentil Toast
    Cream Crisps
    Date Bread
    Graham Puffs
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Macaroni Soup
    Stewed Split Peas
    Scalloped Turnip
    Browned Rice
    Corn Meal Mush Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Custard or Fresh Fruit


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Fruit Mush
    Prune Toast
    Graham Fruit Bread
    Toasted Rolls
    Baked Sour Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato Cream Soup
    Potato Cakes
    Stewed Corn
    Steamed Rice
    Beaten Biscuits
    Buns
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Pie or Fresh Fruit


    TENTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine Flakes
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Toasted Beaten Biscuits
    Corn Cakes
    Granola
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Potato Soup
    Scalloped Beans
    Macaroni baked with Granola
    Graham Grits
    Graham Crisps
    Pop Overs
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Stewed Fruit Pudding


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Strawberry Toast
    French Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Combination Soup
    Scalloped Potato
    Browned Parsnips
    Hulled Corn
    Graham Apple Mush
    Rye Bread
    Zwieback
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Cocoanut Cornstarch Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits
    Gravy Toast
    Graham Gems
    Rye Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Parsnip Soup No. 2.
    Boiled Potatoes with Tomato Cream Sauce
    Mashed Peas
    Chopped Cabbage
    Pearl Barley
    Crusts
    Corn Dodgers
    Graham Crackers
    Stewed Fruit
    Cream Rice Pudding


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Blackberry Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Potato Rice
    Succotash
    Stewed Tomato
    Cracked Wheat with Raisins
    Rye Bread
    Sticks
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Bread Pudding or Fresh Fruit


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Rye
    Cream Toast
    Graham Gems
    Hoe Cake
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Potato with Cream Gravy
    Roasted Almonds
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lentil Soup
    Steamed Potato with Brown Sauce
    Cabbage Celery
    Carrots with Egg Sauce
    Macaroni with Kornlet
    Farina
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Currant Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Baked Apples with Whipped Cream


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat with Dates
    Boiled Macaroni
    Graham Biscuits
    Breakfast Rolls
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Carrot Soup
    Baked Potatoes
    Mashed Turnips
    Baked Squash
    Hominy
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Banana Shortcake
    Nuts


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Boiled Wheat
    Grape Toast
    Fruit Bread
    Beaten Biscuits
    Citron Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Macaroni Soup
    Browned Potatoes
    Canned Green Peas
    Steamed Rice
    Fruit Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Beaten Biscuit
    Stewed Fruit
    Almond Cream


    ELEVENTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Browned Rice
    Gravy Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Beaten Biscuits
    Macaroni with Raisins
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Scalloped Potatoes
    Mashed Parsnips
    Hulled Corn
    Mixed Mush
    Rye Gems
    Corn Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Custard or Fresh Fruit


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Corn Meal Mush
    Apricot Toast
    Graham Gems
    Corn Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Plain Rice Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Scalloped Turnip
    Stewed Split Peas
    Farina Fruit Mush
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Sally Lunn Gems
    Zwieback
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice and Tapioca Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Parched Farinose
    Tomato Toast
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Pop Overs
    Browned Corn Meal Mush
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Brown Soup
    Stewed Potatoes
    Chopped Beets
    Mashed Lima Beans
    Pearl Wheat
    Pulled Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Bread and Fruit Custard


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Roasted Almonds
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Oatmeal Soup
    Boiled Potato
    Cabbage and Tomato
    Mashed Peas
    Rice
    Cream Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Tapioca Lemon Jelly


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Corn Meal Gruel with Croutons
    Boiled Macaroni
    Graham Gems
    Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Baked Potato with Gravy
    Cottage Cheese
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Baked Bean Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Carrots with Egg Sauce
    Scalloped Tomato
    Graham Grits
    Graham Bread
    Buns
    Cream Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Dried Apple Pie or Fresh Fruit


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Rye
    Graham Bread
    Breakfast Rolls
    Potato Cakes
    Peas Puree
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Boiled Potato with Cream Sauce
    Succotash
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Rolled Wheat with Raisins
    Graham Puffs
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Graham Grits Pudding


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Prune Toast
    Fruit Rolls
    Graham Biscuit
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lima Bean Soup
    Stewed Potato
    Cold Sliced Beets
    Kornlet
    Steamed Rice
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Fruit Rolls
    Stewed Fruit
    Fresh Fruit and Nuts


    TWELFTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine Flakes
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Potato with Cream Sauce
    Steamed Eggs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Mashed Potatoes
    Scalloped Tomatoes
    Stewed Cabbage
    Pearl Barley
    Cream Crisps
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Blancmange with Cocoanut Sauce


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Apple and Apricot Toast
    Cream Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Potato Rice
    Creamed Parsnips
    Chopped Turnip
    Graham Mush
    Crusts
    Graham Bread
    Cream Rolls
    Stewed Fruit
    Prune and Tapioca Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Corn Meal Mush with Fruit
    Cream Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Parker House Rolls
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Vegetable Broth
    Baked Potato and Brown Sauce
    Boiled Beets
    Corn and Tomato
    Graham Grits
    Mush Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Sally Lunn Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Cream Rice Pudding


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Plum Porridge
    Prune Toast
    Toasted Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Citron Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Vermicelli Soup
    Beet Hash
    Mashed Peas
    Macaroni with Kornlet
    Orange Rice
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Currant Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Sago Pudding


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Browned Rice
    Gravy Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Potatoes
    Pease Cakes with Tomato Sauce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Black Bean Soup No. 2.
    Mashed Potato
    Mashed Parsnips
    Stewed Corn
    Rolled Rye
    Corn Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Banana Dessert


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Blackberry Toast
    Macaroni with Raisins
    Pop Overs
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Potato Soup
    Potato Puff
    Scalloped Tomato
    Baked Beans
    Cracked Wheat
    Graham Bread
    Sticks
    Currant Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Malaga Grapes


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Tomato Toast
    Buns
    Beaten Biscuit
    Baked Apples
    Cup Custard
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Macaroni Soup
    Stewed Potato
    Canned String Beans
    Boiled Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Buns
    Lemon Shortcake
    Nuts


    THIRTEENTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush with Dates
    Cream Toast
    Breakfast Rolls with Fruit Jelly
    Toasted Wafers
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Potato Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Beets with Cream Sauce
    Macaroni baked with Granola
    Pearl Barley with Raisins
    Toasted Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Rye Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Lemon Apples with Whipped Cream


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal Porridge
    Poached Eggs on Toast
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Potato Cakes
    Cottage Cheese
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Swiss Lentil Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Cabbage Salad
    Mashed Turnip
    Graham Grits
    Graham Bread
    Cream Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Baked Apple Dessert


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Corn Meal Mush
    Snowflake Toast
    Oatmeal Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Fruit Bread
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Potato Soup
    Baked Potatoes with Tomato Cream Sauce
    Mashed or Stewed Peas
    Canned Corn
    Graham Mush
    Pulled Bread
    Fruit Bread
    Graham Crackers
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Tart


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Plum Porridge
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Corn Puffs
    Creamed Potatoes
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Potato Rice
    Tomato and Macaroni
    Hulled Corn
    Rice
    Graham Bread
    Rye Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Raised Pie or Fresh Fruit


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Apple Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Breakfast Rolls
    Baked Bananas
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Brown Soup
    Creamed Potatoes
    Chopped Turnips
    Parsnips with Cream Sauce
    Cracked Wheat
    Toasted Rolls
    Date Bread
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Cream Pudding


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine Flakes
    Prune Toast
    Macaroni with Egg Sauce
    Date Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Gems
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Tomato Soup
    Boiled Potatoes
    Macaroni and Lentil Gravy
    Stewed Carrots
    Graham Grits
    Cream Crisps
    Rye Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Cracked Wheat Pudding


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Gravy Toast
    Breakfast Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Fruit Bread
    Cup Custard
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato Soup with Vermicelli
    Warmed-over Potato
    Canned Green Peas
    Cold Sliced Beets
    Rolled Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Stewed Fruit
    Prune Pie
    Fruit


    FOURTEENTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Steamed Figs
    Cream Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Rolls
    Fruit Bread
    Granola
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Canned Corn Soup
    Baked Potatoes with Cream Sauce
    Scalloped Tomatoes
    Mashed Peas
    Browned Rice
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Stewed Fruit Pudding


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Peach Toast
    Cream Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Graham Gems
    Dates
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Creamed Potatoes
    Baked Cabbage
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Hominy
    Toasted Rolls
    Corn Puffs
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Fruit Cornstarch Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Fruit Mush
    Snowflake Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Parker House Rolls
    Lemon Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Hominy Soup
    Mashed Potatoes
    Mashed Lentils
    Turnips with Cream Sauce
    Farina
    Vienna Bread
    Sally Lunn Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Banana Dessert or Fresh Fruit


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Lentil Toast
    Currant Puffs
    Breakfast Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Potato Cakes
    Granola
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato Cream Soup
    Scalloped Potatoes
    Baked or Stewed Beans
    Macaroni Baked with Granola
    Rice
    Vienna Bread
    Toasted Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Prune Dessert
    Nuts


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Gravy Toast
    Graham Bread
    Breakfast Rolls
    Rice and Corn Cakes
    Baked Apples
    Roasted Almonds
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Mashed Parsnips
    Succotash
    Graham Grits
    Raised Corn Bread
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Rolls
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice and Tapioca Pudding


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits Gruel with Croutons
    Strawberry Toast
    Macaroni with Raisins
    Cream Rolls
    Corn Bread
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Swiss Lentil Soup
    Potato Cakes
    Chopped Cabbage
    Stewed Corn and Tomatoes
    Pearl Barley
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Pop Overs
    Stewed Fruit
    Bread Pudding or Fresh Fruit


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Prune Toast
    Currant Buns
    Beaten Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit
    White Custard in Cups

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Baked Potatoes with Tomato Cream Sauce
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Rice
    Graham Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Pie
    Oranges


    FIFTEENTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Fruit Mush
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Graham Bread
    Baked Bananas
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Potato Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Cabbage Celery
    Scalloped Tomato
    Lentil Puree
    Cerealine
    Graham Bread
    Corn Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice and Tapioca Pudding


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Tomato Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Macaroni with Cream Sauce
    Granola
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Canned Corn Soup
    Broiled Potato
    Stewed Parsnips
    Mashed Peas
    Farina with Maple Syrup
    Graham Puffs
    Cream Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Lemon Apples with Almond Sauce



    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Lentil Gravy
    Poached Egg on Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Breakfast Rolls
    Granola
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Rice Soup
    Boiled Potato
    Mashed Turnip
    Pease Cakes with Tomato Sauce
    Graham Grits
    Rye Bread
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Oatmeal Blancmange
    Nuts


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Apple and Apricot Toast
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Breakfast Rolls
    Rye Bread
    Graham Puffs
    Roasted Almonds
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Swiss Potato Soup
    Baked Potatoes with Tomato Cream Sauce
    Hulled Corn
    Boiled Beets
    Boiled Wheat with Lemon Sauce
    Toasted Rolls
    Currant Puffs
    Rye Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Tapioca Custard


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Snowflake Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Carrot Soup
    Scalloped Potato
    Mashed Beans
    Cold Boiled Beets, sliced
    Rolled Rye
    Graham Bread
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Crackers
    Stewed Fruit
    Cornstarch with Raisins


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Frumenty
    Blueberry Toast
    Breakfast Rolls
    Corn Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Combination Soup
    Mashed Potatoes
    Stewed Split Peas
    Cabbage Salad
    Cracked Wheat with Raisins
    Toasted Rolls
    Currant Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Snowball


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Blackberry Toast
    Raised Corn Bread
    Crescents
    Fruit Rolls
    Citron Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Canned String Beans or Kornlet
    Macaroni, Tomato Sauce
    Rice with Oranges
    Fruit Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Nuts


    SIXTEENTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Fruit Mush
    Cream Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lima Bean Soup
    Potato Rice
    Chopped Beets
    Egg and Macaroni
    Pearl Wheat
    Graham Bread
    Sally Lunn Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Cottage Cheese
    Nuts


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine Flakes
    Grape Toast
    Graham Bread
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Cream Rolls
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Baked Potatoes
    Stewed Cabbage
    Stewed Dried Corn
    Rolled Wheat
    Graham Bread
    Rye Gems
    Toasted Rolls
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Meringue


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Snowflake Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Fruit Bread
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Corn Soup
    Cabbage Hash
    Stewed Split Peas
    Scalloped Tomato
    Steamed Rice
    Graham Bread
    Cream Crisps
    Oatmeal Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Prune Dessert


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Tomato Toast
    Breakfast Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Cottage Cheese
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Oatmeal Soup
    Baked Potatoes
    Succotash
    Macaroni Baked with Granola
    Farina with Maple Syrup
    Graham Bread
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Lemon Apples with Cocoanut Sauce


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Prune Toast
    Corn Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Plain Omelet
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Potato Snowballs
    Baked Turnips
    Lentil Puree with Lemon
    Browned Rice
    Graham Crisps
    Currant Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Corn Meal Pudding


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Rye
    Gravy Toast
    Macaroni with Egg Sauce
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Breakfast Rolls
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lentil and Parsnip Soup
    Boiled Potatoes with Brown Sauce
    Chopped Beets
    Mashed Peas
    Graham Grits
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Custard


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Fig Sauce
    Peach Toast
    Sticks
    Fruit Crackers
    Graham Bread
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Canned Pea Soup
    Stewed Potato
    Canned Okra and Tomatoes
    Boiled Wheat
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Raised Biscuit
    Stewed Fruit
    Pineapple Tapioca
    Nuts


    SEVENTEENTH WEEK.

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Browned Rice
    Strawberry Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Plain Rice Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Scalloped Beans
    Macaroni with Tomato
    Rolled Rye
    Graham Bread
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Bread Custard

    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Apple Mush
    Tomato Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Breakfast Rolls
    Roasted Almonds
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Brown Soup
    Boiled Potatoes with Cream Sauce
    Chopped Cabbage
    Mashed Lentils
    Pearl Wheat with Raisins
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Granola Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Custard

    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Lentil Toast
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Crackers
    Currant Puffs
    Stewed Potatoes
    Cottage Cheese
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Black Bean Soup
    Mashed Potatoes
    Canned Green Peas
    Boiled Macaroni
    Pearl Wheat
    Oatmeal Crisps
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Cornstarch Meringue or Fresh Fruit

    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Wheat Porridge with Croutons
    Banana Toast
    Molded Rice with Custard Sauce
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Sticks
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Potato Soup
    Baked Potatoes with Brown Sauce
    Mashed Turnips
    Stewed Split Peas
    Pearl Barley with Raisins
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Rye Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Prune and Tapioca Pudding

    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Breakfast Rolls
    Granola
    Roasted Almonds
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Split Pea Soup
    Creamed Potatoes
    Scalloped Tomatoes
    Chopped Beets
    Graham Grits
    Pop Overs
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Fruit Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Cream Pudding

    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Mixed Mush
    Snowflake Toast
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Toasted Rolls
    Fruit Bread
    Corn Puffs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Baked Bean Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Macaroni with Kornlet
    Stewed Carrots
    Rolled Rye
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Mush Rolls
    Graham Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Cornstarch Blancmange with Fruit Sauce

    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Prune Toast
    Graham Raised Biscuits
    Toasted Rolls
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato Soup with Vermicelli
    Broiled Potato
    Canned Corn
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Rolled Wheat
    Stewed Fruit
    Custard Pie


    EIGHTEENTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Banana Mush
    Gravy Toast
    Macaroni with Egg Sauce
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Beaten Biscuits
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Corn Soup
    Mashed Potatoes
    Spinach
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Graham Grits
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Crusts
    Stewed Fruit


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Apricot Toast
    Toasted Wafers
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Cream Rolls
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean Soup
    Steamed Potatoes
    Stewed Asparagus
    Scalloped Tomato
    Pearl Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Sticks
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Graham Grits Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal Porridge with Croutons
    Blueberry Toast
    Macaroni with Cream Sauce
    Toasted Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Macaroni Soup
    Potato Rice
    Stewed Cabbage
    Pearl Barley
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Oatmeal Crisps
    Currant Puffs
    Egg Sandwich
    Cottage Cheese
    Stewed Fruit
    Molded Tapioca


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits
    Gravy Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Granola
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Cabbage Hash
    Asparagus Points
    Boiled Macaroni
    Browned Rice
    Graham Bread
    Sally Lunn Gems
    Mush Rolls
    Stewed Fruit
    Fig Pudding with Orange Sauce


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Tomato Toast
    Macaroni with Kornlet
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Potato Soup
    Boiled Potatoes with Tomato Cream Sauce
    Mashed Peas
    Spinach
    Graham Bread
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Rolled Rye
    Stewed Fruit
    Nuts


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Plum Porridge
    Snowflake Toast
    Rye Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Breakfast Rolls
    Almonds
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Mashed Potatoes
    Lettuce
    Egg and Macaroni
    Farina
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Oatmeal Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Prune Whip


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Prune Toast
    Plain Buns
    Oatmeal Bread
    Cream Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Cup Custard
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Canned Green Pea Soup
    Creamed Potato
    Mashed Lima Beans
    Steamed Rice
    Oatmeal Bread
    Fruit Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Banana Dessert


    NINETEENTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mash with Dates
    Cream Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Rolls
    Baked Potato with Cream Sauce
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lima Bean Soup
    Scalloped Potatoes
    Stewed Asparagus
    Egg Sandwich
    Granola Fruit Mush
    Rice and Corn Cakes
    Cream Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Almond Cornstarch Pudding


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Asparagus Toast
    Toasted Wafers
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Rolls
    Cottage Cheese
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Potato Soup
    Boiled Potato
    Mashed Peas
    Scalloped Tomato
    Pearl Wheat
    Sally Lunn Gems
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Custard Pie


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Steamed Rice
    Lentil Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Mashed Potatoes
    Radishes
    Asparagus with Cream Sauce
    Macaroni Baked with Granola
    Cracked Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Zwieback
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Cream Pudding


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Tomato Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Breakfast Rolls
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Asparagus Soup
    Baked Potato with Cream Sauce
    Mashed Beans
    Lettuce
    Farina
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Oatmeal Crisps
    Graham Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Molded Wheat with Fruit Sauce


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush
    Peach Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Breakfast Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Baked Potatoes
    Spinach
    Succotash
    Rolled Rye
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Currant Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Fruit Mold


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits
    Gravy Toast
    Macaroni with Cream Sauce
    Cream Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Rye Gems
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Corn and Bean Soup
    Boiled Potatoes
    Fresh or Canned Green Peas
    Scalloped Tomatoes
    Cracked Wheat with Raisins
    Toasted Wafers
    Cream Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Plain Custard


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Prune Toast
    Beaten Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Asparagus Soup
    Stewed Potato
    Macaroni with Tomato
    Fruit Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Rice
    Stewed Fruit
    Pineapple


    TWENTIETH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine Flakes
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Potato Soup
    Baked Potatoes with Tomato Cream Sauce
    Stewed Split Peas
    Spinach
    Boiled Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Fruit Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Cocoanut Cornstarch Pudding



    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits
    Asparagus Toast
    Macaroni with Egg Sauce
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Cream Crisps
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Scalloped Potatoes
    Hulled Corn
    Asparagus with Egg Sauce
    Graham Grits
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Graham Puffs
    Cream Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Banana Custard


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Snowflake Toast
    Breakfast Rolls
    Rye Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Rice Soup
    Mashed Potatoes
    Lettuce
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Hominy
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Crusts
    Stewed Fruit
    Snowball Custard


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal Porridge
    Berry Toast
    Macaroni with Cream Sauce
    Graham Crisps
    Hominy Gems
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Asparagus Soup
    Baked Potatoes
    Scalloped Tomatoes
    Stewed Corn
    Graham Grits
    Graham Bread
    Bean Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Prune Dessert


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Raisins
    Tomato Toast
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Cream Rolls
    Cottage Cheese
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Corn and Tomato Soup
    Creamed Potatoes
    Mashed Peas
    Spinach
    Cracked Wheat
    Toasted Wafers
    Sally Lunn Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice and Tapioca Pudding


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Asparagus Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Toasted Rolls
    Cup Custard
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Baked Bean Soup
    Mashed Potatoes
    Stewed Asparagus
    Lettuce
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Baked Barley
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Molded Rice with Fruit Sauce


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Rye
    Prune Toast
    Cream Rolls
    Fruit Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Roasted Almonds
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Kornlet Soup
    Canned Okra and Tomato
    Mashed Peas
    Rice
    Fruit Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Stewed Fruit
    Pineapple Tapioca


    TWENTY-FIRST WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Farina with Fig Sauce
    Snowflake Toast
    Corn Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Kornlet and Tomato Soup
    Stuffed Potato
    Stewed Beans
    Macaroni with Egg Sauce
    Cracked Wheat with Raisins
    Graham Bread
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Cornstarch Blancmange



    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Frumenty
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Pease Paree
    Breakfast Rolls
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Tapioca Soup
    Baked Potato with Pease Gravy
    Stewed Dried Corn
    Scalloped Tomato
    Browned Rice
    Graham Bread
    Rolls
    Rye Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Cracked Wheat Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Mush
    Dried Apple and Apricot Toast
    Raised Biscuit
    Breakfast Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Macaroni Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Succotash
    Canned Green Peas
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Fruit Roll
    Stewed Fruit
    Lemon Cornstarch Pudding


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Jellied Oatmeal
    Lentil Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Oatmeal Soup
    Boiled Potato with Tomato Cream Sauce
    Mashed Lentils with Beans
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Hominy
    Fruit Rolls
    Graham Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Snowball


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Orange Rice
    Gravy Toast
    Macaroni with Cream Sauce
    Graham Crisps
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Hominy Soup
    Potato Puff
    Stewed Split Peas
    Stewed Asparagus
    Pearl Barley with Lemon Sauce
    Graham Bread
    Rye Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Orange Float


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rye Mush
    Prune Toast
    Graham Bread
    Corn Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Cottage Cheese
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Black Bean Soup
    Stewed Potato
    Spinach
    Stewed Corn and Tomato
    Graham Grits
    Raised Corn Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Fruit Mold


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Grape Toast
    Currant Buns
    Beaten Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Canned Green Pea Soup
    Stewed Potato
    Macaroni with Kornlet
    Rice
    Beaten Biscuit
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Loaf Cake
    Bananas


    TWENTY-SECOND WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush with Dates
    Gravy Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Mashed Potatoes
    Spinach
    Stewed Dried Corn
    Rolled Wheat
    Graham Bread
    Rye Gems
    Sticks
    Bread Custard
    Stewed Fruit



    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Macaroni with Raisins
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Oatmeal Soup
    Boiled Potatoes
    Scalloped Tomato
    Mashed Lima Beans
    Boiled Wheat
    Graham Bread
    Rye Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Macaroni Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Plum Porridge
    Prune Toast
    Breakfast Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Crackers
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Tomato Soup
    Mashed Potatoes
    Stewed Split Peas
    Radishes
    Asparagus with Cream Sauce
    Rolled Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Currant Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Fresh Fruit


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Fig Sauce
    Gravy Toast
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Crusts
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Broiled Potato
    Lettuce
    Hominy
    Egg and Macaroni
    Oatmeal Bread
    Sally Lunn Gems
    Graham Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Molded Wheat with Fruit Sauce


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits
    Poached Egg on Toast
    Hominy Gems
    Graham Crisps
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Macaroni Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Stewed Asparagus
    Scalloped Beans
    Cracked Wheat
    Oatmeal Bread
    Cream Rolls
    Graham Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Stewed Fruit Pudding


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Gruel with Croutons
    Asparagus Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Rolls
    Potato Cakes
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Potato Soup
    Baked Potatoes
    Spinach
    Succotash
    Granola Fruit Mush
    Currant Puffs
    Sticks
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Tapioca Jelly


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Prune Toast
    Fruit Bread
    Cream Rolls
    Graham Crisps
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato with Vermicelli Soup
    Mashed Peas
    Creamed Potato
    Lettuce
    Browned Rice
    Fruit Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Stewed Fruit
    Custard Pie


    TWENTY-THIRD WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine Flakes
    Banana Toast
    Beaten Biscuit
    Graham Puffs
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Baked Potato with Brown Sauce
    Scalloped Tomato
    Asparagus with Egg Sauce
    Graham Grits
    Fruit Bread
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Banana Shortcake


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Jellied Oatmeal
    Asparagus Toast
    Graham Gems
    Cream Mush Rolls
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Rice Soup
    Baked Beans
    Stewed Dried Corn
    Lettuce
    Cracked Wheat with Raisins
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Raised Biscuit
    Stewed Fruit
    Almond Cream


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush
    Snowflake Toast
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Currant Puffs
    Cup Custard
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Tapioca Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Green Peas
    Macaroni Baked with Granola
    Rice
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Crusts
    Stewed Fruit
    Floating Islands


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Mixed Mush
    Tomato Toast
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Split Pea Soup
    Potato Cakes
    Spinach
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Rolled Rye
    Sally Lunn Gems
    Cream Mush Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Cocoanut Rice Custard


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Prune Toast
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Gems
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Brown Soup
    Baked Potato
    Stewed Asparagus
    Mashed Lentils with Beans
    Graham Grits
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Cream Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Pie


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits
    Porridge with Croutons
    Asparagus Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Cream Crisps
    Crescents
    Stewed Fruit
    White Custard in Cups

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Steamed Potato
    Green Peas
    Stewed Corn and Tomato
    Granola Fruit Mush
    Graham Gems
    Cream Crisps
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Banana Dessert


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Rye
    Grape Toast
    Macaroni with Cream Sauce
    Crescents
    Fruit Rolls
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato Soup with Vermicelli
    Stewed Asparagus
    Mashed Peas
    Rice with Raisins
    Graham Biscuit
    Fruit Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Nuts


    TWENTY-FOURTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush with Figs
    Gravy Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Roasted Almonds
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Vegetable Broth with Croutons
    Baked Potato
    Asparagus Points
    Cauliflower with Tomato Sauce
    Rolled Rye
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Meringue


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Fruit Mush
    Cream Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Fruit Crackers
    Fresh Strawberries

    DINNER

    Asparagus Soup
    Scalloped Potatoes
    Spinach with Cream
    Stewed Corn
    Cottage Cheese
    Pearl Barley
    Sticks
    Graham Gems
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Custard


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Gruel with Croutons
    Snowflake Toast
    Graham Puff
    Toasted Wafers
    Breakfast Rolls
    Strawberries

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Stewed Potatoes
    Asparagus with Green Peas
    Scalloped Tomato
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Currant Puffs
    Stewed or Fresh Berries
    Oatmeal Blancmange with Fruit Sauce


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Browned Rice
    Tomato Toast
    Boiled Macaroni
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Breakfast Rolls
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lentil Soup
    Mashed Potatoes
    Green Peas
    Macaroni Baked with Granola
    Graham Grits
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Crisps
    Fresh or Stewed Berries
    Bread Custard


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Plum Porridge
    Gravy Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Rolls
    Strawberries

    DINNER

    Plain Rice Soup
    Potato Cakes
    Mashed Split Peas
    Stewed Corn and Tomato
    Pearl Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Strawberry Shortcake


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Fresh Berry Toast
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Graham Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Lettuce
    Fresh or Stewed Berries

    DINNER

    Corn and Bean Soup
    Baked Potato
    Boiled Macaroni
    Asparagus with Egg Sauce
    Rolled Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Rye Gems
    Strawberries
    Lemon Cornstarch Pudding


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Prune Toast
    Graham Raised Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Cream Rolls
    Cup Custard
    Strawberries

    DINNER

    Green Pea Soup
    Canned Okra and Tomato
    Stewed Asparagus
    Rice
    Fruit Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Strawberries
    Sliced Pineapple


    TWENTY-FIFTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine Flakes
    Fresh Berry Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Plain Rice Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Mashed Peas
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Rolled Wheat
    Graham Bread
    Sally Lunn Gems
    Sticks
    Stewed Fruit
    Gooseberry Tart



    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Rye
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Lettuce
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Sticks
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed or Fresh Berries

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Potato Cakes
    Spinach
    Scalloped Tomato
    Boiled Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Rye Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Strawberries
    Molded Rice with Strawberry Sauce


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush
    Prune Toast
    Cream Rolls
    Fruit Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Lettuce
    Strawberries

    DINNER

    Swiss Potato Soup
    Boiled Potato with Tomato Cream Sauce
    Green Peas
    Macaroni with Kornlet
    Molded Wheat with Fruit Sauce
    Fruit Bread
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Cherries on Stems


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits Gruel with Croutons
    Gravy Toast
    Rice with Lentil Gravy
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Macaroni Soup
    Baked Potato
    String Beans
    Asparagus with Egg Sauce
    Baked Barley
    Currant Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Strawberries
    Slice Pineapple


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Browned Rice
    Grape Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Cream Rolls
    Lettuce
    Fresh or Stewed Berries

    DINNER

    Swiss Lentil Soup
    Baked Potato
    Green Peas
    Summer Squash
    Farina with Bananas
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Gems
    Strawberry Shortcake


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Cream Toast
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Cottage Cheese
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Green Pea Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Scalloped Cauliflower
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Graham Grits
    Toasted Wafers
    Currant Puffs
    Oatmeal Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Blancmange with Cocoanut Sauce


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Fruit Mush
    Snowflake Toast
    Beaten Biscuit
    Date Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Strawberries

    DINNER

    Canned Corn Soup
    Potato Cakes
    String Beans
    Rice
    Date Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Strawberry Pie


    TWENTY-SIXTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Fruit Mush
    Strawberry Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    String Bean Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Mashed Peas
    Chopped Cabbage
    Boiled Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Cream Crisps
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Tapioca Dessert with Strawberries

    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Plum Porridge
    Gravy Toast
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Cream Crisps
    Lettuce
    Breakfast Rolls and Currant Jelly

    DINNER

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Baked Potato
    Summer Squash
    Browned Cauliflower
    Pearl Wheat
    Crusts
    White Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Strawberry Sandwich

    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush
    Cherry Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    White Bread
    Graham Crackers
    Strawberries

    DINNER

    Potato Soup
    Green Peas
    Mashed Lentils
    Lettuce
    Browned Rice
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Rye Gems
    Graham Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Cherry Tart

    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits
    Fresh Berry Toast
    Graham Crisps
    Graham Bread
    French Rolls
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Potato Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Cauliflower with Tomato Sauce
    Macaroni Baked with Granola
    Cracked Wheat with Raisins
    Graham Bread
    Cream Mush Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Blancmange

    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Fig Sauce
    Snowflake Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Vermicelli Soup
    Broiled Potato
    Succotash
    Summer Squash
    Pearl Barley
    Cream Rolls
    Crusts
    Zwieback
    Graham Bread
    Rice Cream Pudding

    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine Flakes
    Prune Toast
    Cottage Cheese
    Cream Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Boiled Potato
    Mashed Split Peas
    Scalloped Tomato
    Farina with Banana
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Strawberry Minute Pudding

    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Banana Toast
    Currant Buns
    Toasted Wafers
    Breakfast Rolls
    Strawberries

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Stewed Potato
    String Beans
    Rice
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Cream Rolls
    Stewed Fruit
    Fresh Cherries
    Banana Dessert


    TWENTY-SEVENTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush
    Cream Toast
    Boiled Macaroni
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Rolls
    Fresh or Stewed Berries

    DINNER

    Potato Soup with Vermicelli
    Mashed Potato
    Beet Greens
    Pease Cakes with Tomato Sauce
    Pearl Wheat
    White Bread
    Graham Crisps
    Currant Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Prune Whip


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Boiled Wheat
    Fresh Berry Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Breakfast Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Roasted Almonds
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Broiled Potatoes
    Summer Squash
    Cauliflower with Tomato Sauce
    Graham Grits
    Graham Bread
    Crusts
    Fruit Crackers
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed or Fresh Berries
    Fruit Shape


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice
    Snowflake Toast
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Fruit Rolls
    Fresh Berries

    DINNER

    Lentil Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Green Peas
    Scalloped Tomatoes
    Browned Rice
    Fruit Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Fresh Cherries


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Tomato Toast
    Toasted Fruit Rolls
    Graham Puffs
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Macaroni Soup
    Beets and Potato
    String Beans
    Pearl Barley
    Pop Overs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Fresh or Stewed Fruit
    Gooseberry Tart


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cracked Wheat Porridge with Croutons
    Macaroni with Raisins
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Breakfast Rolls
    Graham Crackers
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Baked Potato
    Spinach
    Green Peas
    Cracked Wheat
    Rye Puffs
    Oatmeal Bread
    Graham Crisps
    Fruit Foam


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine
    Fresh Berry Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Crisps
    Roasted Almonds
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Green Pea Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Stewed Dried or Fresh Corn
    Rice
    Oatmeal Bread
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Strawberry Shortcake


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Fruit Mush
    Gravy Toast
    Fruit Rolls
    Raised Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Baked Bananas

    DINNER

    Tomato and Vermicelli Soup
    Broiled Potato
    Macaroni with Cream Sauce
    Browned Rice
    Beaten Biscuit
    Fruit Rolls
    Strawberries
    Nuts


    TWENTY-EIGHTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Raisins
    Cherry Toast
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed or Fresh Berries

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Baked Potatoes with Tomato Cream Sauce
    Summer Squash
    Green Peas
    Cracked Wheat
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice and Strawberry Dessert



    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Gravy Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Green Pea Soup
    Macaroni Baked with Granola
    String Beans
    Lettuce
    Boiled Wheat
    Cream Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Berry Sandwich (prepared like Apple Sandwich)


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Rye
    Fresh Berry Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Cup Custard
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Macaroni Soup
    Creamed Potato
    Mashed Peas
    Cottage Cheese
    Pearly Wheat
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Crusts
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Fruit Mold


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Molded Rice with Fresh Berries
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Graham Raised Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Beet Greens
    Stewed Dried Corn
    Graham Grits
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Vienna Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Fruit Tapioca


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Plum Porridge
    Snowflake Toast
    Vienna Bread
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Lettuce
    Stewed or Fresh Berries

    DINNER

    Potato and Sago Soup
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Radishes
    Boiled Macaroni
    Hominy
    Cream Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Berry Shortcake with Prepared Cream


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Fruit Mush
    Tomato Toast
    French Rolls
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lentil Soup
    Mashed Potato
    String Beans
    Canned Kornlet
    Cream Rolls
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Red Sago Mold


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine
    Prune Toast
    Fruit Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Steamed Figs
    Cottage Cheese
    Stewed or Fresh Berries

    DINNER

    String Bean Soup
    Macaroni with Egg Sauce
    New Beets with Lemon Dressing
    Rice
    Beaten Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Plain Buns
    Stewed Fruit
    Fruit and Nuts


    TWENTY-NINTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Brewis
    Tomato Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Potato Soup
    Mashed Peas
    Beet Greens
    Pearl Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Buns
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Banana Dessert


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Fresh Tomato Salad
    Graham Crisps
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Steamed Potato
    String Beans
    Baked Cabbage
    Graham Grits
    Graham Crisps
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Pop Overs
    Stewed Fruit
    Cream Rice Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush
    Strawberry Toast
    Graham Crisps
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Molded Rice with Currant Sauce

    DINNER

    Lentil Soup
    New Beets and Potato
    Summer Squash
    Green Peas
    Farina
    Crusts
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Fresh Berries
    Stewed Fruit Pudding


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Snowflake Toast
    Rice with Lentil Gravy
    Graham Raised Biscuits
    Breakfast Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Fresh or Stewed Berries

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Scalloped Egg Plant
    Cauliflower with Tomato Sauce
    Molded Wheat with Fruit Sauce
    Cream Rolls
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed or Fresh Berries
    Raspberry Manioca Pudding


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Gravy Toast
    Cream Rolls
    Currant Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Radishes
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    String Bean Soup
    Scalloped Potato
    Baked Beets
    Spinach
    Boiled Wheat with Lemon Sauce
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Gems
    Fresh Berries
    Prune Dessert


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Gruel with Croutons
    Fresh Berry Toast
    Fruit Crackers
    Breakfast Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Stewed or Fresh Berries

    DINNER

    Green Pea Soup
    Creamed Potato
    Cabbage Salad
    Macaroni baked with Granola
    Rolled Rye
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Beaten Biscuit
    Berry Pie


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Fresh Black Raspberry Toast
    Graham Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Cup Custard

    DINNER

    Tomato and Macaroni Soup
    Stewed Potato
    String Beans
    Boiled Wheat with Raisins
    Fruit Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Fresh Berries
    Bananas


    THIRTIETH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Farina with Bananas
    Gravy Toast
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Fruit Rolls
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Stewed or Fresh Berries

    DINNER

    Baked Bean Soup
    Stewed Potato
    Green Peas
    Lettuce
    Graham Grits
    Graham Puffs
    Cream Crisps
    Black Raspberries
    Rice Custard Shape

    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Banana Toast
    Graham Gems
    Sticks
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed or Fresh Berries

    DINNER

    Velvet Soup
    Baked Potato
    Mashed Peas
    Macaroni with Tomato
    Pearl Wheat
    Currant Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Vienna Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Blancmange with Raspberry Juice

    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cracked Wheat
    Fresh Raspberry Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Parker House Rolls
    Lettuce
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Browned Potatoes
    Chopped Cabbage
    Green Corn
    Rice
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Black Raspberry Shortcake

    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Crisps
    Cup Custard
    Fresh Berries

    DINNER

    Black Bean Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Mashed Turnip
    String Beans
    Graham Mush
    Graham Bread
    Cream Rolls
    Pop Overs
    Stewed Fruit
    Raspberry Tapioca


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits
    Cream Toast
    Fresh Tomatoes
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Cream Rolls
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Celery Soup No. 2
    Broiled Potato
    Beet Greens
    Scalloped Cauliflower
    Pearl Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Fruit Bread
    Fresh Berries
    Snow Pudding

    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Plum Porridge
    Prune Toast
    Cottage Cheese
    Cream Rolls
    Fruit Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed or Fresh Berries

    DINNER

    Lima Bean Soup
    Steamed Potato
    Boiled Beets
    Scalloped Egg Plant
    Cracked What
    Fruit Bread
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit Pudding

    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Rye
    Fresh Berry Toast
    Beaten Biscuit
    Graham Puffs
    Cup Custard
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Green Corn Soup
    Mashed Peas
    Cold Boiled Beets, Sliced
    Rice with Raisins
    Buns
    Beaten Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Nuts
    Fresh or Stewed Fruit


    THIRTY-FIRST WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Browned Rice
    Snowflake Toast
    Macaroni with Raisins
    Graham Crackers
    Graham Puffs
    Buns
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Potato Rice
    Baked Corn
    Celery
    Graham Grits
    Currant Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed or Fresh Fruit
    Red Rice Mold


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Gravy Toast
    Boiled Macaroni with Cottage Cheese
    Graham Bread
    Rye Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Brown Soup
    Baked Potatoes
    Green Peas
    Beet Greens
    Boiled Wheat
    Graham Biscuit
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed or Fresh Berries
    Rice Custard Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush with Dates
    Cream Toast
    Graham Puffs
    Sticks
    Pulled Bread
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Mashed Potato
    String Beans
    Summer Squash
    Cracked Wheat with Whortleberries
    Pulled Bread
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Watermelon


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Tomato Toast
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Stewed or Fresh Berried
    Cream Graham Rolls with Raspberry Jelly

    DINNER

    String Bean Soup
    Stewed Split Peas
    Beets and Potato
    Pearl Wheat
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Rolls
    Rye Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Whortleberry Pudding


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits
    Celery Toast
    Graham Gems
    Cream Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Fresh Berries

    DINNER

    Swiss Potato Soup
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Lettuce
    Boiled Macaroni
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Rolls
    Fruit Crackers
    Fresh Berries
    Fruit Tapioca


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Lemon
    Fresh Berry Toast
    Cream Mush Rolls
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Potato Soup
    Green Corn Pulp
    Stewed Potato
    Chopped Turnip
    Graham Grits
    Pop Overs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Fresh Berries
    Cream Rice Pudding
    Stewed Fruit


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cracked Wheat with Blueberries
    Prune Toast
    Graham Crisps
    Raised Biscuit
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Green or Canned Pea Soup
    Creamed Potato
    Kornlet
    Celery
    Graham Grits
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Fruit Rolls
    Stewed Fruit
    Fresh Fruit


    THIRTY-SECOND WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush
    Fresh Black Raspberry Toast
    Fresh Tomatoes
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Fruit Rolls
    Stewed or Fresh Berries

    DINNER

    Cream Rice Soup
    Boiled Potato with Brown Sauce
    Green Corn Pulp
    String Beans
    Pearl Wheat with Whortleberries
    Graham Gems
    Cream Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Raspberry Manioca Pudding


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits
    Gravy Toast
    Lettuce
    Breakfast Rolls
    Whortleberry Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Fresh or Stewed Berries

    DINNER

    Green Corn Soup
    Beets and Potato
    Scalloped Egg Plant
    Boiled Wheat
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Crusts
    Stewed or Fresh Berries
    Whortleberry Pie


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Fresh Tomatoes
    Graham Puffs
    Breakfast Rolls
    Stewed or Fresh Berries
    Raspberry Jelly

    DINNER

    Tomato Cream Soup
    Potato Rice
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Radishes
    Green Corn Pudding
    Graham Mush with Berries
    Graham Gems
    Oatmeal Crisps
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Cream Rice Pudding


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Tomato Toast
    Oatmeal Crisps
    Graham Bread
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lima Bean Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Scalloped Cauliflower
    Mashed Peas
    Graham Grits
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Whortleberry Gems
    Stewed or Fresh Fruit
    Molded Tapioca


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits Gruel with Croutons
    Fresh Berry Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Breakfast Rolls
    Lettuce
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Fresh Berries

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Cracked Potato
    Scalloped Turnip
    Beet Greens
    Cracked Wheat with Blackberries
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Rolls
    Crusts
    Fresh or Stewed Fruit
    Banana Dessert


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush with Blueberries
    Gravy Toast
    Fresh Tomatoes
    French Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Puffs
    Fresh or Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Vegetable Broth
    Baked Potato
    Summer Squash
    Boiled Beets, sliced, with Cream Sauce
    Pearl Barley
    Graham Bread
    Whortleberry Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Fresh Berries
    Damsons


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Blackberry Mush
    Prune Toast
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Fresh Berries

    DINNER

    Tomato and Vermicelli Soup
    Stewed Potato
    Cold Sliced Beets
    Green Corn Pulp
    Rice
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Beaten Biscuit
    Stewed Fruit
    Blackberry Pie


    THIRTY-THIRD WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine Flakes
    Snowflake Toast
    Beaten Biscuit
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Fresh Berries

    DINNER

    Green Pea Soup
    Scalloped Potato
    Boiled Corn
    Cauliflower with Egg Sauce
    Graham Grits
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Sliced Peaches
    Nuts

    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Rye
    Cream Toast
    Whortleberry Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Cream Rolls
    Fresh Blackberries

    DINNER

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Baked Potato
    String Beans
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Farina with Banana
    Cream Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Plums and Peaches


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Peaches
    Blackberry Toast
    Fresh Tomatoes
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Sticks
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    String Bean Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Baked Green Corn
    Scalloped Egg Plant
    Graham Grits
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Fresh Fruit

    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Blackberry Mush
    Tomato Toast
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Raised Graham Biscuit
    Fresh Berries

    DINNER

    Celery Soup No. 2
    Boiled Potato
    Macaroni baked with Granola
    Succotash
    Browned Rice
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Blackberry Cornstarch Pudding

    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal Porridge
    Berry Toast
    Beaten Biscuit
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Brown Soup
    Scalloped Potato
    Chopped Cabbage
    Mashed Peas
    Rice
    Graham Bread
    Sticks
    Stewed or Fresh Berries
    Bread Custard

    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Apple Mush
    Gravy Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Fruit Rolls
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Boiled Potatoes
    Green Corn
    Sliced Tomatoes
    Cracked Wheat with Blackberries
    Graham Bread
    Fruit Rolls
    Rye Gems
    Sliced Peaches
    Pears

    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Prune Toast
    Sliced Tomatoes
    Fruit Bread
    Cream Crisps
    Stewed or Sliced Peaches

    DINNER

    Green Corn Soup
    Boiled Macaroni
    Stewed Tomatoes
    Rice
    Fruit Bread
    Cream Crisps
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed or Fresh Fruit
    Blackberry or Peach Pie


    THIRTY-FOURTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Blackberry Mush
    Gravy Toast
    Graham Puffs
    Fruit Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato Cream Soup
    Potato Snowballs
    Stewed Corn
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Rolled Wheat
    Rye Puffs
    Cream Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Sliced Peaches
    Nuts


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal Porridge
    Cream Toast
    Sliced Tomato
    Graham Crisps
    Graham Bread
    Rye Gems
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lima Bean Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Summer Squash
    Baked Beets with Lemon Dressing
    Pearl Barley
    Graham Bread
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed or Fresh Berries
    Peach Tapioca


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Tomato Toast
    Cottage Cheese
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Oatmeal Soup
    Broiled Potato
    Scalloped Tomatoes
    Green Corn Pulp
    Graham Grits
    French Rolls
    Cream Crisps
    Fresh Fruit
    Sliced Sweet Apples and Cream


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Rye
    Peach Toast
    Macaroni with Corn Pulp
    Fresh Tomatoes
    Cream Rolls
    Vienna Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    String Bean Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Scalloped Egg Plant
    Cabbage and Tomato
    Pearl Wheat
    Toasted Wafers
    Beaten Biscuit
    Vienna Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Fruit Shape

    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Peach Mush
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Celery
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Cream Rolls
    Graham Crackers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    White Celery Soup
    Steamed Potato
    Chopped Beets
    Mashed Peas
    Farina with Bananas
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Cream Rolls
    Rye Puffs
    Sliced Peaches
    Baked Apple Dessert


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits
    Berry Toast
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Fresh Tomatoes
    Currant Puffs
    Toasted Rolls
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Baked Potato
    Stewed Celery
    Cauliflower with Tomato Sauce
    Boiled Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Crackers
    Crescents
    Stewed Fruit
    Sago Fruit Pudding


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Steamed Rice
    Tomato Toast
    Fruit Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Breakfast Rolls
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Creamed Potato
    Green Peas
    Pearl Wheat
    Fruit Bread
    Rolls
    Graham Crackers
    Sliced Peaches
    Nuts
    Tapioca Custard


    THIRTY-FIFTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush with dates
    Sliced Tomatoes
    Macaroni with Egg Sauce
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Cream Rolls
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Baked Bean Soup
    Steamed Potato
    Stewed Tomato
    Mashed Split Peas
    Rolled Rye
    Graham Bread
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Peach Shortcake


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Peach Mush
    Cream Toast
    Sliced Tomatoes
    Graham Bread
    Graham Crisps
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Celery Soup No. 2.
    Boiled Potato
    Shelled Beans
    Cauliflower with Tomato Sauce
    Graham Grits
    Graham Bread
    Oatmeal Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Baked Sweet Apples with Whipped Cream


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Tomato Toast
    Macaroni Baked with Corn Pulp
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Rice Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Stewed Celery
    Mashed Lentils and Beans
    Rolled Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Peach Meringue


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Peach Mush
    Snowflake Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Sticks
    Date Bread
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Black Bean Soup
    Potato Snowballs
    Corn and Tomatoes
    Scalloped Egg Plant
    Cracked Wheat
    Date Bread
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Grapes


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Peach Toast
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Breakfast Rolls
    Graham Gems
    Baked Pears
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Macaroni Soup
    Boiled Potato
    Baked Corn
    Celery
    Pearl Barley
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Peach Shortcake


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine Flakes
    Strawberry Toast
    Macaroni with Cream Sauce
    Sliced Tomato
    Graham Puffs
    Parker House Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Potato Soup
    Baked Sweet Potato
    Mashed Peas
    Cauliflower with Egg Sauce
    Graham Grits
    Granola
    Fruit Rolls
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Cream Pudding


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat with Blackberries and Cream
    Prune Toast
    Fruit Rolls
    Raised Graham Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Fresh Tomatoes
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Mashed Sweet Potato
    String Beans
    Pearl Wheat with Peaches and Cream
    Buns
    Cream Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Nuts


    THIRTY-SIXTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush
    Blackberry Toast
    Sliced Tomato
    Currant Puffs
    Cream Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Sweet Potato Soup
    Steamed Potato
    Boiled Beets
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Rolled Wheat
    Buns
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Peach Sandwich


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Apricot Toast
    Zwieback
    Graham Puffs
    Breakfast Rolls
    Lemon Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lima Bean Soup
    Potato Stewed with Celery
    Mashed Squash
    Scalloped Tomatoes
    Farina
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Gems
    Sliced Peaches
    Bran Jelly with Fruit Sauce


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Apple Mush
    Blueberry Toast
    Cream Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Sliced Tomatoes
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Corn and Bean Soup
    Baked Potato
    Stewed Tomato
    Scalloped Cauliflower
    Pearl Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Rolls
    Corn Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Custard


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Tomato Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Rice Soup
    Baked Sweet Potato
    Mashed Beans
    Green Peas
    Graham Grits
    Oatmeal Bread
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Sliced Peaches
    Red Rice


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cracked Wheat
    Banana Toast
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Oatmeal Bread
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Celery Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Baked Tomato
    Baked Green Corn
    Graham Grits
    Graham Bread
    Sticks
    Rye Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Baked Apple Dessert


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice
    Cream Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Corn Cakes
    Sticks
    Sliced Tomatoes
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Potato and Rice Soup
    Macaroni Baked with Granola
    Mashed Cabbage
    String Beans
    Pearl Wheat
    Pop Overs
    Cream Crisps
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Almonds


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Tomato Toast
    Toasted Wafers
    Fruit Rolls
    Raised Biscuit
    Baked Pears
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Green Corn Soup
    Tomato and Macaroni
    Stewed Potato
    Rolled Wheat
    Fruit Bread
    Cream Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Peach Pie
    Grapes


    THIRTY-SEVENTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine Flakes
    Toast with Egg Sauce
    Fruit Bread
    Breakfast Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Sliced Peaches

    DINNER

    Green Bean Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Baked Squash
    Corn Pudding
    Graham Grits
    Graham Bread
    Currant Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Peach Shortcake


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Peach Mush
    Tomato Toast
    Macaroni with Kornlet
    Graham Bread
    Cream Mush Rolls
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Baked Potato
    Shelled Beans
    Cauliflower with Tomato Sauce
    Browned Rice
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Whole-wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Jam Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal Porridge
    Peach Toast
    Sliced Tomato
    Graham Crisps
    Graham Gems
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Scalloped Potato
    Beet Salad
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Rice
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Molded Wheat with Grape Sauce


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits
    Dry Toast with Tomato Gravy
    Whole-Wheat Bread Crusts
    Breakfast Rolls
    Baked Pears
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    White Celery Soup
    Baked Sweet Potato
    Mashed Peas
    Scalloped Tomatoes
    Pearl Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Graham Crackers
    Stewed Fruit
    Cocoanut Rice Custard


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Macaroni with Apple Sauce
    Sliced Tomato
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lentil Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Baked Squash
    String Beans
    Rolled Rye
    Whole-Wheat Bread Crusts
    Graham Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Peach Pudding or Fresh Fruit

    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush with Fruit
    Gravy Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Crescents
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Split Pea Soup
    Baked Potato
    Baked Tomato
    Green Corn Pulp
    Rice
    Fruit Loaf
    Graham Gems Sticks
    Stewed Fruit
    Sweet Apple Pie or Fresh Fruit


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Peach Toast
    Sliced Tomato
    Baked Pears
    Fruit Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Green Corn Soup
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Mashed Sweet Potato
    Rice with Peaches
    Beaten Biscuit
    Currant Buns
    Stewed Fruit
    Pears


    THIRTY-EIGHTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Peach Mush
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Fruit Bread
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Tapioca Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Stewed Celery
    Baked Squash
    Rolled Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Currant Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Peach Tapioca


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Rye
    Lentil Toast
    Sliced Tomato
    Cream Rolls
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lentil Soup
    Potato Snowballs
    Stewed Tomato
    Egg and Macaroni
    Browned Rice
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Rolls
    Crusts
    Stewed Fruit
    Plain Fruit Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Sweet Apple Toast
    Cottage Cheese
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    French Rolls
    Graham Crisps
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Plain Rice Soup
    Baked Potato with Celery Sauce
    Shelled Beans
    Baked Corn
    Farina with Fresh Fruit
    Graham Puffs
    Oatmeal Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Fresh Fruit, or Sweet Apple Pudding


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Peaches
    Tomato Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Oatmeal Crisps
    Breakfast Rolls
    Sliced Peaches

    DINNER

    Shelled Bean Soup
    Mashed Sweet Potato
    Scalloped Tomatoes
    Celery
    Pearl Wheat
    Toasted Rolls
    Buns
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Manioca


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Strawberry Toast
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Rye Gems
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Oatmeal Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Mashed Squash
    Boiled Macaroni
    Browned Rice
    Graham Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Fruit Crackers
    Stewed Fruit
    Cup Custard


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine
    Macaroni with Raisins
    Slice Tomatoes
    Cream Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Brown Soup
    Boiled Potato
    Stewed Celery
    Pease Cakes with Tomato Sauce
    Graham Grits
    Raised Biscuit
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Grape Tart


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice
    Grape Toast
    Fruit Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Vermicelli Soup
    Mashed Sweet Potato
    Stewed Corn
    Boiled Wheat
    Fruit Bread
    Beaten Biscuits
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Blancmange with Grape Sauce


    THIRTY-NINTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Fruit Mush
    Gravy Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Tomato Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Boiled Green Corn
    String Beans
    Rolled Wheat
    Toasted Wafers
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Corn Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Stewed Fruit Pudding


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Peach Mush
    Snowflake Toast
    Graham Puffs
    Cream Rolls
    Baked Pears
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Green Bean Soup
    Potato Cakes
    Stewed Tomato
    Baked Beets
    Cracked Wheat
    Pop Overs
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Bread Custard


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Tomato Toast
    Graham Bread
    Corn Puffs
    Graham Crisps
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Mixed Potato Soup
    Baked Potato
    Chopped Beets
    Succotash
    Graham Grits
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Rye Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Cracked Wheat Pudding


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Plum Porridge
    Cream Toast
    Cottage Cheese
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Stewed Celery
    Corn Pudding
    Rolled Wheat
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Buns
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice and Tapioca Pudding


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Tomato Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Raised Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Sour Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Green Corn Soup
    Steamed Potato
    Mashed Squash
    Scalloped Turnip
    Rolled Wheat
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Lemon Cornstarch Pudding


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal Gruel with Croutons
    Grape Toast
    Macaroni with Kornlet
    Cream Rolls
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Swiss Potato Soup
    Creamed Potato
    Celery
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Cracked Wheat
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Rolls
    Fruit Crackers
    Stewed Fruit
    Snowball Custard


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Peaches
    Apricot Toast
    Toasted Wafers
    Fruit Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Chopped Sweet Potato
    Sliced Tomato
    Rice
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Fruit Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Grape Pie


    FORTIETH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Grape Mush
    Cream Toast
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Rolls
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Potato and Vermicelli Soup
    Boiled Macaroni
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Boiled Corn
    Cracked Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Corn Cakes
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Cornstarch Meringue


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Celery Toast
    Baked Sweet Potatoes
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Tomato Salad

    DINNER

    Lima Bean Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Scalloped Tomatoes
    Green Corn Cakes
    Mixed Mush
    Sally Lunn Gems
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Snow


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice
    Tomato Toast
    Graham Crisps
    Raised Biscuit
    Grape Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Brown Soup
    Potato Snowballs
    Stewed Split Peas
    Scalloped Cauliflower
    Graham Grits
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Graham Crisps
    Corn Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Blancmange with Grape Sauce


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Apple Mush
    Grape Toast
    Cream Rolls
    Rye Gems
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Cup Custard
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Baked Potato
    Baked Squash
    Boiled Beets with Cream Sauce
    Pearl Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Sticks
    Raised Corn Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Nuts


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Rye
    Gravy Toast
    Oatmeal Crisps
    Corn Bread
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Vegetable Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Scalloped Egg Plant
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Farina
    Stewed Fruit
    Almond Cornstarch Pudding with Grape Sauce


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Grape Mush
    Cream Toast
    Fruit Bread
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Granola
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Baked Bean Soup
    Potato Rice
    Mashed Squash
    Boiled Green Corn
    Graham Mush
    Fruit Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Sandwich


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Fig Sauce
    Peach Toast
    Sliced Tomato
    Fruit Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Vermicelli Soup
    Mashed Sweet Potato
    Green Corn Pulp
    Boiled Wheat
    Fruit Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Grape Tarts
    Stewed Fruit


    FORTY-FIRST WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Browned Rice
    Grape Toast
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Graham Puffs
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Corn and Tomato Soup
    Sweet Potato Cakes
    Shelled Beans
    Macaroni Baked with Granola
    Farina
    Graham Puffs
    Zwieback
    Cream Rolls
    Stewed Fruit
    Fresh Fruit


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Apple Mush
    Gravy Toast
    Sliced Tomato
    Toasted Rolls
    Corn Dodgers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Shelled Bean Soup
    Baked Potato with Brown Sauce
    Chopped Cabbage
    Baked Tomato
    Pearl Barley
    Graham Puffs
    Sticks
    Rye Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Cream Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal Porridge
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Rye Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Puffs
    Baked Sour Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Rice Soup
    Steamed Potato with Cream Sauce
    Baked Squash
    Mashed Peas
    Graham Apple Mush
    Rye Bread
    Zwieback
    Graham Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Fresh Fruit


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush with dates
    Gravy Toast
    Rye Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Corn Puffs
    Lemon Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Scalloped Potato
    Chopped Turnip
    Macaroni Baked with Kornlet
    Steamed Rice
    Toasted Wafers
    Currant Puffs
    Rye Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Cornmeal Pudding


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Rye
    Tomato Toast
    Graham Bread
    Breakfast Rolls
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Swiss Potato Soup
    Baked Beans
    Boiled Macaroni
    Boiled Wheat
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice and Tapioca Pudding


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Lentil Gravy
    Gravy Toast
    Sliced Tomato
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Corn and Bean Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Scalloped Tomato
    Stewed Celery
    Cracked Wheat
    Graham Bread
    Zwieback
    Crusts
    Stewed Fruit
    Graham Grits Pudding


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Grape Toast
    Graham Raised Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Breakfast Rolls
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Cup Custard
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Macaroni Soup
    Broiled Potato
    Stewed Corn
    Browned Rice
    Graham Biscuit
    Beaten Biscuit
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Pie


    FORTY-SECOND WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine Flakes
    Gravy Toast
    Caked Peas
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Celery Soup
    Boiled Potato with Tomato Cream Sauce
    Baked Cauliflower
    Shelled Beans
    Graham Grits
    Currant Puffs
    Cream Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Tapioca Grape Jelly


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Tomato Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Rolls
    Bakes Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Potato Soup
    Mashed Peas
    Mashed Cabbage
    Cracked Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Cream Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush
    Grape Toast
    Cream Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Gems
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Steamed Potato
    Boiled Beets
    Celery
    Tomato and Macaroni
    Rice
    Parker House Rolls
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Cracked Wheat Pudding


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Steamed Rice with Grape Sauce
    Prune Toast
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Crusts
    Baked Pears
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Swiss Lentil Soup
    Baked Potato
    Baked Squash
    Chopped Cabbage
    Boiled Wheat
    Graham Bread
    Rye Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Snowballs


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Lentil Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Macaroni Soup
    Baked Sweet Potato
    Stewed Celery
    Boiled Green Corn
    Rolled Rye
    Graham Bread
    Currant Puffs
    Sticks
    Stewed Fruit
    Molded Wheat with Grape Sauce


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal Gruel with Croutons
    Tomato Toast
    Graham Crisps
    Graham Bread
    Pop Overs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Green Corn Soup
    Chopped Potato
    Baked Beans
    Mashed Squash
    Farina
    Cream Mush Rolls
    Vienna Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Stewed Fruit Pudding


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cracked Wheat with Raisins
    Prune Toast
    Vienna Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Toasted Rolls
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Potato Soup
    Stewed Corn
    Boiled Macaroni
    Granola Fruit Mush
    Buns
    Beaten Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Nuts
    Fresh Fruit


    FORTY-THIRD WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Stewed Fruit
    Granola Apple Mush
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Celery Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Scalloped Tomato
    Mashed Peas
    Graham Grits
    Corn Puffs
    Cream Crisps
    Graham Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Fresh Fruit


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Tomato Toast
    Cream Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Graham Gems
    Grape Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Baked Potatoes with Brown Sauce
    Shelled Beans
    Corn and Tomato
    Graham Grits
    Toasted Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Currant Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Bake Sweet Apples with Whipped Cream


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal Porridge with Croutons
    Grape Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Sticks
    Fruit Crackers
    Bake Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Plain Rice Soup
    Baked Potatoes with Celery Sauce
    Mashed Beans
    Parsnip with Cream Sauce
    Graham Grits
    Corn Bread
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Tart


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Gravy Toast
    Cream Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Tomato Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Chopped Beets
    Macaroni Baked with Granola
    Rice
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Graham Gems
    Cream Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Blancmange


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal Blancmange with Grape Sauce
    Sweet Apple Toast
    Corn Meal Gruel with Croutons
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Cream Crisps
    French Rolls
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato Cream Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Mashed Squash
    Baked Turnip
    Pearl Wheat with Raisins
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Graham Crisps
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Custard


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Rye
    Peach Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Pears
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Scalloped Potato
    Succotash
    Scalloped Tomato
    Graham Grits
    Graham Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Sticks
    Stewed Fruit
    Plain Fruit Pudding


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Fruit Mush
    Prune Toast
    Beaten Biscuit
    Buns
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Chestnuts
    Cup Custard
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Corn Soup
    Canned Green Peas
    Tomato and Macaroni
    Graham Grits
    Fruit Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Squash Pie


    FORTY-FOURTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Almonds with Wafers
    Cerealine
    Steamed Eggs
    Baked Potato
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Graham Gems
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Potato Soup
    Macaroni with Cream Sauce
    Mashed Beans
    Baked Corn
    Browned Rice
    Graham Bread
    Cream Crisps
    Graham Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Baked Sweet Apple Pudding


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Cream Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Cream Crisps
    Fruit Rolls
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Tomato Soup
    Potato Rice
    Mashed Squash
    Stewed Celery
    Cracked Wheat
    Graham Puffs
    Fruit Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Macaroni Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Peach Mush
    Snowflake Toast
    Macaroni with Kornlet
    Cream Mush Rolls
    Fruit Loaf
    Graham Crackers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Oatmeal Soup
    Potato Cakes
    Celery
    Cauliflower with Tomato Sauce
    Hominy
    Fruit Loaf
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Snow Pudding


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cracked Wheat
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Hominy Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Cottage Cheese
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Black Bean Soup
    Potato Snowballs
    Scalloped Tomato
    Parsnip with Egg Sauce
    Rolled Wheat
    Corn Puffs
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Cream Crisps
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Blancmange


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits
    Berry Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Crescents
    Granola
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Carrots with Egg Sauce
    Scalloped Beans
    Rice
    Graham Bread
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Prune and Tapioca Pudding


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat with Baked Apples
    Gravy Toast
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Cream Rolls and Crab Apple Jelly
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Macaroni Soup
    Baked Sweet Potato
    Stewed Celery
    Shelled Beans
    Pearl Barley with Raisins
    Graham Bread
    Corn Cake
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Tapioca Custard


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Blackberry Toast
    Beaten Biscuits
    Fruit Bread
    Lemon Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Plain Rice Soup
    Warmed-over Sweet Potato
    Stewed Corn
    Boiled Wheat
    Graham Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Nuts


    FORTY-FIFTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal Porridge
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Corn Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Fruit Loaf
    Roasted Almonds
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Vegetable Soup
    Steamed Potatoes with Tomato Cream Sauce
    Stewed Cabbage
    Mashed Squash
    Pearl Wheat
    Graham Bread
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Sago Pudding


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Samp and Milk
    Gravy Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Hoe Cake
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Swiss Lentil Soup
    Mashed Potatoes
    Celery and Tomato
    Turnip with Cream Sauce
    Oatmeal Crisps
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Grits
    Stewed Fruit
    Baked Corn Meal Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Banana Toast
    Breakfast Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Granola
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Swiss Potato Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Mashed Peas
    Broccoli with Egg Sauce
    Cracked Wheat with Raisins
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Nuts


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Plum Porridge
    Berry Toast
    Graham Crackers
    Hoe Cake
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Macaroni Soup
    Boiled Potato with Celery Sauce
    Baked Beets
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Farina
    Raised Corn Cake
    Toasted Wafers
    Cream Rolls
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Tart


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Fig Sauce
    Cream Toast
    Currant Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Browned Potatoes
    Succotash
    Steamed Squash
    Graham Grits
    Graham Bread
    Rye Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Custard


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Lentil Toast
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Cream Rolls
    Rye Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Roasted Almonds

    DINNER

    Potato Soup
    Potato Puff
    Browned Parsnips
    Celery
    Mashed Peas
    Rolled Wheat
    Rye Bread
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Crisps
    Apple Rose Cream


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Prune Toast
    Fruit Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    White Custard in Cups
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Stewed Potato
    Kornlet and Tomato
    Rice
    Rye Bread
    Buns
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Pie
    Fresh Fruit


    FORTY-SIXTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush with Dates
    Gravy Toast
    Rye Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Canned Green Pea Soup
    Scalloped Potatoes
    Baked Beans
    Macaroni with Egg
    Farina
    Pop Overs
    Toasted Wafers
    Rye Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Cream Pudding


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits
    Blackberry Toast
    Rice with Lentil Gravy
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Rye Bread
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Hominy Soup
    Boiled Potatoes
    Stewed Celery
    Creamed Parsnips
    Pearl Wheat
    Raised Corn Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Gems
    Stewed Fruit


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Samp and Milk
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Corn Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Breakfast Rolls
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Brown Soup
    Scalloped Potatoes
    Beet Salad
    Mashed Turnips
    Boiled Wheat
    Hoe Cake
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Cracked Wheat Pudding

    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Tomato Toast
    Rice and Corn Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Potato Soup
    Macaroni Baked with Granola
    Succotash
    Baked Squash
    Pearl Barley
    Pulled Bread
    Oatmeal Crisps
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Tart


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Celery Toast
    Baked Potato with Cream Sauce
    Corn Cakes
    Pulled Bread
    Oatmeal Crisps
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Baked Sweet Potato
    Scalloped Tomatoes
    Celery
    Pearl Wheat
    Rye Gems
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Bread Custard


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Mixed Mush
    Snowflake Toast
    Graham Bread
    Cream Rolls
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato Cream Soup
    Potatoes Stewed with Celery
    Parsnips with Egg Sauce
    Mashed Peas
    Oatmeal Blancmange with Cranberry Sauce
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Raised Corn Cake
    Stewed Fruit
    Nuts


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Fig Sauce
    Cream Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Buns
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Canned Corn Soup
    Canned Peas
    Macaroni with Egg Sauce
    Cracked Wheat
    Toasted Wafers
    Beaten Biscuit
    Fruit Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Cranberry Pie


    FORTY-SEVENTH WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Corn Meal Mush and Milk
    Gravy Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Fruit Bread
    Toasted Beaten Biscuit
    Baked Chestnuts
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Combination Soup
    Baked Potato with Brown Sauce
    Scalloped Turnips
    Mashed Squash
    Graham Grits
    Raised Corn Cake
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Tapioca

    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Gruel with Toasted Wafers
    Blueberry Toast
    Breakfast Rolls
    Corn Bread
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Swiss Potato Soup
    Baked Sweet Potato
    Mashed Beans
    Stewed Sweet Corn
    Cracked Wheat
    Toasted Rolls
    Pulled Bread
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Cream Pudding

    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat with Raisins
    Banana Toast
    Hoe Cake
    Toasted Wafers
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Vegetable Oyster Soup
    Boiled Potatoes with Tomato Cream Sauce
    Mashed Parsnips
    Mashed Lentils
    Graham Grits
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Bean Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Almonds


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Cream Toast
    Potato Cakes
    Celery
    Corn Bread
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Parsnip Soup
    Scalloped Potatoes
    Mashed Peas
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Steamed Rice
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Cup Custards


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal Porridge with Toasted Wafers
    Gravy Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Hoe Cakes
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Baked Potato
    Boiled Macaroni
    Stewed Cabbage and Tomato
    Graham Grits
    Zwieback
    Graham Bread
    Corn Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Rose Cream

    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Tomato toast
    Macaroni with Kornlet
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Rye Gems
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Plain Rice Soup
    Mashed Potatoes
    Baked Squash
    Scalloped Beans
    Graham Mush
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Oatmeal Crisps
    Graham Crusts
    Stewed Fruit
    Baked Apple Loaf


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Rye
    Prune Toast
    Beaten Biscuit
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Graham Crackers
    Grape Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lima Bean Soup
    Mashed Sweet Potatoes
    Scalloped Tomato
    Rice
    Fruit Bread
    Beaten Biscuit
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Blancmange


    FORTY-EIGHTH WEEK


    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mash with Dates
    Blackberry Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Fruit Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Green Pea Soup
    Boiled Potato with Cream Sauce
    Mashed Lima Beans
    Stewed Vegetable Oysters
    Graham Grits
    Corn Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Crusts
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Custard Pudding


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST
    Baked Chestnuts
    Samp and Milk
    Vegetable Oyster Toast
    Creamed Potatoes
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Bean and Tomato Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Stewed Split Peas
    Macaroni with Egg
    Cracked Wheat
    Parker House Rolls
    Sticks
    Corn Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    Prune Tapioca


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Prune Toast
    Graham Sticks
    Fruit Loaf
    Baked Apples
    Roasted Almonds
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Swiss Potato Soup
    Baked Potato
    Boiled Beets with Cream Sauce
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Rolled Wheat
    Fruit Loaf
    Rye Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Baked Apples with Whipped Cream


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Steamed Rice
    Lentil Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Crisps
    Fruit Bread

    DINNER

    Vegetable Oyster Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Parsnips with Egg Sauce
    Succotash
    Boiled Wheat with Lemon Sauce
    Graham Crisps
    Beaten Biscuit
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Cocoanut Blancmange
    Cranberry Jelly


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal Gruel with Croutons
    Tomato Toast
    Macaroni with Raisins
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Beaten Biscuit
    Stewed Fruit
    Baked Apples

    DINNER

    Cream Barley Soup
    Mashed Sweet Potato
    Mashed Peas
    Stewed Celery
    Hominy
    Cream Crisps
    Corn Cake
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Tart


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Apple Mush
    Tomato Toast
    Cream Crisps
    Graham Bread
    Hominy Gems
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea soup
    Boiled Potato
    Scalloped Tomatoes
    Mashed Squash
    Cracked Wheat with Raisins
    Graham Bread
    Rye Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Baked Apples with Cream Sauce


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Raisins
    Prune toast
    Toasted Wafers
    Crescents
    Graham Bread
    Baked Apples
    Cup Custards
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Macaroni Soup
    Canned Sweet Corn
    Cold Boiled Beets, Sliced
    Graham Grits
    Beaten Biscuit Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Prune Pie


    FORTY-NINTH WEEK.

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush with Chopped Figs
    Gravy Toast
    Cream Rolls
    Corn Gems
    Baked Chestnuts
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER
    Canned Corn Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Chopped Beets
    Stewed Parsnips with Celery
    Rolled Wheat
    Toasted Rolls
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Fig Pudding with Orange Sauce


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Cracker Toast
    Graham Sticks
    Currant Puff
    Graham Bread
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER
    Cream Pea Soup
    Potato Rice
    Chopped Cabbage
    Scalloped Vegetable Oysters
    Browned Rice
    Graham Sticks
    Raised Corn Cake
    Stewed Fruit
    Cracked Wheat Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Granola Fruit Mush
    Cream Toast
    Boiled Macaroni
    Hoe Cake
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Vegetable Oyster Soup
    Steamed Potato with Cream Sauce
    Stewed Corn and Tomatoes
    Mashed Squash
    Mixed Mush
    Pop Overs
    Toasted Wafers
    Cream Rolls
    Stewed Fruit
    Cornstarch Blancmange


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Grits
    Strawberry Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Cream Rolls
    Baked Chestnuts
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Stewed Pumpkin
    Macaroni Baked with Granola
    Pearl Barley
    Graham Bread
    Sally Lunn Gems
    Toasted Rolls
    Stewed Fruit
    Molded Tapioca


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush
    Tomato Toast
    Potato Cakes
    Graham Bread
    Rye Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Macaroni Soup
    Potato Snow
    Stewed Parsnips
    Chopped Turnip
    Rolled Rye
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Crusts
    Stewed Fruit
    Prune Dessert


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Gravy Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Hoe Cake
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Mixed Potato Soup
    Macaroni with Cream Sauce
    Stewed Beans
    Scalloped Tomato
    Pearl Wheat
    Pulled Bread
    Corn Cakes
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Custard


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Prune Toast
    Fruit Bread
    Cream Rolls
    Toasted Wafers
    Steamed Figs
    Cup Custard
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Vegetable Oyster Soup
    Macaroni with Kornlet
    Canned String Beans
    Steamed Rice
    Graham Fruit Bread
    Cream Rolls
    Cranberry Jelly
    Fresh Fruit

    FIFTIETH WEEK.


    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine Flakes
    Baked Potato with Cream Gravy
    Toasted Wafers
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Hoe Cake
    Baked Chestnuts
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Velvet Soup
    Broiled Potato
    Succotash
    Baked Squash
    Cracked Wheat
    Toasted Rolls
    Graham Bread
    Crusts
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Cream Pudding


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Corn Meal Mush
    Cream Toast
    Cream Rolls
    Granola Gems
    Graham Bread
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Brown Soup
    Baked Potato
    Stewed Celery
    Mashed Peas with Tomato Sauce
    Graham Grits
    French Rolls
    Rye Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Snow


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat
    Grape Toast
    Graham Crisps
    Rye Bread
    Graham Puffs
    Lemon Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Mashed Parsnips
    Macaroni with Egg
    Pearl Wheat with Raisins
    Rye Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Currant Puffs
    Stewed Fruit
    California Grapes


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Tomato Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Sticks
    Corn Cakes
    Granola
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Parsnip Soup
    Potato Rice
    Steamed Squash
    Baked Beans
    Cracked Wheat
    Raised Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Blancmange with Cranberry Dressing


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Apple Mush
    Blackberry Toast
    Macaroni with Cream Sauce
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Baked Bean Soup
    Potato Cakes
    Scalloped Tomatoes
    Stewed Vegetable Oysters
    Rice
    Graham Bread
    Oatmeal Crisps
    Beaten Biscuit
    Stewed Fruit
    Tapioca Jelly


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Rye
    Snowflake Toast
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Bread
    Corn Puffs
    Citron Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Vegetable Oyster Soup
    Baked Sweet Potato
    Mashed Peas
    Boiled Beets with Lemon Dressing
    Graham Grits
    Pulled Bread
    Graham Crusts
    Stewed Fruit


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rice with Fig Sauce
    Gravy Toast
    Fruit Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Cream Rolls
    Grape Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Kornlet Soup
    Mashed Sweet Potato
    Pease Cakes
    Browned Rice
    Buns
    Pulled Bread
    Cream Rolls
    Stewed Fruit
    Bananas


    FIFTY-FIRST WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cerealine Flakes
    Cream Toast
    Graham Puffs
    Fruit Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Swiss Lentil Soup
    Boiled Potatoes with Cream Sauce
    Scalloped Tomato
    Stewed Vegetable Oysters
    Pearl Barley
    Graham Bread
    Rye Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Lemon Apples
    Stewed Fruit


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Oatmeal
    Vegetable Oyster Toast
    Lentil Puree
    Toasted Wafers
    Corn Puffs
    Graham Bread
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Mashed Turnip
    Parsnip with Egg Sauce
    Graham Grits
    Raised Corn Cake
    Graham Sticks
    Stewed Fruit
    Ground Rice Pudding


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush with Raisins
    Tomato Toast
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Parsnip Soup
    Baked Potato
    Mashed Squash
    Stewed Lima Beans
    Cracked Wheat
    Graham Bread
    Cream Crisps
    Pop Overs
    Stewed Fruit
    Bread Custard


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Plum Porridge
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Cream Crisps
    Hoe Cake
    Granola
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Vermicelli Soup
    Baked Potato with Pease Gravy
    Boiled Beets
    Stewed Tomatoes
    Graham Grits
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Beaten Biscuit
    Cranberry Tarts


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Gravy Toast
    Baked Sweet Potato
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Puffs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Macaroni Soup
    Baked Potatoes with Brown Sauce
    Mashed Peas
    Stewed Dried Corn
    Rice
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Rye Gems
    Stewed Fruit
    Nuts and Oranges


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Corn Meal Mush
    Apricot Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Breakfast Rolls
    Steamed Figs
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Boiled Potato
    Stewed Carrots
    Celery
    Mashed Chestnuts
    Cracked Wheat
    Raised Corn Cake
    Toasted Wafers
    Fruit Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Cream Pudding


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Grape Toast
    Beaten Biscuit
    Roasted Almonds
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Tomato and Vermicelli Soup
    Boiled Macaroni
    Canned String Beans
    Steamed Rice
    Beaten Biscuit
    Fruit Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Fresh Fruit


    FIFTY-SECOND WEEK

    FIRST DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Plum Porridge
    Strawberry Toast
    Toasted Wafers
    Hoe Cake
    Graham Puffs
    Baked Chestnuts
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER
    Vegetable Oyster Soup
    Baked Potato
    Cabbage and Tomato
    Hulled Corn or Hominy
    Graham Grits
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Graham Sticks
    Fruit Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Snow Pudding


    SECOND DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Corn Meal Mush
    Tomato Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lentil Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Boiled Macaroni
    Canned Okra and Tomato
    Corn Bread
    Graham Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Fresh Fruit and Nuts


    THIRD DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Dry Toast with Hot Cream
    Currant Puffs
    Rye Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Lima Bean Soup
    Scalloped Potato
    Mashed Peas
    Baked Squash
    Celery
    Rice with Raisins
    Rye Bread
    Graham Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Manioca


    FOURTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Baked Chestnuts
    Rolled Wheat
    Gravy Toast
    Baked Sweet Potato with Tomato Sauce
    Cream Rolls
    Graham Puffs
    Granola
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Cream Pea Soup
    Baked Potato
    Stewed Tomatoes
    Scalloped Vegetable Oysters
    Graham Grits
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Buns
    Stewed Fruit
    Apple Tart


    FIFTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Cracked Wheat
    Vegetable Oyster Toast
    Graham Bread
    Crusts
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Potato Soup
    Baked Beans
    Stewed Parsnips
    Pearl Wheat
    Graham Bread
    Currant Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Rice Cream Pudding


    SIXTH DAY

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Graham Mush with Dates
    Snowflake Toast
    Graham Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Baked Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Black Bean Soup
    Mashed Potato
    Kornlet and Tomato
    Macaroni baked with Granola
    Farina
    Graham Bread
    Crescents
    Cream Rolls
    Stewed Fruit
    Cracked Wheat Pudding


    SABBATH

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Oats
    Blackberry Toast
    Pulled Bread
    Buns
    Beaten Biscuit
    Baked Chestnuts
    Citron Apples
    Stewed Fruit

    DINNER

    Canned Green Pea Soup
    Broiled Potato
    Macaroni with Egg Sauce
    Steamed Rice with Raisins
    Buns
    Beaten Biscuit
    Toasted Wafers
    Stewed Fruit
    Farina Pie

COUNTING THE COST.

The expense of the menus given will vary somewhat with the locality and
the existing market prices. The following analysis of several similar
bills of fare used in widely different localities will serve to show
something of the average cost. The first of these were taken at random
from the daily menus, during the month of January, of a Michigan family
of seventeen persons, grown persons and hearty, growing children, none
younger than six years. In the estimates made of the cost of material,
wherever fractions occurred, the next higher whole number was taken. No
butter was used, a small pitcher of cream for each individual supplying
its place. The milk used for cooking was not counted, since in this case
most of the cream had been removed, and its cost reckoned at the entire
cost of the milk itself, or twenty cents a quart, allowing four quarts
of milk at five cents a quart for one quart of cream.

    BILLS OF FARE.

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Apples
    Toasted Whole-Wheat Wafers
    Rolled Wheat with Cream
    Grape Toast
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Toasted Wafers
    Baked Sweet Apples
    Stewed Prunes
    Cream
    Hot Milk

    _Cost:_
    Apples (fresh and baked), one half peck,   10c.;
    one lb. rolled wheat,   5c.;
    one and one half lbs. zwieback for toast,   15c.;
    one pint of canned grape pulp for toast,   12c.;
    puffs (for which beside milk, three eggs at 25c. per doz., and one and
    one half lbs. whole-wheat flour at 5c. per lb. were used),   14c.;
    two and one half lbs. of California prunes,   37c.;
    two qts. cream, an amount quite sufficient for moistening
    the toast and supplying a small cream cup for each individual,   40c.;
    two lbs. of toasted whole-wheat wafers, 20c.

    --making the entire cost of breakfast $1.53, or
    exactly nine cents per person.


    DINNER

    Lima Bean Soup
    Baked Potato with Cream Sauce
    Scalloped Vegetable Oysters
    Graham Grits
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Whole-Wheat Wafers, Toasted
    Canned Cherries
    Citron Apples with Whipped Cream
    Cream
    Hot Milk

    _Cost:_
    One and one fourth lbs. Lima beans,   9c.;
    one half peck of potatoes,   12c.;
    one lb. Graham grits,   5c.;
    1 loaf whole-wheat bread,   10c.;
    2-1/4 lbs. whole-wheat wafers,   23c.;
    canned cherries,   25c.;
    apples and citron,   10c.;
    3 bunches vegetable oysters,   15c.;
    cream (1 cup for the soup, one for the cream sauce, and one for whipped
    cream, beside three and one fourth pints for individual use),   50c.;
    flour and sugar for cooking,   10c.

    Total, $1.69--a little less than ten cents each.


    BREAKFAST NO. 2

    Bananas
    Oatmeal
    Gravy Toast
    Graham Gems
    Toasted Wafers
    Apple Sauce
    Cream
    Hot Milk

    _Cost:_
    1 1/2 doz. bananas,   45c.;
    toast,   15c.;
    cream for gravy,   5c.;
    material for gems (Graham flour, milk,
         and a small portion of cream),   8c.;
    apple sauce,   10c.;
    wafers,   20c.;
    cream for individual use,   30c.;
    sugar,   5c.

    Total, $1.46, or a trifle more than 8 cents apiece.


    DINNER NO. 2

    Tomato and Macaroni Soup
    Boiled Potato with Gravy
    Mashed Peas
    Pearl Barley with Raisins
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Canned Berries
    Apple Tapioca with Cream
    Cream
    Hot Milk

    _Cost:_
    For the soup was required two cans of tomatoes at 10c. each,
    2 oz. macaroni at 15c. per lb., and one cup of cream,   27c.;
    1/2 peck of potatoes,   12c.;
    1 1/2 lbs. peas,   6c.;
    1 lb. pearl barley,   5c.;
    1/3 lb. raisins,   5c.;
    1/2 lb. tapioca,   3c.;
    apples,   20c.;
    cream,   50c.;
    canned fruit,   25c.;
    flour and sugar,   4c.

    Total, $1.70--ten cents apiece for each member of the household.



The following bills of fare were used by an Iowa family of six persons.
The prices given were those current in that locality in the month of
March.

    BREAKFAST

    Apples
    Rolled Oats
    Tomato Toast
    Toasted Wafers
    Graham Gems
    Patent Flour Bread
    Dried Apple Sauce
    Cream
    Hot Milk

    _Cost:_
    One sixth peck of apples, 3 1/3c.;
    one third lb. rolled oats, 1 2/3c.;
    three fourths lb. whole-wheat wafers, 7 1/2c.;
    one half can tomatoes, 5c.;
    bread for table and for toast, 10c.;
    material for gems, 3 1/2c.;
    dried apples, 6c.;
    sugar, 2c.;
    cream and milk, 15c.

    Average cost for each person, 9 1/2 cents.


    DINNER

    Canned Corn Soup with Croutons
    Scalloped Tomato
    Parsnip with Egg Sauce
    Graham Mush
    Buns
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Cup Custard
    Cream
    Hot Milk

    _Cost:_
    One can of corn, 10c.;
    tomatoes (using the half can left over from breakfast), 5c.;
    bread for the table, for the scalloped tomatoes,
         and for croutons for the soup, 10c.;
    parsnips, 5c.;
    buns, 5c.;
    four eggs, 6 1/2c.;
    milk and cream, 15c.;
    sugar, 2c.;
    Graham flour, 1c.

    Average cost, 10 cents apiece.


The material for the bills of fare given on the next page was reckoned
at prices current in a city in northern West Virginia, in the autumn,
and was for a family of six persons.

    BREAKFAST

    Browned Rice
    Graham Crisps
    Whole-Wheat Puffs
    Dried Peach Sauce
    Cream
    Hot Milk

    _Cost:_
    One half doz. bananas, 10c.;
    one half lb. rice, 5c.;
    puffs, 5c; crisps
    2-1/3c.;
    one lb. dried peaches, 8c.;
    2 qts. milk, 10c.;
    sugar, 1-1/2c.

    Total, 42 cents, or 7 cents for each individual.


    DINNER

    Tomato Soup with Croutons
    Baked Potatoes
    Mashed Peas
    Rolled Wheat
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Orange Rice
    Cream
    Hot Milk

    _Cost:_
    One half peck tomatoes, 7-1/2c.;
    one fourth peck potatoes, 5c.;
    one half lb. rolled wheat, 2-1/2c.;
    one fourth loaf of bread to make croutons, 2-1/2c,;
    whole-wheat bread, 5c.;
    one half doz. oranges,12-1/2c.;
    one half lb. rice, 5c.;
    two qts. milk, 10c.

    Total, 60 cents, or exactly 10 cents apiece.


The following four days' bills of fare,--the first two served by a
Michigan lady to her family of four persons, the second used by an
Illinois family of eight,--although made up of much less variety, serve
to show how one may live substantially even at a very small cost.


    BREAKFAST NO. 1

    Apples
    Graham Mush with Dates
    Toasted Wafers
    Bread
    Dried Apples Stewed with Cherries
    Milk
    Cream

    _Cost:_
    Apples, 4c.;
    Graham mush and dates, 3c.;
    toasted wafers, 3c.;
    bread, 2c.;
    sauce, 3c.;
    milk and cream, 5c.

    Total, 20 cents, or 5 cents apiece.


    DINNER NO. 1

    Baked Potatoes with Gravy
    Mashed Peas
    Oatmeal Blancmange
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Stewed Fruit
    Milk
    Cream


    _Cost:_
    Mashed peas, 3c.;
    baked potato and gravy, 3c.;
    whole-wheat bread, 2c.;
    milk and cream, 5c.;
    Oatmeal Blancmange, 2c.;
    Sauce, 5c.

    Total cost, 20 cents, or 5 cents apiece.


    BREAKFAST NO. 2

    Apples
    Graham Grits
    Zwieback
    Cream
    Milk

    _Cost:_
    Apples, 4c.;
    Graham grits, 2c.;
    Graham gems, 5c.;
    Zwieback, 2c.;
    cream and milk, 5c.

    Total, 20 cents, or 5 cents per person.


    DINNER NO. 2

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Scalloped Potatoes
    Graham Rolls
    Rice Custard
    Milk
    Cream

    _Cost:_
    Soup, 4c.;
    potatoes, 1c.;
    rolls 4c.;
    milk and cream, 5c.;
    rice custard, 6c.

    Total, 20 cents, or 5 cents each.


    BREAKFAST NO. 3

    Baked Apples
    Graham Grits with Cream
    Cream Toast
    Graham Gems
    Graham and Whole-Wheat Wafers
    Stewed Prunes

    BREAKFAST NO. 4

    Oatmeal with Cream
    Blueberry Toast
    Breakfast Rolls
    Graham and Whole-Wheat Wafers
    Stewed Apples

    DINNER NO. 3

    Bean Soup with Croutons
    Mashed Potatoes
    Pearl Wheat
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Oatmeal Crackers
    Patent Flour Bread
    Fresh Apples

    DINNER NO. 4

    Rice Soup
    Baked Potatoes with Cream Gravy
    Baked Beans
    Graham Crackers
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Fresh Apples
    Farina with Cream

    Material necessary to furnish these four meals for eight persons,--
    Six lbs. flour, 18c.;
    two lbs. crackers, different varieties, 20c.;
    pearl wheat, oatmeal, graham grits, and farina, one half lb. each, 10c.;
    one peck apples, 30c.;
    prunes, 10c.;
    one half lb. rice, 3-1/2c.;
    two lbs. beans, 8c.;
    one can tomatoes, 10.;
    one half peck of potatoes, 13c.;
    blueberries, 10c.;
    eight qts. milk, 32c.;
    macaroni, 5c.;
    sugar, 1-1/2c.

    Total, $1.71, or cost to each individual, 5-2/3 cents a meal.



TABLE TOPICS.

    The food on which the man who would be healthy should live must be
    selected so as to ensure variety without excess.--_Dr. Richardson._

    Hearty foods are those in which there is an abundance of potential
    energy.--_Prof. Atwater._

    AN OLD-FASHIONED RECIPE FOR A LITTLE HOME COMFORT.--Take of thought
    for self one part, two parts of thought for family; equal parts of
    common sense and broad intelligence, a large modicum of the sense of
    fitness of things, a heaping measure of living above what your
    neighbors think of you, twice the quantity of keeping within your
    income, a sprinkling of what tends to refinement and aesthetic
    beauty, stirred thick with the true brand of Christian principle,
    and set it to rise.--_Sel._

    For all things have an equal right to live.
    'T is only just prerogative we have;
    But nourish life with vegetable food,
    and shun the sacrilegious taste of blood.--_Ovid._




A BATCH OF DINNERS

HOLIDAY DINNERS,

A Special dinner for a holiday celebration has so long been a
time-honored custom in most families, that the majority of housewives
consider it indispensable. While we admire the beautiful custom of
gathering one's friends and neighbors around the hospitable board, and
by no means object to a special dinner on holiday occasions, yet we are
no wise in sympathy with the indiscriminate feastings so universally
indulged in at such dinners, whereby stomachs are overloaded with a
decidedly unhealthful quality of food, to be followed by dull brains and
aching heads for days to come.

And this is not the extent of the evil. Holiday feasting undoubtedly has
much to do with the excessive use of intoxicants noticeable at such
times. Tempted to overeat by the rich and highly seasoned viands which
make up the bill of fare, the heaviness resulting from a stomach thus
overburdened creates a thirst not readily satisfied. A person who has
noted how frequently one is called upon to assuage thirst after having
eaten too heartily of food on any occasion, will hardly doubt that
indigestible holiday dinners are detrimental to the cause of total
abstinence.

Then, for the sake of health and the cause of temperance, while an ample
repast is provided, let not the bill of fare be so lavish as to tempt to
gormandizing; and let the viands be of the most simple and wholesome
character practicable, although, of course, inviting. As an aid in this
direction, we offer the following bills of fare;--

    THANKSGIVING MENUS.

    NO. 1

    Tomato Soap with Pasta d'Italia
    Stuffed Potatoes
    Canned Asparagus
    Pulp Succotash
    Celery
    Graham Grits
    Fruit Rolls
    Graham Puffs
    Buns
    Canned Peaches
    Pumpkin Pie
    Baked Chestnuts
    Grape Apples
    Fresh Fruits

    NO. 2

    Vegetable Oyster Soup
    Potato Puff
    Roasted Sweet Potatoes
    Parsnip Stewed with Celery
    Beet Salad
    Boiled Wheat with Raisins
    Cream Crisps
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Crescents with Peach Jelly
    Canned Fruit
    Cranberry Tarts
    Almonds and Pecans


    HOLIDAY MENUS.

    NO. 1

    Canned Corn Soup
    Mashed Sweet Potato
    Macaroni with Tomato Sauce
    Canned Wax Beans or Cabbage Salad
    Steamed Rice
    Graham Puffs
    Fruit Bread
    Toasted Wafers
    Canned Strawberries
    Malaga Grapes
    Loaf Cake with Roasted Almonds
    Bananas in Syrup

    NO. 2

    Pea and Tomato Soup
    Ornamental Potatoes
    Scalloped Vegetable Oysters
    Egg and Macaroni
    Farina with Fig Sauce
    Sally Lunn Gems
    Beaten Biscuit
    Graham Bread
    Apply Jelly
    Canned Gooseberries
    Prune Pie with Granola Crust
    Citron Apples
    Pop Corn

[Illustration: A Picnic Dinner]


PICNIC DINNERS

A picnic, to serve its true end, ought to be a season of healthful
recreation; but seemingly, in the general acceptation of the term, a
picnic means an occasion for a big dinner composed of sweets and
dainties, wines, ices, and other delectable delicacies, which tempt to
surfeiting and excess. The preparation necessary for such a dinner
usually requires a great amount of extra and wearisome labor, while the
eating is very apt to leave results which quite overshadow any benefit
derived from the recreative features of the occasion. It is generally
supposed that a picnic is something greatly conducive to health; but
where everything is thus made subservient to appetite, it is one of the
most unhygienic things imaginable.

The lunch basket should contain ample provision for fresh-air-sharpened
appetites, but let the food be as simple as possible, and of not too
great variety. Good whole-wheat or Graham bread in some form, with well
sterilized milk and cream, or a soup previously prepared from grains or
legumes, which can be readily heated with the aid of a small alcohol or
kerosene stove, and plenty of fruit of seasonable variety, will
constitute a very good bill of fare. If cake is desirable, let it be of
a very simple kind, like the buns or raised cake for which directions
are given in another chapter. Beaten biscuits, rolls, and crisps are
also serviceable for picnic dinners. Fruit sandwiches--made by spreading
slices of light whole-wheat or Graham bread with a little whipped cream
and then with fresh fruit jam lightly sweetened, with fig sauce or
steamed figs chopped, steamed prunes or sliced bananas--are most
relishable. These should be made on the ground, just before serving,
from material previously prepared. An egg sandwich may be prepared in
the same manner by substituting for the fruit the hard-boiled yolks of
eggs chopped with a very little of the whitest and tenderest celery, and
seasoned lightly with salt. Two pleasing and palatable picnic breads may
be made as follows:--


_RECIPES._

PICNIC BISCUIT.--Prepare a dough as for Raised Biscuit, page 145,
and when thoroughly kneaded the last time, divide, and roll both
portions to about one fourth of an inch in thickness. Spread one portion
with stoned dates, or figs that have been chopped or cut fine with
scissors, cover with the second portion, and cut into fancy shapes. Let
the biscuits rise until very light, and bake. Wash the tops with milk to
glace before baking.

FIG WAFERS.--Rub together equal quantities of Graham meal, and figs
that have been chopped very fine. Make into a dough with cold sweet
cream. Roll thin, cut in shape, and bake.

If provision can be made for the reheating of foods, a soup, or grain,
macaroni with tomato sauce, or with egg or cream sauce, or some similar
article which can be cooked at home, transported in sealed fruit cans,
and reheated in a few moments on the grounds, is a desirable addition to
the picnic bill of fare.

Recipes for suitable beverages for such occasions will be found in the
chapter on Beverages.


SCHOOL LUNCHES.

Mothers whose children are obliged to go long distances to school, are
often greatly perplexed to know what to put up for the noonday lunch
which shall be both appetizing and wholesome. The conventional school
lunch of white bread and butter, sandwiches, pickles, mince or other
rich pie, with a variety of cake and cookies, is scarcely better than
none at all; since on the one hand there is a deficiency of food
material which can be used for the upbuilding of brains, muscles, and
nerves; while on the other hand it contains an abundance of material
calculated to induce dyspepsia, headache, dullness of intellect, and
other morbid conditions. Left in an ante-room, during the school
session, until, in cold weather, it becomes nearly frozen, and then
partaken of hurriedly, that there may be more time for play, is it to be
wondered at that the after-dinner session drags so wearily, and that the
pupils feel sleepy, dull, and uninterested? Our brains are nourished by
blood made from the food we eat; and if it be formed of improper or
unwholesome food, the result will be a disordered organ, incapable of
first-class work.

Again, the extra work imposed upon the digestive organs and the liver in
getting rid of the excess of fats and sugar in rich, unwholesome foods,
continually overtaxes these organs.

It can hardly be doubted that a large majority of the cases of so-called
overwork from which school children suffer, are caused by violation of
hygienic laws regarding food and diet rather than by an excess of brain
work; or in other words, had the brain been properly nourished by an
abundance of good, wholesome food, the same amount of work could have
been easily accomplished with no detriment whatever.

Whenever practicable, children should return to their homes for the
midday lunch, since under the oversight of a wise mother there will be
fewer violations of hygienic laws, and the walk back to the school room
will be far more conducive to good digestion than the violent exercise
or the sports so often indulged in directly after eating. When this is
impracticable, let the lunch be as simple as possible, and not so ample
as to tempt the child to overeat. Good whole-wheat or Graham bread of
some kind, rolls, crisps, beaten biscuit, sticks, fruit rolls, and
wafers, with a cup of canned fruit or a bottle of rich milk as an
accompaniment, with plenty of nice, fresh fruits or almonds or a few
stalks of celery, is as tempting a lunch as any child need desire. It
would be a good plan to arrange for the heating of a portion of the milk
to be sipped as a hot drink. In many school rooms the ordinary heating
stove will furnish means for this, or a little alcohol stove or a
heating lamp may be used for the purpose, under the supervision of the
teacher.

Furnish the children with apples, oranges, bananas, pears, grapes,
filberts, and almonds in place of rich pie and cake. They are just as
cheap as the material used for making the less wholesome sweets, and far
easier of digestion. An occasional plain fruit or grain pudding, cup
custard, or molded dessert may be substituted for variety. Fruit
sandwiches, or a slice of Stewed Fruit Pudding prepared as directed on
page 308 are also suitable for this purpose.

Rice prepared as directed below makes a wholesome and appetizing article
for the lunch basket:--

CREAMY RICE.--Put a pint of milk, one quarter of a cup of best
Carolina rice, a tablespoonful of sugar, and a handful of raisins into
an earthen-ware dish, and place on the top of the range where it will
heat very slowly to boiling temperature. Stir frequently, so that the
rice will not adhere to the bottom of the dish. When boiling, place in
the oven, and bake till the rice is tender, which can be ascertained by
dipping a spoon into one side and taking out a few grains. Twenty
minutes will generally be sufficient.

Much care should be used in putting up the lunch to have it as neat and
dainty as possible. A basket of suitable size covered with a clean white
napkin is better for use than the conventional dinner pail, in which
air-tight receptacle each food is apt to savor of all the others, making
the entire contents unappetizing, if not unwholesome.


SABBATH DINNERS.

One of the most needed reforms in domestic life is a change to more
simple meals on the Sabbath. In many households the Sabbath is the only
day in the week when all the members of the family can dine together,
and with an aim to making it the most enjoyable day of all, the good
housewife provides the most elaborate dinner of the week, for the
preparation of which she must either spend an unusual amount of time and
labor the day previous or must encroach upon the sacred rest day to
perform the work.

Real enjoyment ought not to be dependent upon feasting and gustatory
pleasures. Plain living and high thinking should be the rule at all
times, and especially upon the Sabbath day. Nothing could be more
conducive to indigestion and dyspepsia than this general custom of
feasting on the Sabbath. The extra dishes and especial luxuries tempt to
over-indulgence of appetite; while the lack of customary exercise and
the gorged condition of the stomach incident upon such hearty meals,
fosters headaches and indigestion and renders brain and mind so inactive
that the participants feel too dull for meditation and study, too sleepy
to keep awake during service, too languid for anything but dozing and
lounging, and the day that should have fostered spiritual growth is
worse than thrown away. Nor is this all; the evil effects of the
indigestion occasioned are apt to be felt for several succeeding days,
making the children irritable and cross, and the older members of the
family nervous and impatient,--most certainly an opposite result from
that which ought to follow a sacred day of rest.

Physiologically such feasting is wrong. The wear and consequent repair
incident upon hard labor, calls for an equivalent in food; but when no
labor is performed, a very moderate allowance--is all that is necessary,
and it should be of easy digestibility. Let the Sabbath meals be simple,
and served with abundant good cheer and intelligent thought as an
accompaniment.

Let as much as possible of the food be prepared and the necessary work
be done the day previous, so that the cook may have ample opportunity
with the other members of the family to enjoy all Sabbath privileges.
This need by no means necessitate the use of cold food nor entail a
great amount of added work in preparation. To illustrate, take the
following--

    SABBATH BILL OF FARE.

    BREAKFAST

    Fresh Fruit
    Rolled Wheat with Cream
    Prune Toast
    Whole-Wheat Bread
    Toasted Waters
    Buns
    Fresh Strawberries

    DINNER

    Canned Green Corn Soup
    Creamed Potato
    Green Peas
    Tomato and Macaroni
    Rice
    Toasted Wafers
    Beaten Biscuit
    Buns
    Canned Peaches
    Fruit and Nuts


Both the rolled wheat and rice may be prepared the day previous, as may
also the prune sauce for the toast, the buns, bread, and nearly all the
other foods. The potatoes can be boiled and sliced, the corn for the
soup rubbed through the colander and placed in the ice chest, the green
peas boiled but not seasoned, and the macaroni cooked and added to the
tomato but not seasoned. The berries may be hulled, the nuts cracked,
and the canned fruit opened. If the table is laid over night and covered
with a spread to keep off dust, a very short time will suffice for
getting the Sabbath breakfast. Heat the rolled wheat in the inner dish
of a double boiler. Meanwhile moisten the toast; and heat the prune
sauce.

To prepare the dinner, all that is necessary is to add to the material
for soup the requisite amount of milk and seasoning, and heat to
boiling; heat and season the peas and macaroni; make a cream sauce and
add the potatoes; reheat the rice, which should have been cooked by
steaming after the recipe given on page 99.

All may be done in half an hour, while the table is being laid, and with
very little labor.
PREFACE

This volume, which is the third of the Woman's Institute Library of
Cookery, includes soups and the high-protein foods, meat, poultry, game,
and fish. It therefore contains information that is of interest to every
housewife, for these foods occupy an important place in the majority
of meals.

In her study of _Soup,_ she will come to a thorough appreciation of the
place that soup occupies in the meal, its chief purposes, and its
economic value. All the different kinds of soups are classified and
discussed, recipes for making them, as well as the stocks used in their
preparation, receiving the necessary attention. The correct serving of
soup is not overlooked; nor are the accompaniments and garnishes so
often required to make the soup course of the meal an attractive one.

In _Meat,_ Parts 1 and 2, are described the various cuts of the
different kinds of meat--beef, veal, lamb, mutton, and pork--and the
part of the animal from which they are obtained, the way in which to
judge a good piece of meat by its appearance, and what to do with it
from the time it is purchased until all of it is used. All the methods
applicable to the cooking of meats are emphasized in this section.
Supplementing the text are numerous illustrations showing the ways in
which meat cuts are obtained. Besides, many of them are so reproduced
that actual cuts of meat may be readily recognized. Equipped with this
knowledge, the housewife need give no concern to the selection, care,
and cooking of every variety of meat.

In _Poultry and Game,_ the selection and preparation of all kinds of
poultry receive attention. While such food is somewhat of a luxury in a
great many homes, it helps to relieve the monotony of the usual protein
foods, and it often supplies just what is desired for special occasions.
Familiarity with poultry and game is a decided asset to any housewife,
and success with their cooking and serving is assured through a study
of this text, for every step in their preparation is clearly explained
and illustrated.

In _Fish and Shell Fish,_ the other high-protein food is treated in full
as to its composition, food value, purchase, care, and preparation. Such
interesting processes as the boning, skinning, and filleting of fish are
not only carefully explained but clearly illustrated. In addition to
recipes for fresh, salt, smoked, and canned fish are given directions
for the preparation of all edible shell fish and recipes for the various
stuffings and sauces served with fish.

Too much cannot be said about the importance of the subjects covered in
this volume and the necessity for a thorough understanding of them on
the part of every housewife. Indeed, a mastery of them will mean for her
an acquaintance with the main part of the meal, and when she knows how
to prepare these foods, the other dishes will prove a simple matter.



CONTENTS

SOUP
  Value of Soup
  Classification of Soups
  Uses and Varieties of Soup Stock
  The Stock Pot
  Principal Ingredients in Soup
  Processes Involved in Making Stock
  Serving Soup
  Recipes for Soup and Soup Accompaniments
  Stocks and Clear Soups
  Heavy Thick Soups
  Cream Soups
  Purées
  Chowders
  Soup Accompaniments and Garnishes

MEAT
  Value of Meat as Food
  Structure and Composition of Meat
  Purchase and Care of Meat
  Purposes of Cooking Meat
  Methods of Cooking Meat
  Time Required for Cooking Meat
  Beef--General Characteristics
  Cuts of Beef
  Steaks and Their Preparation
  Roasts and Their Preparation
  Preparation of Stews and Corned Beef
  Beef Organs and Their Preparation
  Making Gravy
  Trying Out Suet and Other Fats
  Preparation of Left-Over Beef
  Veal
  Cuts of Veal and Their Uses
  Veal Cuts and Their Preparation
  Veal Organs and Their Preparation
  Preparation of Left-Over Veal
  Mutton and Lamb--Comparison
  Cuts of Mutton and Lamb
  Preparation of Roasts, Chops, and Stews
  Preparation of Left-Over Lamb and Mutton
  Pork
  Cuts of Pork
  Fresh Pork and Its Preparation
  Cured Pork and Its Preparation
  Preparation of Left-Over Pork
  Serving and Carving of Meat
  Sausages and Meat Preparations
  Principles of Deep-Fat Frying
  Application of Deep-Fat Frying
  Timbale Cases

POULTRY AND GAME
  Poultry as a Food
  Selection of Poultry
  Selection of Chicken
  Selection of Poultry Other Than Chicken
  Composition of Poultry
  Preparation of Chicken for Cooking
  Preparation of Poultry Other Than Chicken for Cooking
  Cooking of Poultry
  Stuffing for Roast Poultry
  Boned Chicken
  Dishes from Left-Over Poultry
  Serving and Carving of Poultry
  Game
  Recipes for Game

FISH AND SHELL FISH
  Fish in the Diet
  Composition and Food Value of Fish
  Purchase and Care of Fish
  Cleaning Fish
  Boning Fish
  Skinning Fish
  Filleting Fish
  Methods of Cooking Fish
  Recipes for Fish Sauces and Stuffings
  Recipes for Fresh Fish
  Recipes for Salt and Smoked Fish
  Recipes for Canned Fish
  Recipes for Left-Over Fish
  Shell Fish--Nature, Varieties, and Use
  Oysters and Their Preparation
  Clams and Their Preparation
  Scallops and Their Preparation
  Lobsters and Their Preparation
  Crabs and Their Preparation
  Shrimp and Their Preparation




SOUP

SOUP AND ITS PLACE IN THE MEAL

VALUE OF SOUP

1. SOUP is a liquid food that is prepared by boiling meat or vegetables,
or both, in water and then seasoning and sometimes thickening the liquid
that is produced. It is usually served as the first course of a dinner,
but it is often included in a light meal, such as luncheon. While some
persons regard the making of soup as difficult, nothing is easier when
one knows just what is required and how to proceed. The purpose of this
Section, therefore, is to acquaint the housewife with the details of
soup making, so that she may provide her family with appetizing and
nutritious soups that make for both economy and healthfulness.

2. It is interesting to note the advancement that has been made with
this food. The origin of soup, like that of many foods, dates back to
practically the beginning of history. However, the first soup known was
probably not made with meat. For instance, the mess of pottage for which
Esau sold his birthright was soup made of red lentils. Later on meat
came to be used as the basis for soup because of the agreeable and
appetizing flavor it provides. Then, at one time in France a scarcity of
butter and other fats that had been used to produce moistness and
richness in foods, brought about such clear soups as bouillon and
consommé. These, as well as other liquid foods, found much favor, for
about the time they were devised it came to be considered vulgar to chew
food. Thus, at various periods, and because of different emergencies,
particular kinds of soup have been introduced, until now there are many
kinds from which the housewife may choose when she desires a dish that
will start a meal in the right way and at the same time appeal to
the appetite.

3. VALUE OF SOUP IN THE MEAL.--Not all persons have the same idea
regarding the value of soup as a part of a meal. Some consider it to be
of no more value than so much water, claiming that it should be fed to
none but children or sick persons who are unable to take solid food. On
the other hand, many persons believe that soup contains the very essence
of all that is nourishing and sustaining in the foods of which it is
made. This difference of opinion is well demonstrated by the ideas that
have been advanced concerning this food. Some one has said that soup is
to a meal what a portico is to a palace or an overture to an opera,
while another person, who evidently does not appreciate this food, has
said that soup is the preface to a dinner and that any work really worth
while is sufficient in itself and needs no preface. Such opinions,
however, must be reconciled if the true value of this food is to be
appreciated.

4. Probably the best way in which to come to a definite conclusion as to
the importance of soup is to consider the purposes it serves in a meal.
When its variety and the ingredients of which it is composed are thought
of, soup serves two purposes: first, as an appetizer taken at the
beginning of a meal to stimulate the appetite and aid in the flow of
digestive juices in the stomach; and, secondly, as an actual part of the
meal, when it must contain sufficient nutritive material to permit it to
be considered as a part of the meal instead of merely an addition. Even
in its first and minor purpose, the important part that soup plays in
many meals is not hard to realize, for it is just what is needed to
arouse the flagging appetite and create a desire for nourishing food.
But in its second purpose, the real value of soup is evident. Whenever
soup contains enough nutritive material for it to take the place of some
dish that would otherwise be necessary, its value cannot be
overestimated.

If soup is thought of in this way, the prejudice that exists against it
in many households will be entirely overcome. But since much of this
prejudice is due to the fact that the soup served is often unappetizing
in both flavor and appearance, sufficient attention should be given to
the making of soup to have this food attractive enough to appeal to the
appetite rather than discourage it. Soup should not be greasy nor
insipid in flavor, neither should it be served in large quantities nor
without the proper accompaniment. A small quantity of well-flavored,
attractively served soup cannot fail to meet the approval of any family
when it is served as the first course of the meal.

5. GENERAL CLASSES OF SOUP.--Soups are named in various ways, according
to material, quality, etc.; but the two purposes for which soup is used
have led to the placing of the numerous kinds into two general classes.
In the first class are grouped those which serve as appetizers, such as
bouillon, consommé, and some other broths and clear soups. In the second
class are included those eaten for their nutritive effect, such as cream
soups, purées, and bisques. From these two classes of soup, the one that
will correspond with the rest of the meal and make it balance properly
is the one to choose. For instance, a light soup that is merely an
appetizer should be served with a heavy dinner, whereas a heavy, highly
nutritious soup should be used with a luncheon or a light meal.

6. ECONOMIC VALUE OF SOUP.--Besides having an important place in the
meal of which it forms a part, soup is very often an economy, for it
affords the housewife a splendid opportunity to utilize many left-overs.
With the French people, who excel in the art of soup making chiefly
because of their clever adaptation of seasoning to foods, their
_pot-au-feu_ is a national institution and every kitchen has its stock
pot. Persons who believe in the strictest food economy use a stock pot,
since it permits left-overs to be utilized in an attractive and
palatable way. In fact, there is scarcely anything in the way of fish,
meat, fowl, vegetables, and cereals that cannot be used in soup making,
provided such ingredients are cared for in the proper way. Very often
the first glance at the large number of ingredients listed in a soup
recipe creates the impression that soup must be a very complicated
thing. Such, however, is not the case. In reality, most of the soup
ingredients are small quantities of things used for flavoring, and it is
by the proper blending of these that appetizing soups are secured.

CLASSIFICATION OF SOUPS

7. The two general classes of soup already mentioned permit of numerous
methods of classification. For instance, soups are sometimes named from
the principal ingredient or an imitation of it, as the names potato
soup, beef soup, macaroni soup, mock-turtle soup testify. Again, both
stimulating and nutritious soups may be divided into thin and thick
soups, thin soups usually being clear, and thick soups, because of their
nature, cloudy. When the quality of soups is considered, they are placed
in still different classes and are called broth, bisque, consommé,
purée, and so on. Another important classification of soups results from
the nationality of the people who use them. While soups are classified
in other ways, it will be sufficient for all practical purposes if the
housewife understands these three principal classes.

8. CLASSES DENOTING CONSISTENCY.--As has already been pointed out, soups
are of only two kinds when their consistency is thought of, namely,
_clear soups_ and _thick soups._

CLEAR SOUPS are those made from carefully cleared stock, or soup
foundation, and flavored or garnished with a material from which the
soup usually takes its name. There are not many soups of this kind,
_bouillon_ and _consommé_ being the two leading varieties, but in order
to be palatable, they require considerable care in making.

THICK SOUPS are also made from stock, but milk, cream, water, or any
mixture of these may also be used as a basis, and to it may be added for
thickening meat, fish, vegetables, eggs, or grain or some other starchy
material. Soups of this kind are often made too thick, and as such soups
are not appetizing, care must be taken to have them just right in
consistency.

9. CLASSES DENOTING QUALITY.--When attention is given to the quality of
soup, this food divides itself into several varieties, namely, _broth,
cream soup, bisque, chowder,_ and _purée._

BROTHS have for their foundation a clear stock. They are sometimes a
thin soup, but other times they are made quite thick with vegetables,
rice, barley, or other material, when they are served as a substantial
part of a meal.

CREAM SOUPS are highly nutritious and are of great variety. They have
for their foundation a thin cream sauce, but to this are always added
vegetables, meat, fish, or grains.

BISQUES are thick, rich soups made from game, fish, or shell fish,
particularly crabs, shrimp, etc. Occasionally, vegetables are used in
soup of this kind.

CHOWDERS are soups that have sea food for their basis. Vegetables and
crackers are generally added for thickening and to impart flavor.

PURÉES are soups made thick partly or entirely by the addition of some
material obtained by boiling an article of food and then straining it to
form a pulp. When vegetables containing starch, such as beans, peas,
lentils, and potatoes, are used for this purpose, it is unnecessary to
thicken the soup with any additional starch; but when meat, fish, or
watery vegetables are used, other thickening is required. To be right, a
purée should be nearly as smooth as thick cream and of the same
consistency.

10. CLASSES TYPICAL OF PARTICULAR COUNTRIES.--Certain kinds of soup have
been made so universally by the people of various countries that they
have come to be regarded as national dishes and are always thought of as
typical of the particular people by whom they are used. Among the best
known of these soups are _Borsch,_ a soup much used by the Russian
people and made from beets, leeks, and sour cream; _Daikan,_ a Japanese
soup in which radishes are the principal ingredient; _Kouskous,_ a soup
favored by the people of Abyssinia and made from vegetables; _Krishara_,
a rice soup that finds much favor in India; _Lebaba,_ an Egyptian soup
whose chief ingredients are honey, butter, and raisin water; _Minestra,_
an Italian soup in which vegetables are combined; _Mulligatawny,_ an
Indian rice soup that is flavored with curry; _Potroka,_ another kind of
Russian soup, having giblets for its foundation; _Soljinka,_ an entirely
different variety of Russian soup, being made from fish and onions; and
_Tarhonya,_ a Hungarian soup containing noodles.

       *       *       *       *       *


STOCK FOR SOUP

USES AND VARIETIES OF STOCK

11. MEANING AND USE OF STOCK.--In order that soup-making processes may
be readily grasped by the housewife, she should be thoroughly familiar
with what is meant by _stock,_ which forms the foundation of many soups.
In looking into the derivation of this term, it will be found that the
word stock comes from an Anglo-Saxon word meaning to stick, and that
while it has many different uses, the idea of fixedness is expressed in
every one of them. As is generally known, a stock of anything means a
reserve supply of that thing stored away for future use. When applied to
soup, stock is similar in meaning, for it refers to material stored or
prepared in such a way that it may be kept for use in the making of
certain kinds of soup. In a more definite sense, soup stock may be
regarded as a liquid containing the juices and soluble parts of meat,
bone, and vegetables, which have been extracted by long, slow cooking
and which can be utilized in the making of soups, sauces, and gravies.

12. Soups in which stock is utilized include all the varieties made from
beef, veal, mutton, and poultry. If clear stock is desired for the
making of soup, only fresh meat and bones should be used and all
material that will discolor the liquid in any way carefully avoided. For
ordinary, unclarified soups, the trimmings and bones of roast, steak, or
chops and the carcass of fowl can generally be utilized. However, very
strongly flavored meat, such as mutton, or the fat from mutton should be
used sparingly, if at all, on account of the strong flavor that
it imparts.

13. VARIETIES OF STOCK.--Several kinds of stock are utilized in the
making of soup, and the kind to employ depends on the soup desired. In
determining the kind of stock required for the foundation of a soup, the
housewife may be guided by the following classification:

FIRST STOCK is made from meat and bones and then clarified and used for
well-flavored, clear soups.

SECOND STOCK is made from the meat and the bones that remain after the
first stock is strained off. More water is added to the remaining
material, and this is then cooked with vegetables, which supply the
needed flavor. Such stock serves very well for adding flavor to a
nutritious soup made from vegetables or cereal foods.

HOUSEHOLD STOCK is made by cooking meat and bones, either fresh or
cooked, with vegetables or other material that will impart flavor and
add nutritive value. Stock of this kind is used for ordinary soups.

BONE STOCK is made from meat bones to which vegetables are added for
flavor, and it is used for making any of the ordinary soups.

VEGETABLE STOCK is made from either dried or fresh vegetables or both.
Such stock is employed in making vegetable soups.

GAME STOCK is made from the bones and trimmings of game to which
vegetables are added for flavor. This kind of stock is used for making
game soups.

FISH STOCK is made from fish or fish trimmings to which vegetables are
added for flavor. Shell fish make especially good stock of this kind.
Fish stock is employed for making chowders and fish soups.

14. ADDITIONAL USES OF STOCK.--As has already been shown, stock is used
principally as a foundation for certain varieties of soup. This
material, however, may be utilized in many other ways, being especially
valuable in the use of left-over foods. Any bits of meat or fowl that
are left over can be made into an appetizing dish by adding thickened
stock to them and serving the combination over toast or rice. In fact, a
large variety of made dishes can be devised if there is stock on hand to
add for flavor. The convenience of a supply of stock will be apparent
when it is realized that gravy or sauce for almost any purpose can be
made from the contents of the stock pot.

15. SOUP EXTRACTS.--If a housewife does not have sufficient time to go
through the various processes involved in making soup, her family need
not be deprived of this article of diet, for there are a number of
concentrated meat and vegetable extracts on the market for making soups
quickly. The _meat extracts_ are made of the same flavoring material as
that which is drawn from meat in the making of stock. Almost all the
liquid is evaporated and the result is a thick, dark substance that must
be diluted greatly with water to obtain the basis for a soup or a broth.
Some of the _vegetable extracts,_ such as Japanese soy and English
marmite, are so similar in appearance and taste to the meat extracts as
to make it quite difficult to detect any difference. Both varieties of
these extracts may be used for sauces and gravies, as well as for soups,
but it should be remembered that they are not highly nutritious and are
valuable merely for flavoring.


THE STOCK POT

16. NATURE, USE, AND CARE OF STOCK POT.--Among the utensils used for
cooking there is probably none more convenient and useful than the stock
pot. It is nothing more or less than a covered crock or pot like that
shown in Fig. 1, into which materials that will make a well-flavored
stock are put from time to time. From such a supply, stock can be drawn
when it is needed for soup; then, when some is taken out, more water
and materials may be added to replenish the pot. The stock pot should be
made of either enamel or earthenware, since a metal pot of any kind is
liable to impart flavor to the food. Likewise, its lid, or cover, should
be tight-fitting, for then it will be an excellent utensil in which the
materials may be stored until they are to be heated, when they can be
poured or dipped into a saucepan or a kettle.

The stock pot, like any other utensil used for making soup, should
receive considerable care, as it must be kept scrupulously clean. No
stock pot should ever be allowed to stand from day to day without being
emptied, thoroughly washed, and then exposed to the air for a while
to dry.

[Illustration: Fig. 1]

17. FOOD SUITABLE FOR THE STOCK POT.--Some one has said that nothing
edible is out of place in the stock pot, and, to a great extent, this
statement is true. Here should be put the bones from the cooked roast,
as well as the trimmings cut from it before it went into the oven; the
tough ends and bones of beefsteak; the trimmings or bones sent home by
the butcher; the carcasses of fowls, together with any remains of
stuffing and tough or left-over bits of meat; any left-over vegetables;
the remains of the gravy or any unsweetened sauces used for meats or
vegetables; the spoonful of left-over hash, stew, or stuffing; a
left-over stuffed tomato or pepper; and the water in which rice,
macaroni, or certain vegetables have been cooked. Of course, plain water
can be used for the liquid, but the water in which such vegetables as
cauliflower, carrots, beans, peas, asparagus, celery, and potatoes have
been cooked is especially desirable, for, besides imparting flavor to
the soup, it adds valuable mineral salts. However, when such things as
left-over cereals, rice, macaroni, and green vegetables are to be
utilized in soup, they should not be put in the stock pot; rather, they
should be added to the stock after it is removed from the pot.


MAKING OF SOUP

PRINCIPAL INGREDIENTS

18. The making of the stock that is used in soup is the most important
of the soup-making processes; in fact, these two things--soup and
stock--may be regarded, in many instances, as one and the same. The
housewife will do well, therefore, to keep in mind that whenever
reference is made to the making of soup usually stock making is also
involved and meant. Before the actual soup-making processes are taken
up, however, the nature of the ingredients required should be well
understood; for this reason, suitable meats and vegetables, which are
the principal ingredients in soups, are first discussed.

19. MEAT USED FOR SOUP MAKING.--With the exception of pork, almost every
kind of meat, including beef, veal, mutton, lamb, game, and poultry, is
used for soup making. Occasionally, ham is employed, but most other
forms of pork are seldom used to any extent. When soup stock is made
from these meats, they may be cooked separately, or, as a combination is
often an improvement over a single variety, several kinds may be
combined. For instance, mutton used alone makes a very strongly flavored
soup, so that it is usually advisable to combine this kind of meat with
another meat that has a less distinctive flavor. On the other hand, veal
alone does not have sufficient flavor, so it must be combined with lamb,
game, fowl, or some other well-flavored meat.

20. Certain cuts of meats are preferred to others in the making of
soups, because of the difference in their texture. The tender cuts,
which are the expensive ones, should not be used for soups, as they do
not produce enough flavor. The tough cuts, which come from the muscles
that the animal uses constantly and that therefore grow hard and tough,
are usually cheaper, but they are more suitable, because they contain
the material that makes the best soup. The pieces best adapted to soup
making are the shins, the shanks, the lower part of the round, the neck,
the flank, the shoulder, the tail, and the brisket. The parts of the
animal from which these cuts are taken are clearly shown in Fig. 2.
Although beef is obtained from the animal shown, the same cuts come from
practically the same places in other animals. Stock made from one of
these cuts will be improved if a small amount of the fat of the meat is
cooked with it; but to avoid soup that is too greasy, any excess fat
that remains after cooking should be carefully removed. The marrow of
the shin bone is the best fat for soup making.

If soup is to be made from fish, a white variety should be selected. The
head and trimmings may be utilized, but these alone are not sufficient,
because soup requires some solid pieces of meat. The same is true of
meat bones; they are valuable only when they are used with meat, an
equal proportion of bone and meat being required for the best stock.

[Illustration: Fig. 2]

21. VEGETABLES USED FOR SOUP MAKING.--In soup making, the housewife has
also a large number of vegetables from which to select, for any
vegetable that has a decided flavor may be used. Among those from which
soups can be made successfully are cabbage, cauliflower, asparagus,
corn, onions, turnips, carrots, parsnips, tomatoes, beans, peas,
lentils, salsify, potatoes, spinach, celery, mushrooms, okra, and even
sweet potatoes. These vegetables are used for two purposes: to provide
flavoring and to form part of the soup itself as well as to furnish
flavor. When they are used simply for flavoring, they are cooked until
their flavor is obtained and then removed from the stock. When they are
to form part of the soup, as well as to impart flavor, they are left in
the soup in small pieces or made into a purée and eaten with the soup.

Attention, too, must be given to the condition of the vegetables that
are used in soup. The fresh vegetables that are used should be in
perfect condition. They should have no decayed places that might taint
or discolor the soups, and they should be as crisp and solid as
possible. If they are somewhat withered or faded, they can be freshened
by allowing them to stand in cold water for a short time. When dried
vegetables are to be used for soup making, they should first be soaked
well in cold water and then, before being added to the stock, either
partly cooked or entirely cooked and made into a purée.


PROCESSES INVOLVED IN MAKING STOCK

22. Although the making of stock or soup is a simple process, it must
necessarily be a rather long one. The reason for this is that all flavor
cannot be drawn from the soup materials unless they are subjected to
long, slow cooking at a temperature lower than the boiling point. With
this point definitely understood, the actual work of soup making may
be taken up.

23. COOKING MEAT FOR SOUP.--When clear stock is to be made from fresh
meat, the required quantity of meat should be cut into small pieces
rather than large ones, so as to expose as much of the surface as
possible from which the flavor of the meat can be drawn. A little more
flavor is obtained and a brown color developed if a small part, perhaps
a fourth, of the pieces of meat are first browned in the frying pan. The
pieces thus browned, together with the pieces of fresh meat, are put
into a kettle and a quart of cold water for each pound of meat is
then added.

The reason for using cold rather than hot water will be evident when the
action of water on raw meat is understood. The fiber of meat is composed
of innumerable thread-like tubes containing the flavor that is to be
drawn out into the water in order to make the stock appetizing. When the
meat is cut, these tiny tubes are laid open. Putting the meat thus
prepared into cold water and allowing it to heat gradually tend to
extract the contents of the tubes. This material is known as
_extractives_, and it contains in its composition stimulating
substances. On the other hand, plunging the meat into hot water and
subjecting it quickly to a high temperature will coagulate the protein
in the tissue and prevent the extractives from leaving the tubes.

24. To obtain the most flavor from meat that is properly prepared, it
should be put over a slow fire and allowed to come gradually to the
boiling point. As the water approaches the boiling point, a scum
consisting of coagulated albumin, blood, and foreign material will begin
to rise to the top, but this should be skimmed off at once and the
process of skimming continued until no scum remains. When the water
begins to boil rapidly, either the fire should be lowered or the kettle
should be removed to a cooler part of the stove so that the water will
bubble only enough for a very slight motion to be observed. Throughout
the cooking, the meat should not be allowed to boil violently nor to
cease bubbling entirely.

The meat should be allowed to cook for at least 4 hours, but longer if
possible. If, during this long cooking, too much water evaporates, more
should be added to dilute the stock. The salt that is required for
seasoning may be added just a few minutes before the stock is removed
from the kettle. However, it is better to add the salt, together with
the other seasonings, after the stock has been drawn off, for salt, like
heat, has a tendency to harden the tissues of meat and to prevent the
flavor from being readily extracted.

25. Although, as has been explained, flavor is drawn from the fibers of
meat by boiling it slowly for a long time, the cooking of meat for soup
does not extract the nourishment from it to any extent. In reality, the
meat itself largely retains its original nutritive value after it has
been cooked for soup, although a small quantity of protein is drawn out
and much of the fat is removed. This meat should never be wasted;
rather, it should be used carefully with materials that will take the
place of the flavor that has been cooked from it.

26. FLAVORING STOCK.--It is the flavoring of stock that indicates real
skill in soup making, so this is an extremely important part of the
work. In fact, the large number of ingredients found in soup recipes
are, as a rule, the various flavorings, which give the distinctive
flavor and individuality to a soup. However, the housewife whose larder
will not produce all of the many things that may be called for in a
recipe should not feel that she must forego making a particular kind of
soup. Very often certain spices or certain flavoring materials may be
omitted without any appreciable difference, or something that is on hand
may be substituted for an ingredient that is lacking.

27. The flavorings used most for soup include cloves, peppercorns, red,
black, and white pepper, paprika, bay leaf, sage, marjoram, thyme,
summer savory, tarragon, celery seed, fennel, mint, and rosemary. While
all of these are not absolutely necessary, the majority of them may well
be kept on the pantry shelf. In addition, a bottle of Worcestershire
sauce should be kept on hand. Celery and parsley, which are also much
used for flavoring, can usually be purchased fresh, but as they are
scarce at times it is advisable to dry some of the leaves during the
season when they can be secured, so as to have a supply when they are
not in the market. A small amount of lemon peel often improves soup, so
some of this should be kept in store. Another group of vegetables that
lend themselves admirably to soup flavoring includes leeks, shallots,
chives, garlic, and onions, all of which belong to the same family. They
must be used judiciously, however, as a strong flavor of any of them is
offensive to most persons.

28. As many of the flavorings used for soup lose their strength when
they are exposed to the air, every effort should be made to keep them in
good condition. Many of them can be kept an indefinite length of time if
they are placed in tightly closed metal boxes or glass jars. Flavorings
and spices bought from the grocer or the druggist in paper packages
should be transferred to, and enclosed in, a receptacle that will not
allow them to deteriorate. If proper attention is given to these
materials, the supply will not have to be replenished often; likewise,
the cost of a sufficient number to produce the proper flavorings will be
very slight.

29. In the use of any of the flavorings mentioned or the strongly
flavored vegetables, care should be taken not to allow any one
particular flavor to predominate. Each should be used in such quantity
that it will blend well with the others. A very good way in which to fix
spices and herbs that are to flavor soup is to tie them in a small piece
of cheesecloth and drop the bag thus made into the soup pot. When
prepared in this way, they will remain together, so that, while the
flavor can be cooked out, they can be more readily removed from the
liquid than if they are allowed to spread through the contents of the
pot. Salt, which is, of course, always used to season soup, should be
added in the proportion of 1 teaspoonful to each quart of liquid.

30. REMOVING GREASE FROM SOUP.--A greasy soup is always unpalatable.
Therefore, a very important feature of soup making, whether a thin or a
thick soup is being made, is the removal of all grease. Various ways of
removing grease have been devised, depending on whether the soup is hot
or cold. In the case of hot or warm soup, all the grease that it is
possible to remove with a spoon may be skimmed from the top, and the
remainder then taken up with a piece of clean blotting paper,
tissue-paper, or absorbent cotton. Another plan, by which the fat may be
hardened and then collected, consists in tying a few small pieces of ice
in a piece of cloth and drawing them over the surface of the soup. A
very simple method is to allow the soup or stock to become cold, and
then remove the fat, which collects on the top and hardens, by merely
lifting off the cake that forms.

31. CLEARING SOUP.--Sometimes it is desired to improve the appearance of
soup stock, particularly a small amount of soup that is to be served at
a very dainty luncheon or dinner. In order to do this, the stock may be
treated by a certain process that will cause it to become clear. After
being cleared, it may be served as a thin soup or, if it is heavy
enough, it may be made into a clear, sparkling jelly into which many
desirable things may be molded for salad or for a dish to accompany a
heavy course. Clearing soup is rather extravagant; however, while it
does not improve the taste, it does improve the appearance.

A very satisfactory way in which to clear stock is to use egg whites and
crushed egg shell. To each quart of cold stock should be added the
crushed shell and a slightly beaten egg white. These should be mixed
well, placed on the fire, and the mixture stirred constantly until it
boils. As the egg coagulates, some of the floating particles in the
stock are caught and carried to the top, while others are carried to the
bottom by the particles of shell as they settle. After the mixture has
boiled for 5 or 10 minutes, the top should be skimmed carefully and the
stock then strained through a fine cloth. When it has been reheated, the
cleared stock will be ready to serve.

32. THICKENING SOUP.--Although thin, clear soups are preferred by some
and are particularly desirable for their stimulating effect, thick soups
find much favor when they are used to form a substantial part of a meal.
Besides giving consistency to soup, thickening usually improves the
flavor, but its chief purpose is to give nutritive value to this food.
In fact, whenever a soup is thickened, its food value is increased by
the ingredient thus added. For this reason, it is advisable to thicken
soups when they are desired for any other purpose than their
stimulating effect.

33. The substance used to thicken soups may be either a starchy material
or food or a purée of some food. The starchy materials generally used
for this purpose are plain flour, browned flour, corn starch, and
arrowroot flour. Any one of these should be moistened with enough cold
water to make a mixture that will pour easily, and then added to the hot
liquid while the soup is stirred constantly to prevent the formation of
lumps. A sufficient amount of this thickening material should be used to
make a soup of the consistency of heavy cream.

The starchy foods that are used for thickening include rice, barley,
oatmeal, noodles, tapioca, sago, and macaroni. Many unusual and fancy
forms of macaroni can be secured, or the plain varieties of Italian
pastes may be broken into small pieces and cooked with the soup. When
any of these foods are used, they should be added long enough before the
soup is removed to be cooked thoroughly.

Purées of beans, peas, lentils, potatoes, and other vegetables are
especially desirable for the thickening of soups, for they not only give
consistency, but add nutritive value and flavor as well. Another
excellent thickening may be obtained by beating raw eggs and then adding
them carefully to the soup just before it is to be served. After eggs
have been added for thickening, the soup should not be allowed to boil,
as it is liable to curdle.

34. KEEPING STOCK.--Soup stock, like many other foods, spoils quite
readily. Therefore, in order to keep it for at least a few days, it must
receive proper attention. At all times, the vessel containing stock
should be tightly closed and, especially in warm weather, the stock
should be kept as cold as possible. Stock that is heavy enough to
solidify into a jellylike consistency when it is cold will keep better
than stock that remains liquid. The addition of salt or any spicy
flavoring also helps to keep stock from deteriorating, because these
materials act as preservatives and prevent the action of bacteria that
cause spoiling. Bacteria may be kept from entering soup if, instead of
removing the grease, it is allowed to form in a solid cake over the
top. No matter which of these precautions is taken to prevent stock from
spoiling, it should be heated to boiling point once a day when it is to
be kept for several days.


SERVING SOUP

35. Soup may be correctly served in several different ways, the method
to adopt usually depending on the kind of soup. Thin, clear soups are
generally served in bouillon cups, as shown in Fig. 3, which may be
placed on the table immediately before the family assembles or passed
after the members are seated. Heavier soups may be served at the table
from a soup tureen, or each person's portion may be served before the
family comes to the table. For soups of this kind, the flat soup plate,
like that shown in Fig. 4, is found preferable.

[Illustration: FIG. 3]

The spoon to be served with soup also depends on the kind of soup, but a
larger spoon than a teaspoon is always necessary. When soup is served in
a soup plate, a dessert spoon is used, as will be observed in Fig. 4. A
bouillon spoon is the best kind to use with any thin soup served in
bouillon cups. Such a spoon, as shown in Fig. 3, is about the length of
a teaspoon, but has a round bowl.

36. To increase the attractiveness of soup and at the same time make it
more appetizing and nutritious, various accompaniments and relishes are
served with it. When the accompaniment is in the form of crackers,
croutons, or bread sticks, they may be passed after the soup is served,
or, as shown in Figs. 3 and 4, a few of them may be placed on the
bread-and-butter plate at each person's place. The relishes should be
passed while the soup is being eaten. Plain whipped cream or whipped
cream into which a little mashed pimiento has been stirred adds much to
the flavor and appearance of soup when served on the top of any hot or
cold variety. Then, too, many soups, especially vegetable soups, are
improved in flavor by the addition of a spoonful of grated cheese, which
should be sprinkled into the dish at the time of serving. For this
purpose, a hard, dry cheese, such as Parmesan, which can often be
purchased already grated in bottles, is the most satisfactory.

[Illustration: FIG. 4]

37. In summer, clear soups are sometimes served cold, as cold soups are
found more desirable for warm weather than hot ones. However, when a
soup is intended to be hot, it should be hot when it is ready to be
eaten, and every effort should be made to have it in this condition if
an appetizing soup is desired. This can be accomplished if the soup is
thoroughly heated before it is removed from the stove and the dishes in
which it is to be served are warmed before the soup is put into them.

       *       *       *       *       *


RECIPES FOR SOUP AND SOUP ACCOMPANIMENTS

NECESSITY FOR CAREFUL WORK

38. So that the housewife may put into practice the knowledge she has
gained about soup making, there are here given recipes for various kinds
of soup. As will be observed, these recipes are classified according to
the consistency and nature of the soups, all those of one class being
placed in the same group. As it is important, too, for the housewife to
know how to prepare the various accompaniments and garnishes that are
generally served with soup, directions for the making of these are also
given and they follow the soup recipes.

39. In carrying out these recipes, it will be well to note that
exactness in fulfilling the requirements and care in working out the
details of the recipes are essential. These points cannot be ignored in
the making of soup any more than in other parts of cookery, provided
successful results and excellent appearance are desired. It is therefore
wise to form habits of exactness. For instance, when vegetables are to
be cut for soups, they should be cut into pieces of equal size, or, if
they are to be diced, they should be cut so that the dice are alike. All
the pieces must be of the same thickness in order to insure uniform
cooking; if this precaution is not observed, some of the pieces are
likely to overcook and fall to pieces before the others are done.

Strict attention should also be given to the preparation of other
ingredients and the accompaniments. The meat used must be cut very
carefully rather than in ragged, uneven pieces. Noodles, which are often
used in soup, may be of various widths; but all those used at one time
should be uniform in width--that is, all wide or all narrow. If
different widths are used, an impression of careless cutting will be
given. Croutons and bread sticks, to be most satisfactory, should be cut
straight and even, and, in order to toast uniformly, all those made at
one time should be of the same size.


STOCKS AND CLEAR SOUPS

40. Stock for Clear Soup or Bouillon.--A plain, but well-flavored, beef
stock may be made according to the accompanying recipe and used as a
basis for any clear soup served as bouillon without the addition of
anything else. However, as the addition of rice, barley, chopped
macaroni, or any other such food will increase the food value of the
soup, any of them may be supplied to produce a more nutritious soup.
When this stock is served clear, it should be used as the first course
in a comparatively heavy meal.

STOCK FOR CLEAR SOUP OR BOUILLON

4 lb. beef
4 qt. cold water
1 medium-sized onion
1 stalk celery
2 sprigs parsley

6 whole cloves
12 peppercorns
1 bay leaf
Salt
Pepper

Cut the meat into small pieces. Pour the cold water over it, place on a
slow fire, and let it come to a boil. Skim off all scum that rises to
the top. Cover tightly and keep at the simmering point for 6 to 8 hours.
Then strain and remove the fat. Add the onion and celery cut into
pieces, the parsley, cloves, peppercorns, and bay leaf. Simmer gently
for about 20 minutes. Add salt and pepper to taste. Strain through
a cloth.

41. Household Stock.--If it is desired to make a stock that may be kept
on hand constantly and that may be used as a foundation for various
kinds of soups, sauces, and gravies, or as a broth for making casserole
dishes, household stock will be found very satisfactory. Such stock made
in quantity and kept in a sufficiently cool place may be used for
several days before it spoils. Since most of the materials used in this
stock cannot be put to any other particularly good use, and since the
labor required in making it is slight, this may be regarded as an
extremely economical stock.

HOUSEHOLD STOCK

3 qt. cold water
3 lb. meat (trimmings of fresh
meat, bones, and tough pieces
from roasts, steaks, etc.)
1 medium-sized onion
4 cloves
6 peppercorns
Herbs
Salt
Pepper

Pour the cold water over the meat and bones and put them on the fire to
cook. When they come to a boil skim well. Then cover and simmer 4 to 6
hours. Add the onion, cloves, peppercorns, and herbs and cook for
another hour. Add salt and pepper to taste. Strain and set aside to
cool. Remove the fat.

42. White Stock.--An especially nice broth having a delicate flavor and
generally used for special functions when an attractive meal is being
served to a large number of persons is made from veal and fowl and known
as white stock. If allowed to remain in a cool place, this stock will
solidify, and then it may be used as the basis for a jellied meat
dish or salad.

WHITE STOCK

5 lb. veal
1 fowl, 3 or 4 lb.
8 qt. cold water
2 medium-sized onions
2 Tb. butter
2 stalks celery
1 blade mace
Salt
Pepper

Cut the veal and fowl into pieces and add the cold water. Place on a
slow fire, and let come gradually to the boiling point. Skim carefully
and place where it will simmer gently for 6 hours. Slice the onions,
brown slightly in the butter, and add to the stock with the celery and
mace. Salt and pepper to suit taste. Cook 1 hour longer and then strain
and cool. Remove the fat before using.

43. Consommé.--One of the most delicious of the thin, clear broths is
consommé. This is usually served plain, but any material that will not
cloud it, such as finely diced vegetables, green peas, tiny pieces of
fowl or meat, may, if desired, be added to it before it is served. As a
rule, only a very small quantity of such material is used for
each serving.

CONSOMMÉ

4 lb. lower round of beef
4 lb. shin of veal
1/4 c. butter
8 qt. cold water
1 small carrot
1 large onion
2 stalks celery
12 peppercorns
5 cloves
4 sprigs parsley
Pinch summer savory
Pinch thyme
2 bay leaves
Salt
Pepper

Cut the beef and veal into small pieces. Put the butter and meat into
the stock kettle, and stir over the fire until the meat begins to brown.
Add the cold water, and let come to the boiling point. Skim carefully
and let simmer for 6 hours. Cut the vegetables into small pieces and
add to the stock with the spices and herbs. Cook for 1 hour, adding salt
and pepper to suit taste. Strain and cool. Remove the fat and clear
according to directions previously given.

44. Tomato Bouillon.--It is possible to make a clear tomato soup without
meat stock, but the recipe here given, which is made with meat stock,
has the advantage of possessing a better flavor. The tomato in this
bouillon lends an agreeable color and flavor and affords a change from
the usual clear soup. Cooked rice, macaroni, spaghetti, or vermicelli
may be added to tomato bouillon to provide an additional quantity of
nutrition and vary the plain soup.

TOMATO BOUILLON
(Sufficient to Serve Eight)

1 qt, meat stock
1 tsp. salt
1 Tb. sugar

1/4 tsp. pepper
1 can tomatoes

Heat the stock, and to it add the salt, sugar, and pepper. Rub the
tomatoes through a fine sieve, and add them to the stock. Cook together
for a few minutes and serve.

HEAVY THICK SOUPS

45. Julienne Soup.--A very good way in which to utilize any small
quantities of vegetables that may be in supply but are not sufficient to
serve alone is to use them in julienne soup. For soup of this kind,
vegetables are often cut into fancy shapes, but this is a more or less
wasteful practice and should not be followed, as tiny strips or dice cut
finely and carefully are quite as agreeable. The vegetables do not add a
large amount of nutriment to this soup, but they introduce into the soup
mineral salts that the soups would otherwise not have and they also add
a variety of flavor.

JULIENNE SOUP
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 pt. mixed vegetables
1/2 tsp. salt
1 qt. stock
1/4 tsp. pepper

Cut into tiny dice or into strips such vegetables as celery, carrots,
and turnips, making them as nearly the same size and shape as possible.
Put them on to cook in enough boiling salted water to cover well. Cook
until they are soft enough to be pierced with a fork, but do not lose
their shape. Drain off the water and put the vegetables into the stock.
Bring to the boiling point, season with the pepper, and serve.

46. Ox-Tail Soup.--The use of ox tails for soup helps to utilize a part
of the beef that would ordinarily be wasted, and, as a rule, ox tails
are comparatively cheap. Usually the little bits of meat that cook off
the bones are allowed to remain in the soup. Variety may be obtained by
the addition of different kinds of vegetables.

OX-TAIL SOUP
(Sufficient to Serve Eight)

2 ox tails
1 large onion
1 Tb. beef drippings
4 qt. cold water
1 Tb. mixed herbs
4 peppercorns
1 Tb. salt

Wash and cut up the ox tails, separating them at the joints. Slice the
onion and brown it and half of the ox tails in the beef drippings. When
they are browned, put them and the remainder of the ox tails into a
kettle. Add the water and the herbs and peppercorns tied in a little
piece of cheesecloth. Bring to the boiling point, and then simmer for 3
to 4 hours or until the meat separates from the bones. Add the salt an
hour before serving the soup. Remove the fat and serve some of the
nicest joints with the soup. If vegetables are desired, they should be
diced and added 20 minutes before serving, so that they will be
cooked soft.

47. Mulligatawny Soup.--If a highly seasoned soup is desired,
mulligatawny, although not a particularly cheap soup, will be found very
satisfactory. The curry powder that is used adds an unusual flavor that
is pleasing to many people, but if it is not desired, it may be omitted.

MULLIGATAWNY SOUP
(Sufficient to Serve Eight)

3 lb. chicken
1 lb. veal
4 qt. cold water
2 onions
1 Tb. butter
4 peppercorns
4 cloves
1 stalk celery
1 Tb. curry powder
1 tsp. salt
1/4 tsp. pepper
1 lemon

Cut up the chicken and veal, add the cold water to them, and place over
a slow fire. Slice the onions and brown them in the butter. Add them and
the peppercorns, cloves, chopped celery, and curry powder stirred to a
smooth paste with a little water to the meat. Simmer together slowly
until the chicken is tender. Remove the meat from the bones and cut it
into small pieces. Put the bones into the kettle and simmer for another
hour. Strain the liquid from the veal and bones and remove the fat. Add
the salt, pepper, chicken, and the juice of the lemon. Return to the
fire and cook for a few minutes. Serve with a tablespoonful or two of
cooked rice in each soup dish.

[Illustration: FIG. 5]

48. Noodle Soup.--The addition of noodles to soup increases its food
value to a considerable extent by providing carbohydrate from the flour
and protein from the egg and flour. Noodle soup is a very attractive
dish if the noodles are properly made, for then they will not cause the
soup to become cloudy when they are put into it. Little difficulty will
be experienced if the directions here given for making noodles are
followed explicitly.

NOODLE SOUP
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 egg
1 Tb. milk
1/2 tsp. salt
Flour
1 qt. household stock
3 sprigs parsley
1 small onion

To make noodles, beat the egg slightly, add to it the milk, and stir in
the salt and enough flour to make a stiff dough. Toss upon a floured
board and roll very thin. Allow the dough to dry for hour or more, and
then, as shown in Fig. 5, cut it into strips about 4 inches wide. Place
several strips together, one on top of the other, and roll them up
tight, in the manner indicated. Cut each roll into thin slices with a
sharp knife, as shown in Fig. 6. When the slices are separated the
noodles should appear as shown in the pile at the right. If it is
desired not to follow this plan, the dough may be rolled into a thin
sheet and cut into strips with a noodle cutter.

[Illustration: FIG. 6]

Such a supply of noodles may be used at once, or they may be dried
thoroughly and sealed tightly in a jar for future use. The very dry
ones, however, require a little longer cooking than those which are
freshly made. With the noodles prepared, heat the stock with the parsley
and onion chopped very fine. Add the noodles and cook for 15 or 20
minutes or until the noodles are thoroughly cooked.

Rice, barley, macaroni, and other starchy materials may be added to
stock in the same way as the noodles.

49. Vegetable Soup With Noodles.--The combination of noodles and
vegetables in soup is a very excellent one, since the vegetables add
flavor and the noodles add nutritive value. If the vegetables given in
the accompanying recipe cannot be readily obtained, others may be
substituted.

VEGETABLE SOUP WITH NOODLES
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 carrot
1 onion
1 turnip
1 stalk celery
1 c. boiling water
1/2 tsp. salt
1/2 c. noodles
2 sprigs parsley
1/8 tsp. pepper
1 qt. household stock

Dice the vegetables and put them on to cook with the boiling water and
the salt. Cook for a few minutes or until partly soft. Add the noodles,
parsley, pepper, and stock and cook for 15 minutes longer. Serve.

[Illustration: Fig. 7]

CREAM SOUPS

50. Soups classed as cream soups consist of a thin white sauce to which
is added a vegetable in the form of a purée or cut into small pieces.
Because of their nature, cream soups are usually high in food value; but
they are not highly flavored, so their use is that of supplying
nutrition rather than stimulating the appetite. Considerable variety can
be secured in cream soups, for there are scarcely any vegetables that
cannot be used in the making of them. Potatoes, corn, asparagus,
spinach, peas, tomatoes, and onions are the vegetables that are used
oftenest, but cream soups may also be made of vegetable oysters, okra,
carrots, watercress, celery, cabbage, cauliflower, beans, lentils, and
dried peas. The vegetables may be cooked especially for the soup, or
left-over or canned vegetables may be utilized. It is an excellent plan
to cook more than enough of some vegetables for one day, so that some
will be left over and ready for soup the next day.

If the vegetable is not cut up into small pieces, it must be put through
a sieve and made into the form of a purée before it can be added to the
liquid. Two kinds of sieves for this purpose are shown in Fig. 7. It
will be observed that with the large, round sieve, a potato masher must
be used to mash the vegetables, the pulp of which is caught by the
utensil in which the sieve is held. In making use of the smaller sieve,
or ricer, the vegetable is placed in it and then mashed by pressing the
top down over the contents with the aid of the handles.

51. THIN WHITE SAUCE.--The liquid for cream soups should be thin white
sauce made entirely of milk or of milk and cream. The flavor of the soup
will be improved, however, by using with the milk some meat stock, or
the stock that remains from cooking celery, asparagus, or any vegetables
that will lend a good flavor to the soup. The recipe here given makes a
sauce that may be used for any kind of cream soup.

THIN WHITE SAUCE

1 pt. milk, or milk and cream or stock
1 tsp. salt
2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour

Heat the liquid, salt, and butter in a double boiler. Stir the flour and
some of the cold liquid that has been reserved to a perfectly smooth,
thin paste and add to the hot liquid. Stir constantly after adding the
flour, so that no lumps will form. When the sauce becomes thick, it is
ready for the addition of any flavoring material that will make a
palatable soup. If thick material, such as any vegetable in the form of
a purée, rice, or potato, is used without additional liquid, only half
as much flour will be required to thicken the sauce.

52. CREAM-OF-POTATO SOUP.--Because of the large quantity of carbohydrate
derived from the potato, cream-of-potato soup is high in food value. For
persons who are fond of the flavor of the potato, this makes a delicious
soup and one that may be served as the main dish in a light meal.

CREAM-OF-POTATO SOUP
(Sufficient to Serve Four)

2 slices of onion
1 sprig parsley
2 medium-sized potatoes
1 c. milk
1 c. potato water
1 Tb. flour
2 Tb. butter
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper

Cook the onion and parsley with the potatoes, and, when cooked soft,
drain and mash. Make a sauce of the milk, potato water, flour, and
butter. Season with the salt and pepper, add the mashed potato,
and serve.

53. CREAM-OF-CORN SOUP.--The flavor of corn is excellent in a cream
soup, the basis of the soup being milk, butter, and flour. Then, too,
the addition of the corn, which is comparatively high in food value,
makes a very nutritious soup.

CREAM-OF-CORN SOUP
(Sufficient to Serve Four)

1 pt. milk
1 Tb. butter
1 Tb. flour
1 c. canned corn
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper

Make a white sauce of the milk, butter, and flour. Force the corn
through a colander or a sieve, and add the purée to the white sauce.
Season with the salt and pepper, and serve.

54. Cream-of-Asparagus Soup.--The asparagus used in cream-of-asparagus
soup adds very little besides flavor, but this is of sufficient value to
warrant its use. If a pinch of soda is used in asparagus soup, there is
less danger of the curdling that sometimes occurs. In making this soup,
the asparagus should be combined with the white sauce just
before serving.

CREAM-OF-ASPARAGUS SOUP
(Sufficient to Serve Four)

1 pt. milk
2 Tb. flour
2 Tb. butter
1 c. asparagus purée
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper

Make white sauce of the milk, flour, and butter. Add to it the cup of
purée made by forcing freshly cooked or canned asparagus through a
sieve. Season with the salt and pepper, and serve.

55. Cream-of-Spinach Soup.--Although cream-of-spinach soup is not
especially attractive in appearance, most persons enjoy its flavor, and
the soup serves as another way of adding an iron-containing food to the
diet. Children may often be induced to take the soup when they would
refuse the spinach as a vegetable.

CREAM-OF-SPINACH SOUP
(Sufficient to Serve Four)

1 pt. milk
2 Tb. flour
2 Tb. butter
1/2 c. spinach purée
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper

Make white sauce of the milk, flour, and butter. Add the spinach purée,
made by forcing freshly cooked or canned spinach through a sieve. Season
with the salt and pepper, heat thoroughly, and serve.

56. Cream-of-Pea Soup.--Either dried peas or canned green peas may be
used to make cream-of-pea soup. If dried peas are used, they must first
be cooked soft enough to pass through a sieve. The flavor is quite
different from that of green peas. With the use of green peas, a fair
amount of both protein and carbohydrate is added to the soup, but more
protein is provided when dried peas are used.

CREAM-OF-PEA SOUP
(Sufficient to Serve Four)

1 pt. milk
1 Tb. flour
2 Tb. butter
1/2 c. pea purée
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper

Make white sauce of the milk, flour, and butter. Put enough freshly
cooked or canned peas through a sieve to make 1/2 cupful of purée. Then
add the pea purée, the salt, and the pepper to the white sauce. Heat
thoroughly and serve.

57. CREAM-OF-TOMATO SOUP.--As a rule, cream-of-tomato soup is popular
with every one. Besides being pleasing to the taste, it is comparatively
high in food value, because its basis is cream sauce. However, the
tomatoes themselves add very little else besides flavor and
mineral salts.

CREAM-OF-TOMATO SOUP
(Sufficient to Serve Four)

1 c. canned tomatoes
1 pt. milk
3 Tb. flour
3 Tb. butter
1/8 tsp. soda
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper

Force the tomatoes through a sieve and heat them. Make white sauce of
the milk, flour, and butter. Add the soda to the tomatoes, and pour them
slowly into the white sauce, stirring rapidly. If the sauce begins to
curdle, beat the soup quickly with a rotary egg beater. Add the salt and
pepper and serve.

58. CREAM-OF-ONION SOUP.--Many persons who are not fond of onions can
often eat soup made of this vegetable. This is probably due to the fact
that the browning of the onions before they are used in the soup
improves the flavor very decidedly. In addition, this treatment of the
onions gives just a little color to the soup.

CREAM-OF-ONION SOUP
(Sufficient to Serve Four)

4 medium-sized onions
4 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
2-1/2 c. milk
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper

Slice the onions and brown them in a frying pan with 2 tablespoonfuls of
the butter. Make white sauce of the flour, the remaining butter, and the
milk. Add to this the browned onions, salt, and pepper. Heat thoroughly
and serve.

PURÉES

59. CHESTNUT PURÉE.--There are many recipes for the use of chestnuts in
the making of foods, but probably none is any more popular than that for
chestnut purée. The chestnuts develop a light-tan color in the soup. The
very large ones should be purchased for this purpose, since chestnuts of
ordinary size are very tedious to work with.

CHESTNUT PURÉE
(Sufficient to Serve Four)

1 c. mashed chestnuts
1 c. milk
2 Tb. flour
2 Tb. butter
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1/8 tsp. celery salt
1 c. white stock

Cook Spanish chestnuts for 10 minutes; then remove the shells and skins
and mash the chestnuts. Make white sauce of the milk, flour, and butter.
Add to this the mashed chestnuts, salt, pepper, celery salt, and stock.
Heat thoroughly and serve.

60. SPLIT-PEA PURÉE.--Dried peas or split peas are extremely high in
food value, and their addition to soup stock makes a highly nutritious
soup of very delightful flavor. Such a purée served in quantity does
nicely for the main dish in a light meal. Instead of the peas, dried
beans or lentils may be used if they are preferred.

SPLIT-PEA PURÉE
(Sufficient to Serve Four)

3/4 c. split peas
1 pt. white stock
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour

Soak the peas overnight, and cook in sufficient water to cover well
until they are soft. When thoroughly soft, drain the water from the peas
and put them through a colander. Heat the stock and add to it the pea
purée, salt, and pepper. Rub the butter and flour together, moisten with
some of the warm liquid, and add to the soup. Cook for a few minutes
and serve.

CHOWDERS

61. CLAM CHOWDER.--The flavor of clams, like that of oysters and other
kinds of sea food, is offensive to some persons, but where this is not
the case, clam chowder is a popular dish of high food value. This kind
of soup is much used in localities where clams are plentiful.

CLAM CHOWDER
(Sufficient to Serve Eight)

1 c. water
1 qt. clams
1 small onion
1 c. sliced potatoes
1/2 c. stewed tomatoes
1/2 c. diced carrots
1/2 c. diced celery
1-1/2 c. milk
2 Tb. butter
1-1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper

Add the water to the clams, and pick them over carefully to remove any
shell. Strain the liquid through cheesecloth, and then scald the clams
in it. Remove the clams and cook the vegetables in the liquid until they
are soft. Add the milk, butter, salt, and pepper and return the clams.
Heat thoroughly and serve over crackers.

62. FISH CHOWDER.--An excellent way in which to utilize a small quantity
of fish is afforded by fish chowder. In addition, this dish is quite
high in food value, so that when it is served with crackers, little of
anything else need be served with it to make an entire meal if it be
luncheon or supper. Cod, haddock, or fresh-water fish may be used in the
accompanying recipe.

FISH CHOWDER
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 lb. fish
1 small onion
1 c. sliced potatoes
1/2 c. stewed tomatoes
1-1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
2 Tb. butter
1-1/2 c. milk

Skin the fish, remove the flesh, and cut it into small pieces. Simmer
the head, bones, and skin of the fish and the onion in water for 1/2
hour. Strain, and add to this stock the fish, potatoes, tomatoes, salt,
and pepper. Simmer together until the potatoes are soft. Add the butter
and milk. Serve over crackers.

63. POTATO CHOWDER.--A vegetable mixture such as the one suggested in
the accompanying recipe is in reality not a chowder, for this form of
soup requires sea food for its basis. However, when it is impossible to
procure the sea food, potato chowder does nicely as a change from the
usual soup. This chowder differs in no material way from soup stock in
this form.

POTATO CHOWDER
(Sufficient to Serve Four)

1-1/2 c. sliced potatoes
1 small onion, sliced
1 c. water
1-1/2 c. milk
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
2 Tb. butter

Cook the potatoes and onion in the water until they are soft, but not
soft enough to fall to pieces. Rub half of the potatoes through a sieve
and return to the sliced ones. Add the milk, salt, pepper, and butter.
Cook together for a few minutes and serve.

64. CORN CHOWDER.--The addition of corn to potato chowder adds variety
of flavor and makes a delicious mixture of vegetables. This dish is
rather high in food value, especially if the soup is served over
crackers. A small amount of tomato, although not mentioned in the
recipe, may be added to this combination to improve the flavor.

CORN CHOWDER
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 c. sliced potatoes
1 small onion, sliced
1 c. water
1 c. canned corn
1-1/2 c. milk
2 Tb. butter
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper

Cook the potatoes and onions in the water until they are soft. Add the
corn, milk, butter, salt, and pepper, and cook together for a few
minutes. Serve over crackers.


SOUP ACCOMPANIMENTS AND GARNISHES

[Illustration: FIG. 8]

65. The soup course of a meal is a more or less unattractive one, but it
may be improved considerably if some tempting thing in the way of a
garnish or an accompaniment is served with it. But whatever is selected
to accompany soup should be, in a great measure, a contrast to it in
both consistency and color. The reason why a difference in consistency
is necessary is due to the nature of soup, which, being liquid in form,
is merely swallowed and does not stimulate the flow of the gastric
juices by mastication. Therefore, the accompaniment should be something
that requires chewing and that will consequently cause the digestive
juices, which respond to the mechanical action of chewing, to flow. The
garnish may add the color that is needed to make soup attractive. The
green and red of olives and radishes or of celery and radishes make a
decided contrast, so that when any of these things are served with soup,
an appetizing first course is the result. It is not necessary to serve
more than one of them, but if celery and radishes or celery, radishes,
and olives can be combined in the same relish dish, they become more
attractive than when each is served by itself.

[Illustration: FIG. 9]

66. RADISHES AND CELERY.--Before radishes and celery are used on the
table, whether with soup or some other part of a meal, they should be
put into cold water and allowed to stand for some time, so that they
will be perfectly crisp when they are served. In the case of radishes,
the tops and roots should first be cut from them, and the radishes then
scrubbed thoroughly. They may be served without any further treatment,
or they may be prepared to resemble flowers, as is shown in Fig. 8. This
may be done by peeling the red skin back to show the white inside, and
then cutting the sections to look like the petals of a flower. Little
difficulty will be experienced in preparing radishes in this artistic
way if a sharp knife is used, for, with a little practice, the work can
be done quickly and skilfully.

67. Celery that is to be served with soup may be prepared in two ways,
as Fig. 9 illustrates. The stems may be pulled from the stalk and served
separately, as in the group on the right, or the stalk may be cut down
through the center with a knife into four or more pieces, as shown at
the left of the illustration. The first of these methods is not so good
as the second, for by it one person gets all of the tender heart and the
coarse outside stems are left for all the others. By the second method,
every piece consists of some of the heart and some of the outside stems
attached to the root and makes a similar serving for each person.
Whichever way is adopted, however, the celery should be scrubbed and
cleansed thoroughly. This is often a difficult task, because the dirt
sticks tightly between the stems. Still, an effort should be made to
have the celery entirely free from dirt before it goes to the table. A
few tender yellow leaves may be left on the pieces to improve the
appearance of the celery.

68. CRACKERS.--Various kinds of wafers and crackers can be purchased to
serve with soup, and the selection, as well as the serving of them, is
entirely a matter of individual taste. One point, however, that must not
be overlooked is that crackers of any kind must be crisp in order to be
appetizing. Dry foods of this sort absorb moisture from the air when
they are exposed to it and consequently become tough. As heat drives off
this moisture and restores the original crispness, crackers should
always be heated before they are served. Their flavor can be improved by
toasting them until they are light brown in color.

69. CROUTONS.--As has already been learned, croutons are small pieces of
bread that have been fried or toasted to serve with soup. These are
usually made in the form of cubes, or dice, as is shown in the front
group in Fig. 10; but they may be cut into triangles, circles, ovals,
hearts, or, in fact, any fancy shape, by means of small cutters that can
be purchased for such purposes. The bread used for croutons should not
be fresh bread, as such bread does not toast nor fry very well;
left-over toast, stale bread, or slices of bread that have been cut from
the loaf and not eaten are usually found more satisfactory. If the
croutons are not made from slices already cut, the bread should be cut
into slices 1/4 to 1/2 inch thick, and, after the crusts have been
closely trimmed, the slices should be cut into cubes. When the cubes
have been obtained, they may be put into a shallow pan and toasted on
all sides quickly, placed in a frying basket and browned in deep fat, or
put into a frying pan and sautéd in butter. If toast is used, it should
merely be cut in the desired shape.

Various methods of serving croutons are in practice. Some housewives
prefer to place them in the soup tureen and pour the soup over them,
while others like to put a few in each individual serving of soup. A
better plan, however, and one that is much followed, is to serve a
number of croutons on a small plate or dish at each person's place, as
shown in Figs. 3 and 4, for then every one may eat them in the way
preferred.

[Illustration: FIG. 10]

70. BREAD STICKS.--A soup accompaniment similar in nature to croutons,
and known as _bread sticks_, is made of pieces of bread 1/2 inch wide,
1/2 inch thick, and several inches long. These are toasted on each side
and are served in place of crackers. A number of them are shown in the
back row in Fig. 10. Variety in bread sticks may be secured by spreading
butter over them before the toasting is begun or by sprinkling grated
cheese over them a few minutes before they are removed from the oven.
Bread sticks are usually served on a bread-and-butter plate to the left
of each person's place at the table.

71. PASTRY STRIPS.--A very appetizing addition to soup may be made by
cutting pastry into narrow strips and then baking these strips in the
oven until they are brown or frying them in deep fat and draining them.
Strips prepared in this way may be served in place of crackers,
croutons, or bread sticks, and are considered delicious by those who are
fond of pastry. Details regarding pastry are given in another Section.

72. SOUP FRITTERS.--If an entirely different kind of soup accompaniment
from those already mentioned is desired, soup fritters will no doubt
find favor. These are made by combining certain ingredients to form a
batter and then dropping small amounts of this into hot fat and frying
them until they are crisp and brown. The accompanying recipe, provided
it is followed carefully, will produce good results.

SOUP FRITTERS

1 egg
2 Tb. milk
3/4 tsp. salt
1/2 c. flour

Beat the egg, and to it add the milk, salt, and flour. Drop the batter
in tiny drops into hot fat, and fry until brown and crisp. Drain on
paper and serve with the soup.

73. EGG BALLS.--To serve with a soup that is well flavored but not
highly nutritious, egg balls are very satisfactory. In addition to
supplying nutrition, these balls are extremely appetizing, and so they
greatly improve a course that is often unattractive. Careful attention
given to the ingredients and the directions in the accompanying recipe
will produce good results.

EGG BALLS

3 yolks of hard-cooked eggs
1/2 tsp. melted butter
Salt and pepper
1 uncooked yolk

Mash the cooked yolks, and to them add the butter, salt, and pepper, and
enough of the uncooked yolk to make the mixture of a consistency to
handle easily. Shape into tiny balls. Roll in the white of egg and then
in flour and sauté in butter. Serve in the individual dishes of soup.

74. FORCEMEAT BALLS.--Another delicious form of accompaniment that
improves certain soups by adding nutrition is forcemeat balls. These
contain various nutritious ingredients combined into small balls, and
the balls are then either sautéd or fried in deep fat. They may be
placed in the soup tureen or in each person's soup.

FORCEMEAT BALLS

1/2 c. fine stale-bread crumbs
1/2 c. milk
2 Tb. butter
White of 1 egg
1/4 tsp. salt
Few grains of pepper
2/3 c. breast of raw chicken or raw fish

Cook the bread crumbs and milk to form a paste, and to this add the
butter, beaten egg white, and seasonings. Pound the chicken or fish to a
pulp, or force it through a food chopper and then through a purée
strainer. Add this to the first mixture. Form into tiny balls. Roll in
flour and either sauté or fry in deep fat. Serve hot.

75. AMERICAN FORCEMEAT BALLS.--A simple kind of forcemeat balls may be
made according to the accompanying recipe. The meat used may be sausage
provided especially for the purpose or some that is left over from a
previous meal. If it is not possible to obtain sausage, some other
highly seasoned meat, such as ham first ground very fine and then
pounded to a pulp, may be substituted.

AMERICAN FORCEMEAT BALLS

1 Tb. butter
1 small onion
1-1/2 c. bread, without crusts
1 egg
1 tsp. salt
1/2 tsp. pepper
Dash of nutmeg
1 Tb. chopped parsley
1/2 c. sausage meat

Melt the butter in a saucepan and add the onion finely chopped. Fry for
several minutes over the fire. Soak the bread in water until thoroughly
softened and then squeeze out all the water. Mix with the bread the egg,
salt, pepper, nutmeg, parsley, and meat, and to this add also the butter
and fried onion. Form small balls of this mixture and sauté them in
shallow fat, fry them in deep fat, or, after brushing them over with
fat, bake them in the oven. Place a few in each serving of soup.


SOUP

EXAMINATION QUESTIONS

(1) (_a_) Mention the two purposes that soups serve in a meal, (_b_)
What are the qualities of a good soup?

(2) (_a_) Mention the two general classes of soup. (_b_) Explain and
illustrate how to choose a soup.

(3) Why is soup an economical dish?

(4) (_a_) Explain in full the meaning of stock as applied to soup. (_b_)
For what purposes other than soup making is stock used?

(5) (_a_) What is the value of the stock pot? (_b_) What care should be
given to it?

(6) Mention some of the materials that may be put into the stock pot.

(7) (_a_) Why are the tough cuts of meat more suitable for soup than the
tender ones? (_b_) Name the pieces that are best adapted to soup making.

(8) (_a_) What proportion of bone to meat should be used in making soup
from fresh meat? (_b_) For what two purposes are vegetables used
in soup?

(9) Explain briefly the making of stock from meat.

(10) (_a_) Why should the cooking of the meat for stock be started with
cold water rather than with hot water? (_b_) What disposal should be
made of meat from which stock is made?

(11) (_a_) Of what value are flavorings in the making of soups? (_b_)
What precaution should be taken in the use of flavorings?

(12) Explain how grease may be removed from soup.

(13) How may soup be cleared?

(14) (_a_) For what purposes is thickening used in soups? (_b_) Mention
the materials most used to thicken soups.

(15) What precaution should be taken to keep soup or stock from
spoiling.

(16) What point about the serving of soup should be observed if an
appetizing soup is desired?

(17) What kind of dish is used for serving: (_a_) thin soup? (_b_) thick
soup?

(18) (_a_) What is a cream soup? (_b_) Give the general directions for
making soup of this kind.

(19) (_a_) How may the soup course of a meal be made more attractive?
(_b_) In what ways should soup accompaniments be a contrast to the soup?

(20) (_a_) Explain the making of croutons. (_b_) What is the most
satisfactory way in which to prepare celery that is to be served
with soup?


ADDITIONAL WORK

Plan and prepare a dinner menu from the recipes given in the lessons
that you have studied. Submit the menu for this dinner and give the
order in which you prepared the dishes. In addition, tell the number of
persons you served, as well as what remained after the meal and whether
or not you made use of it for another meal. Send this information with
your answers to the Examination Questions.

       *       *       *       *       *




MEAT (PART 1)

       *       *       *       *       *

MEAT IN THE DIET

VALUE OF MEAT AS FOOD

1. In its broadest sense, MEAT may be considered as "any clean, sound,
dressed or properly prepared edible part of animals that are in good
health at the time of slaughter." However, the flesh of carnivorous
animals--that is, animals that eat the flesh of other animals--is so
seldom eaten by man, that the term meat is usually restricted to the
flesh of all animals except these. But even this meaning of meat is too
broad; indeed, as the term is generally used it refers particularly to
the flesh of the so-called domestic animals, and does not include
poultry, game, fish, and the like. It is in this limited sense that meat
is considered in these Sections, and the kinds to which attention is
given are beef, veal, lamb, mutton, and pork. Meat, including these
varieties, forms one of the principal sources of the family's food
supply. As such, it is valuable chiefly as a food; but, in the form of
broths and extracts made from it, meat stimulates the appetite and
actually assists the flow of gastric juice. Therefore, so that the
outlay for meat will not be greater than it should be and this food will
provide the greatest amount of nourishment, every housewife should be
thoroughly familiar with the place it occupies in the dietary.

2. In the first place, it should be remembered that the food eaten by
human beings comes from two sources--animal and vegetable. The foods of
animal origin, which include milk, eggs, and meat, have a certain
similarity that causes them to be classed together and this is the fact
that they are high-protein foods. Milk is the first protein food fed to
the young, but a little later it is partly replaced by eggs, and,
finally, or in adult life, meat largely takes the place of both. For
this reason, meat has considerable importance in the dietary. In
reality, from this food is obtained the greatest amount of protein that
the average person eats. However, it will be well to note that milk and
eggs, as well as cheese and even cereals and vegetables, can be made to
take the place of meat when the use of less of this food is deemed
advisable.

3. As the work of protein foods is to build and repair tissue, it is on
them that the human race largely depends. Of course, protein also yields
energy; but the amount is so small that if one variety of protein food,
such as meat, were eaten simply to supply energy to the body, huge
quantities of it would be needed to do the same work that a small amount
of less expensive food would accomplish. Some persons have an idea that
meat produces the necessary strength and energy of those who perform
hard work. This is entirely erroneous, because fats and carbohydrates
are the food substances that produce the energy required to do work.
Some kind of protein is, of course, absolutely necessary to the health
of every normal person, but a fact that cannot be emphasized too
strongly is that an oversupply of it does more harm than good.

Scientists have been trying for a long time to determine just how much
of these tissue-building foods is necessary for individuals, but they
have found this a difficult matter. Nevertheless, it is generally
conceded that most persons are likely to use too much rather than too
little of them. It is essential then, not only from the standpoint of
economy, but from the far more important principle of health, that the
modern housewife should know the nutritive value of meats.

4. In her efforts to familiarize herself with these matters, the
housewife should ever remember that meat is the most expensive of the
daily foods of a family. Hence, to get the greatest value for the money
expended, meat must be bought judiciously, cared for properly, and
prepared carefully. Too many housewives trust the not over-scrupulous
butcher to give them the kind of meat they should have, and very often
they do not have a clear idea as to whether it is the best piece that
can be purchased for the desired purpose and for the price that is
asked. Every housewife ought to be so familiar with the various cuts of
meat that she need not depend on any one except herself in the purchase
of this food. She will find that both the buying and the preparation of
meats will be a simple matter for her if she learns these three
important things: (1) From what part of the animal the particular piece
she desires is cut and how to ask for that piece; (2) how to judge a
good piece of meat by its appearance; and (3) what to do with it from
the moment it is purchased until the last bit of it is used.

5. Of these three things, the cooking of meat is the one that demands
the most attention, because it has a decided effect on the quality and
digestibility of this food. Proper cooking is just as essential in the
case of meat as for any other food, for a tender, digestible piece of
meat may be made tough and indigestible by improper preparation, while a
tough piece may be made tender and very appetizing by careful,
intelligent preparation. The cheaper cuts of meat, which are often
scorned as being too tough for use, may be converted into delicious
dishes by the skilful cook who understands how to apply the various
methods of cookery and knows what their effect will be on the
meat tissues.

6. Unfortunately, thorough cooking affects the digestibility of meat
unfavorably; but it is doubtless a wise procedure in some cases because,
as is definitely known, some of the parasites that attack man find their
way into the system through the meat that is eaten. These are carried to
meat from external sources, such as dust, flies, and the soiled hands of
persons handling it, and they multiply and thrive. It is known, too,
that some of the germs that cause disease in the animal remain in its
flesh and are thus transmitted to human beings that eat such meat. If
there is any question as to its good condition, meat must be thoroughly
cooked, because long cooking completely eliminates the danger from
such sources.


STRUCTURE AND COMPOSITION OF MEAT

7. An understanding of the physical structure of meat is essential to
its successful cooking. Meat consists of muscular tissue, or lean;
varying quantities of visible fat that lie between and within the
membranes and tendons; and also particles of fat that are too small to
be distinguished except with the aid of a microscope. The general nature
of the lean part of meat can be determined by examining a piece of it
with merely the unaided eye. On close observation, it will be noted
that, especially in the case of meat that has been cooked, innumerable
thread-like fibers make up the structure. With a microscope, it can be
observed that these visible fibers are made up of still smaller ones,
the length of which varies in different parts of the animal. It is to
the length of these fibers that the tenderness of meat is due. Short
fibers are much easier to chew than long ones; consequently, the pieces
containing them are the most tender. These muscle fibers, which are in
the form of tiny tubes, are filled with a protein substance. They are
held together with a tough, stringy material called _connective tissue_.
As the animal grows older and its muscles are used more, the walls of
these tubes or fibers become dense and tough; likewise, the amount of
connective tissue increases and becomes tougher. Among the muscle fibers
are embedded layers and particles of fat, the quantity of which varies
greatly in different animals and depends largely on the age of the
animal. For instance, lamb and veal usually have very little fat in the
tissues, mutton and beef always contain more, while pork contains a
greater amount of fat than the meat of any other domestic animal.

8. The composition of meat depends to a large extent on the breed of the
animal, the degree to which it has been fattened, and the particular cut
of meat in question. However, the muscle fibers are made up of protein
and contain more protein, mineral salts, or ash, and certain substances
called _extractives_, all of which are held in solution by water. The
younger the animal, the greater is the proportion of water and the lower
the nutritive value of meat. It should be understood, however, that not
all of meat is edible material; indeed, a large part of it is made up of
gristle, bones, cartilage, nerves, blood vessels, and connective tissue.
The amount of these indigestible materials also varies in different
animals and different cuts, but the average proportion in a piece of
meat is usually considered to be 15 per cent. of the whole. Because of
the variation of both the edible and inedible material of meat, a
standard composition for this food cannot readily be given. However, an
idea of the average composition of the various kinds can be obtained
from Fig. 1.

[Illustration: Fig 1.]

BEEF                Fuel value per pound
  Chuck, medium fat      735
  Loin, medium fat      1040
  Ribs, medium fat      1155
  Round, very lean       475
  Round, medium fat      895
  Round, very fat       1275
  Rump, medium fat      1110

VEAL
  Breast, medium fat      740
  Leg, medium fat         620
  Loin, medium fat        690

LAMB
  Leg, medium fat         870

MUTTON
  Leg, medium fat         900

PORK
  Ham, fresh, medium fat 1345
  Ham, smoked            1675
  Loin                   1455
  Bacon, medium fat      2795

9. PROTEIN IN MEAT.--The value of meat as food is due to the proteins
that it contains. Numerous kinds of protein occur in meat, but the
chief varieties are myosin and muscle albumin. The _myosin_, which is
the most important protein and occurs in the greatest quantity, hardens
after the animal has been killed and the muscles have become cold. The
tissues then become tough and hard, a condition known as _rigor
mortis_. As meat in this condition is not desirable, it should be used
before rigor mortis sets in, or else it should be put aside until this
condition of toughness disappears. The length of time necessary for this
to occur varies with the size of the animal that is killed. It may be
from 24 hours to 3 or 4 days. The disappearance is due to the
development of certain acids that cause the softening of the tissues.
The _albumin_, which is contained in solution in the muscle fibers, is
similar in composition to the albumen of eggs and milk, and it is
affected by the application of heat in the cooking processes in much
the same way.

10. GELATINE IN MEAT.--The gelatine that is found in meat is a substance
very similar in composition to protein, but it has less value as food.
It is contained in the connective tissue and can be extracted by
boiling, being apparent as a jellylike substance after the water in
which meat has been cooked has cooled. Use is made of this material in
the preparation of pressed meats and fowl and in various salads and
other cold-meat dishes. Some kinds of commercial gelatine are also made
from it, being first extracted from the meat and then evaporated to form
a dry substance.

11. FAT IN MEAT.--All meat, no matter how lean it appears, contains some
fat. As already explained, a part of the fat contained in meat occurs in
small particles so embedded in the muscle fibers as not to be readily
seen, while the other part occurs in sufficient amounts to be visible.
In the flesh of some animals, such as veal and rabbit, there is almost
no visible fat, but in very fat hogs or fowls, one-third or one-half of
the weight may be fat. Meats that are very fat are higher in nutritive
value than meats that contain only a small amount of this substance, as
will be observed on referring to the table of meat compositions in Fig.
1. However, an excessive amount of fat prevents the protein materials
from digesting normally.

The quality of fat varies greatly, there being two distinct kinds of
this material in animals. That which covers or lies between the muscles
or occurs on the outside of the body just beneath the skin has a lower
melting point, is less firm, and is of a poorer grade for most purposes
than that which is found inside the bony structure and surrounds the
internal organs. The suet of beef is an example of this internal fat.

Fat is a valuable constituent of food, for it is the most concentrated
form in which the fuel elements of food are found. In supplying the body
with fuel, it serves to maintain the body temperature and to yield
energy in the form of muscular and other power. Since this is such a
valuable food material, it is important that the best possible use be
made of all drippings and left-over fats and that not even the smallest
amount of any kind be wasted.

12. CARBOHYDRATE IN MEAT.--In the liver and all muscle fibers of animals
is stored a small supply of carbohydrate in a form that is called
_glycogen_, or _muscle sugar_. However, there is not enough of this
substance to be of any appreciable value, and, so far as the methods of
cookery and the uses of meat as food are concerned, it is of no
importance.

13. WATER IN MEAT.--The proportion of water in meat varies from
one-third to three-fourths of the whole, depending on the amount of fat
the meat contains and the age of the animal. This water carries with it
the flavor, much of the mineral matter, and some food material, so that
when the water is removed from the tissues these things are to a great
extent lost. The methods of cookery applied to meat are based on the
principle of either retaining or extracting the water that it contains.
The meat in which water is retained is more easily chewed and swallowed
than that which is dry. However, the water contained in flesh has no
greater value as food than other water. Therefore, as will be seen in
Fig. 1, the greater the amount of water in a given weight of food, the
less is its nutritive value.

14. MINERALS IN MEAT.--Eight or more kinds of minerals in sufficient
quantities to be of importance in the diet are to be found in meat. Lean
meat contains the most minerals; they decrease in proportion as the
amount of fat increases. These salts assist in the building of hard
tissues and have a decided effect on the blood. They are lost from the
tissues of meat by certain methods of cookery, but as they are in
solution in the water in which the meat is cooked, they need not be lost
to the diet if use is made of this water for soups, sauces, and gravies.

15. EXTRACTIVES IN MEAT.--The appetizing flavor of meat is due to
substances called _extractives_. The typical flavor that serves to
distinguish pork from beef or mutton is due to the difference in the
extractives. Although necessary for flavoring, these have no nutritive
value; in fact, the body throws them off as waste material when they are
taken with the food. In some methods of cookery, such as broiling and
roasting, the extractives are retained, while in others, such as those
employed for making stews and soups, they are drawn out.

Extractives occur in the greatest quantity in the muscles that the
animal exercises a great deal and that in reality have become tough.
Likewise, a certain part of an old animal contains more extractives than
the same part of a young one. For these reasons a very young chicken is
broiled while an old one is used for stew, and ribs of beef are roasted
while the shins are used for soup.

Meat that is allowed to hang and ripen develops compounds that are
similar to extractives and that impart additional flavor. A ripened
steak is usually preferred to one cut from an animal that has been
killed only a short time. However, as the ripening is in reality a
decomposition process, the meat is said to become "high" if it is
allowed to hang too long.


PURCHASE AND CARE OF MEAT

16. PURCHASE OF MEAT.--Of all the money that is spent for food in the
United States nearly one-third is spent for meat. This proportion is
greater than that of any European country and is probably more than is
necessary to provide diets that are properly balanced. If it is found
that the meat bill is running too high, one or more of several things
may be the cause. The one who does the purchasing may not understand the
buying of meat, the cheaper cuts may not be used because of a lack of
knowledge as to how they should be prepared to make them appetizing, or
more meat may be served than is necessary to supply the needs of
the family.

Much of this difficulty can be overcome if the person purchasing meat
goes to the market personally to see the meat cut and weighed instead of
telephoning the order. It is true, of course, that the method of cutting
an animal varies in different parts of the country, as does also the
naming of the different pieces. However, this need give the housewife no
concern, for the dealer from whom the meat is purchased is usually
willing to supply any information that is desired about the cutting of
meat and the best use for certain pieces. In fact, if the butcher is
competent, this is a very good source from which to obtain a knowledge
of such matters.

Another way in which to reduce the meat bill is to utilize the trimmings
of bone and fat from pieces of meat. In most cases, these are of no
value to the butcher, so that if a request for them is made, he will, as
a rule, be glad to wrap them up with the meat that is purchased. They
are of considerable value to the housewife, for the bones may go into
the stock pot, while the fat, if it is tried out, can be used for
many things.

17. The quantity of meat to purchase depends, of course, on the number
of persons that are to be served with it. However, it is often a good
plan to purchase a larger piece than is required for a single meal and
then use what remains for another meal. For instance, a large roast is
always better than a small one, because it does not dry out in the
process of cookery and the part that remains after one meal may be
served cold in slices or used for making some other dish, such as meat
pie or hash. Such a plan also saves both time and fuel, because
sufficient meat for several meals may be cooked at one time.

In purchasing meat, there are certain pieces that should never be asked
for by the pound or by the price. For instance, the housewife should not
say to the butcher, "Give me 2 pounds of porterhouse steak," nor should
she say, "Give me 25 cents worth of chops." Steak should be bought by
the cut, and the thickness that is desired should be designated. For
example, the housewife may ask for an inch-thick sirloin steak, a 2-inch
porterhouse steak, and so on. Chops should be bought according to the
number of persons that are to be served, usually a chop to a person
being quite sufficient. Rib roasts should be bought by designating the
number of ribs. Thus, the housewife may ask for a rib roast containing
two, three, four, or more ribs, depending on the size desired. Roasts
from other parts of beef, such as chuck or rump roasts, may be cut into
chunks of almost any desirable size without working a disadvantage to
either the butcher or the customer, and may therefore be bought by the
pound. Round bought for steaks should be purchased by the cut, as are
other steaks; or, if an entire cut is too large, it may be purchased as
upper round or lower round, but the price paid should vary with the
piece that is purchased. Round bought for roasts, however, may be
purchased by the pound.

18. CARE OF MEAT IN THE MARKET.--Animal foods decompose more readily
than any other kind, and the products of their decomposition are
extremely dangerous to the health. It is therefore a serious matter when
everything that comes in contact with meat is not clean. Regarding the
proper care of meat, the sanitary condition of the market is the first
consideration. The light and ventilation of the room and the cleanliness
of the walls, floors, tables, counters, and other equipment are points
of the greatest importance and should be noted by the housewife when she
is purchasing meat. Whether the windows and doors are screened and all
the meat is carefully covered during the fly season are also matters
that should not be overlooked. Then, too, the cleanliness and physical
condition of the persons who handle the meat should be of as great
concern as the sanitary condition of the market. The housewife who
desires to supply her family with the safest and cleanest meat should
endeavor to purchase it in markets where all the points pertaining to
the sanitary condition are as ideal as possible. If she is at all
doubtful as to the freshness and cleanliness of what is sold to her, she
should give it thorough cooking in the process of preparation so that no
harm will be done to the persons who are to eat it.

19. CARE OF MEAT IN THE HOME.--Because of the perishable nature of meat,
the care given it in the market must be continued in the home in order
that no deterioration may take place before it is cooked. This is not
much of a problem during cold weather, but through the summer months a
cool place in which to keep it must be provided unless the meat can be
cooked very soon after it is delivered. Meat that must be shipped long
distances is frozen before it is shipped and is kept frozen until just
before it is used. If such meat is still frozen when it enters the home,
it should not be put into a warm place, for then it will thaw too
quickly. Instead, it should be put in the refrigerator or in some place
where the temperature is a few degrees above freezing point, so that it
will thaw slowly and still remain too cold for bacteria to
become active.

Even if meat is not frozen, it must receive proper attention after it
enters the home. As soon as it is received, it should be removed from
the wrapping paper or the wooden or cardboard dish in which it is
delivered. If the meat has not been purchased personally, it is
advisable to weigh it in order to verify the butcher's bill. When the
housewife is satisfied about the weight, she should place the meat in
an earthenware, china, or enameled bowl, cover it, and then put it away
in the coolest available place until it is used. Some persons put salt
on meat when they desire to keep it, but this practice should be
avoided, as salt draws out the juices from raw meat and hardens the
tissues to a certain extent.

If such precautions are taken with meat, it will be in good condition
when it is to be cooked. However, before any cooking method is applied
to it, it should always be wiped with a clean, damp cloth. In addition,
all fat should be removed, except just enough to assist in cooking the
meat and give it a good flavor. Bone or tough portions may also be
removed if they can be used to better advantage for soups or stews.

       *       *       *       *       *

COOKING OF MEAT

PURPOSES OF COOKING MEAT

20. It is in the preparation of food, and of meat in particular, that
one of the marked differences between uncivilized and civilized man is
evident. Raw meat, which is preferred by the savage, does not appeal to
the appetite of most civilized persons; in fact, to the majority of them
the idea of using it for food is disgusting. Therefore, civilized man
prepares his meat before eating it, and the higher his culture, the more
perfect are his methods of preparation.

While it is probably true that most of the methods of cookery render
meat less easy to digest than in its raw condition, this disadvantage is
offset by the several purposes for which this food is cooked. Meat is
cooked chiefly to loosen and soften the connective tissue and thus cause
the muscle tissues to be exposed more fully to the action of the
digestive juices. Another important reason for cooking meat is that
subjecting it to the action of heat helps to kill bacteria and
parasites. In addition, meat is cooked to make it more attractive to the
eye and to develop and improve its flavor.


METHODS OF COOKING MEAT

21. The result desired when meat is cooked has much to do with the
method of cookery to choose, for different methods produce different
results. To understand this, it will be necessary to know just what the
action of cooking is on the material that meat contains. When raw meat
is cut, the tiny meat fibers are laid open, with the result that, in the
application of the cooking process, the albuminous material either is
lost, or, like the albumen of eggs, is coagulated, or hardened, and thus
retained. Therefore, before preparing a piece of meat, the housewife
should determine which of these two things she wishes to accomplish and
then proceed to carry out the process intelligently.

The methods of cookery that may be applied to meat include broiling, pan
broiling, roasting, stewing or simmering, braizing, frying, sautéing,
and fricasseeing. All of these methods are explained in a general way in
_Essentials of Cookery_, Part 1, but explanations of them as they apply
to meat are here given in order to acquaint the housewife with the
advantages and disadvantages of the various ways by which this food can
be prepared.

22. BROILING AND PAN BROILING.--Only such cuts of meats as require short
cooking can be prepared by the methods of broiling and pan broiling. To
carry out these methods successfully, severe heat must be applied to the
surface of the meat so that the albumin in the ends of the muscle fibers
may be coagulated at once. This presents, during the remainder of the
preparation, a loss of the meat juices.

Meat to which either of these methods is applied will be indigestible on
the surface and many times almost uncooked in the center, as in the case
of rare steak. Such meat, however, is more digestible than thin pieces
that are thoroughly cooked at the very high temperature required
for broiling.

23. ROASTING.--The process of roasting, either in the oven or in a pot
on top of the stove, to be properly done, requires that the piece of
meat to be roasted must first be seared over the entire surface by the
application of severe heat. In the case of a pot roast, the searing can
be done conveniently in the pot before the pot-roasting process begins.
If the meat is to be roasted in the oven, it may be seared first in a
pan on top of the stove. However, it may be seared to some extent by
placing it in a very hot oven and turning it over so that all the
surface is exposed. Then, to continue the roasting process, the
temperature must be lowered just a little.

The roasting pan may be of any desirable size and shape that is
convenient and sufficiently large to accommodate the meat to be
prepared. A pan like that shown in Fig. 2 is both convenient and
satisfactory. It is provided with a cover that fits tight. In this
cover, as shown, is an opening that may be closed or opened so as to
regulate the amount of moisture inside the pan. In the bottom of the pan
is a rack upon which the meat may rest.

[Illustration: Fig. 2]

24. To prepare meat for roasting, flour should be sprinkled or rubbed
over its lean surface before it is put in the pan. This forms a paste
that cooks into a crust and prevents the loss of juices from the meat.
In roasting, the heat is applied longer and more slowly than in broiling
or frying, so that there is more possibility for the connective tissue
beneath the surface to soften. The surface is, however, as indigestible
as that of broiled meat.

An important point for every housewife to remember in this connection is
that the larger the roast the slower should be the fire. This is due to
the fact that long before the heat could penetrate to the center, the
outside would be burned. A small roast, however, will be more delicious
if it is prepared with a very hot fire, for then the juices will not
have a chance to evaporate and the tissues will be more moist and tasty.

25. FRYING AND SAUTÉING.--When meat is fried or sautéd, that is, brought
directly in contact with hot fat, it is made doubly indigestible,
because of the hardening of the surface tissues and the indigestibility
of the fat that penetrates these tissues. This is especially true of
meat that is sautéd slowly in a small quantity of hot fat. Much of this
difficulty can be overcome, however, if meat prepared by these methods,
like that which is broiled or roasted, is subjected quickly to intense
heat. In addition, the fat used for cooking should be made hot before
the meat is put into it.

26. BOILING.--To boil meat means to cook it a long time in water at a
temperature of 212 degrees Fahrenheit. This method of preparing meat is
not strongly advocated, for there is seldom a time when better results
cannot be obtained by cooking meat at a lower temperature than boiling
point. The best plan is to bring the meat to the boiling point, allow
it to boil for a short time, and then reduce the temperature so that the
meat will simmer for the remainder of the cooking.

In cooking meat by boiling, a grayish scum appears on the surface just
before the boiling point is reached. This scum is caused by the gradual
extraction of a part of the soluble albumin that is present in the
hollow fibers of the muscle tissue. After its extraction, it is
coagulated by the heat in the water. As it coagulates and rises, it
carries with it to the top particles of dirt and other foreign material
present in the water or on the surface of the meat. In addition, this
scum contains a little blood, which is extracted and coagulated and
which tends to make it grayish in color. Such scum should be skimmed
off, as it is unappetizing in appearance.

27. Whether the meat should be put into cold water or boiling water
depends on the result that is desired. It is impossible to make a rich,
tasty broth and at the same time have a juicy, well-flavored piece of
boiled meat. If meat is cooked for the purpose of making soup or broth,
it should be put into cold water and then brought to a boil. By this
method, some of the nutritive material and much of the flavoring
substance will be drawn out before the water becomes hot enough to
harden them. However, in case only the meat is to be used, it should be
plunged directly into boiling water in order to coagulate the surface at
once, as in the application of dry heat. If it is allowed to boil for 10
minutes or so and the temperature then reduced, the coating that is
formed will prevent the nutritive material and the flavor from being
lost to any great extent. But if the action of the boiling water is
permitted to continue during the entire time of cooking, the tissues
will become tough and dry.

28. STEWING OR SIMMERING.--The cheap cuts of meat, which contain a great
deal of flavor and are so likely to be tough, cannot be prepared by the
quick methods of cookery nor by the application of high temperature, for
the result would be a tough, indigestible, and unpalatable dish. The
long, slow cooking at a temperature lower than boiling point, which is
known as stewing or simmering, should be applied. In fact, no better
method for the preparation of tough pieces of meat and old fowl can be
found than this process, for by it the connective tissue and the muscle
fibers are softened. If the method is carried out in a tightly closed
vessel and only a small amount of liquid is used, there is no
appreciable loss of flavor except that carried into the liquid in which
the meat cooks. But since such liquid is always used, the meat being
usually served in it, as in the case of stews, there is no actual loss.

To secure the best results in the use of this method, the meat should be
cut into small pieces so as to expose as much surface as possible. Then
the pieces should be put into cold water rather than hot, in order that
much of the juices and flavoring materials may be dissolved. When this
has been accomplished, the temperature should be gradually raised until
it nearly reaches the boiling point. If it is kept at this point for
several hours, the meat will become tender and juicy and a rich, tasty
broth will also be obtained.

29. BRAIZING.--Meat cooked by the method of braizing, which is in
reality a combination of stewing and baking, is first subjected to the
intense dry heat of the oven and then cooked slowly in the steam of the
water that surrounds it. To cook meat in this way, a pan must be used
that will permit the meat to be raised on a rack that extends above a
small quantity of water. By this method a certain amount of juice from
the meat is taken up by the water, but the connective tissue is well
softened unless the cooking is done at too high a temperature.

30. FRICASSEEING.--As has already been learned, fricasseeing is a
combination of sautéing and stewing. The sautéing coagulates the surface
proteins and prevents, to some extent, the loss of flavor that would
occur in the subsequent stewing if the surface were not hardened. To
produce a tender, tasty dish, fricasseeing should be a long, slow
process. This method is seldom applied to tender, expensive cuts of meat
and to young chickens, but is used for fowl and for pieces of meat that
would not make appetizing dishes if prepared by a quicker method.


TIME REQUIRED FOR COOKING MEAT

31. The length of time required for cooking various kinds of meat is
usually puzzling to those inexperienced in cookery. The difference
between a dry, hard beef roast and a tender, moist, juicy one is due to
the length of time allowed for cooking. Overdone meats of any kind are
not likely to be tasty. Therefore, it should be remembered that when dry
heat is used, as in baking, roasting, broiling, etc., the longer the
heat is applied the greater will be the evaporation of moisture and the
consequent shrinkage in the meat.

A general rule for cooking meat in the oven is to allow 15 minutes for
each pound and 15 minutes extra. If it is to be cooked by broiling,
allow 10 minutes for each pound and 10 minutes extra; by boiling, 20
minutes for each pound and 20 minutes extra; and by simmering, 30
minutes for each pound. In Table I is given the number of minutes
generally allowed for cooking 1 pound of each of the various cuts of
beef, veal, mutton, lamb, and pork by the different cookery methods.
This table should be referred to in studying the two Sections
pertaining to meat.

TABLE I

TIME TABLE FOR COOKING MEATS

NAME OF CUT     COOKERY METHOD        TIME PER POUND
                                         MINUTES
                    BEEF
Round            Roasting               12 to 15
Ribs             Roasting, well done    12 to 15
Ribs             Roasting, rare          8 to 10
Rump             Roasting               12 to 15
Sirloin          Roasting, rare          8 to 10
Rolled roast     Roasting               12 to 15
Steaks           Broiling, well done    12 to 15
Steaks           Broiling, rare          8 to 10
Fresh beef       Boiling                20 to 25
Corned beef      Boiling                25 to 30
Any cut          Simmering                    30
Chuck            Braizing               25 to 30

                    VEAL
Leg              Roasting                     20
Chops or steak   Broiling                8 to 30
Shoulder         Braizing               30 to 40

                   MUTTON
Leg              Roasting               15 to 20
Shoulder         Roasting               15 to 20
Leg              Braizing               40 to 50
Leg              Boiling                15 to 25
Chops            Broiling               10 to 12

                    LAMB
Loin or saddle   Roasting               15 to 20
Leg              Roasting               15 to 20
Chops            Broiling                8 to 10

                    PORK
Shoulder or ribs Roasting                20 to 25
Ham              Boiled                  20 to 30
Chops            Broiled                  8 to 10

       *       *       *       *       *


BEEF

GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF BEEF

32. As is generally known, BEEF is the flesh of a slaughtered steer,
cow, or other adult bovine animal. These animals may be sold to be
slaughtered as young as 1-1/2 to 2 years old, but beef of the best
quality is obtained from them when they are from 3 to 4 years of age.
Ranging from the highest quality down to the lowest, beef is designated
by the butcher as prime, extra fancy, fancy, extra choice, choice, good,
and poor. In a market where trade is large and varied, it is possible to
make such use of meat as to get a higher price for the better qualities
than can be obtained in other markets.

33. When the quality of beef is to be determined, the amount, quality,
and color of the flesh, bone, and fat must be considered. The surface of
a freshly cut piece of beef should be bright red in color. When it is
exposed to the air for some time, the action of the air on the blood
causes it to become darker, but even this color should be a good clear
red. Any unusual color is looked on with suspicion by a person who
understands the requirements of good meat. To obtain beef of the best
quality, it should be cut crosswise of the fiber. In fact, the way in
which meat is cut determines to a great extent the difference between
tender and tough meat and, consequently, the price that is charged. This
difference can be readily seen by examining the surface of a cut. It
will be noted that the tender parts are made up of short fibers that are
cut directly across at right angles with the surface of the meat, while
the tougher parts contain long fibers that run either slanting or almost
parallel to the surface.

34. The amount of bone and cartilage in proportion to meat in a cut of
beef usually makes a difference in price and determines the usefulness
of the piece to the housewife. Therefore, these are matters that should
be carefully considered. For instance, a certain cut of beef that is
suitable for a roast may cost a few cents less than another cut, but if
its proportion of bone to meat is greater than in the more expensive
piece, nothing is gained by purchasing it. Bones, however, possess some
value and can be utilized in various ways. Those containing _marrow_,
which is the soft tissue found in the cavities of bones and composed
largely of fat, are more valuable for soup making and for stews and
gravies than are solid bones.

In young beef in good condition, the fat is creamy white in color.
However, as the animal grows older, the color grows darker until it
becomes a deep yellow.

Besides the flesh, bone, and fat, the general shape and thickness of a
piece of beef should be noted when its quality is to be determined. In
addition, its adaptability to the purpose for which it is selected and
the method of cookery to be used in its preparation are also points that
should not be overlooked.

       *       *       *       *       *

CUTS OF BEEF

METHOD OF OBTAINING CUTS

[Illustration: Fig. 3]

35. With the general characteristics of beef well in mind, the housewife
is prepared to learn of the way in which the animal is cut to produce
the different pieces that she sees in the butcher shop and the names
that are given to the various cuts. The cutting of the animal, as well
as the naming of the pieces, varies in different localities, but the
difference is not sufficient to be confusing. Therefore, if the
information here given is thoroughly mastered, the housewife will be
able to select meat intelligently in whatever section of the country she
may reside. An important point for her to remember concerning meat of
any kind is that the cheaper cuts are found near the neck, legs, and
shins, and that the pieces increase in price as they go toward the back.

[Illustration: Fig. 4 *divisions of a cow into cuts*]

36. The general method of cutting up a whole beef into large cuts is
shown in Fig. 3. After the head, feet, and intestines are removed, the
carcass is cut down along the spine and divided into halves. Each half
includes an entire side and is known as a _side of beef_. Then each side
is divided into _fore_ and _hind quarters_ along the diagonal line that
occurs about midway between the front and the back. It is in this form
that the butcher usually receives the beef. He first separates it into
the large pieces here indicated and then cuts these pieces into numerous
smaller ones having names that indicate their location. For instance,
the piece marked _a_ includes the _chuck_; _b_, the _ribs_; _c_, the
_loin_; _d_, the _round_; _e_, the _flank_; _f_, the _plate_; and _g_,
the _shin_.

37. The cuts that are obtained from these larger pieces are shown in
Fig. 4. For instance, from the chuck, as illustrated in (_a_), are
secured numerous cuts, including the neck, shoulder clod, shoulder, and
chuck ribs. The same is true of the other pieces, as a careful study of
these illustrations will reveal. Besides indicating the various cuts,
each one of these illustrations serves an additional purpose. From
(_a_), which shows the skeleton of the beef, the amount and the shape of
the bone that the various cuts contain can be readily observed. From
(_b_), which shows the directions in which the surface muscle fibers
run, can be told whether the cutting of the pieces is done across the
fibers or in the same direction as the fibers. Both of these matters are
of such importance to the housewife that constant reference to these
illustrations should be made until the points that they serve to
indicate are thoroughly understood.


NAMES AND USES OF CUTS

38. So that a still better idea may be formed of the pieces into which a
side of beef may be cut, reference should be made to Fig. 5. The heavy
line through the center shows where the side is divided in order to cut
it into the fore and hind quarters. As will be observed, the fore
quarter includes the chuck, prime ribs, and whole plate, and the hind
quarter, the loin and the round, each of these large pieces being
indicated by a different color.

To make these large pieces of a size suitable for sale to the consumer,
the butcher cuts each one of them into still smaller pieces, all of
which are indicated in the illustration. The names of these cuts,
together with their respective uses, and the names of the beef organs
and their uses, are given in Table II.

TABLE II

CUTS OBTAINED FROM A SIDE OF BEEF AND THEIR USES

NAME OF      NAME OF CUT          USES OF CUTS
LARGE PIECE

Chuck........Neck                 Soups, broths, stews
             Shoulder clod        Soups, broths, stews,
                                     boiling, corning
             Ribs (11th, 12th,    Brown stews, braizing,
                and 13th)            poor roasts
             Ribs (9th and 10th)  Braizing, roasts
             Shoulder             Soups, stews, corning, roast
             Cross-ribs           Roast
             Brisket              Soups, stews, corning
             Shin                 Soups

Prime Ribs...Ribs (1st to 8th,    Roasts
                  inclusive)

Whole Plate..Plate                Soups, stews, corning
             Navel                Soups, stews, corning

Loin.........Short steak          Steaks, roasts
             Porterhouse cuts     Steaks, roasts
             Hip-bone steak       Steaks, roasts
             Flat-bone steak      Steaks, roasts
             Round-bone steak     Steaks, roasts
             Sirloin              Steaks
             Top sirloin          Roasts
             Flank                Rolled steak, braizing, boiling
             Tenderloin           Roast

Round........Rump                 Roasts, corning
             Upper round          Steaks, roasts
             Lower round          Steaks, pot roasts, stews
             Vein                 Stews, soups
             Shank                Soups

Beef Organs..Liver                Broiling, frying
             Heart                Baking, braizing
             Tongue               Boiling, baking, braizing
             Tail                 Soup

39. As will be observed from Fig. 5, the ribs are numbered in the
opposite direction from the way in which they are ordinarily counted;
that is, the first rib in a cut of beef is the one farthest from the
head and the thirteenth is the one just back of the neck. The first and
second ribs are called the _back ribs_; the third, fourth, fifth, and
sixth, the _middle ribs_. To prepare the ribs for sale, they are usually
cut into pieces that contain two ribs, the first and second ribs being
known as the first cut, the third and fourth as _the second_ cut, etc.
After being sawed across, the rib bones are either left in to make a
_standing rib roast_ or taken out and the meat then rolled and fastened
together with skewers to make a _rolled roast_. _Skewers,_ which are
long wooden or metal pins that may be pushed through meat to fasten it
together, will be found useful to the housewife in preparing many cuts
of meat for cooking. They may usually be obtained at a meat market or a
hardware store.

40. Certain of the organs of beef are utilized to a considerable extent,
so that while they cannot be shown in Fig. 5, they are included in Table
II. The heart and the tongue are valuable both because they are
economical and because they add variety to the meat diet of the family.
The tongue, either smoked or fresh, may be boiled and then served hot,
or it may be pickled in vinegar and served cold. The heart may be
prepared in the same way, or it may be stuffed and then baked. The tail
of beef makes excellent soup and is much used for this purpose.

       *       *       *       *       *

COOKING OF BEEF

STEAKS AND THEIR PREPARATION

41. Steaks Obtained From the Loin.--The way in which a loin of beef is
cut into steaks is shown in Fig. 6. From _a_ to _b_ are cut _Delmonico
steaks;_ from _b_ to _c_, _porterhouse steaks;_ from _c_ to _d_,
_hip-bone steaks;_ from _d_ to _e_, _flat-bone steaks;_ and from _e_ to
_f_, _sirloin steaks_. The _loin_ is cut from the rump at _f_ and from
the flank and plate at _h_ to _j_. When steaks are cut from the flesh of
animals in good condition, they are all very tender and may be used for
the quick methods of cookery, such as broiling. A very good idea of what
each of these steaks looks like can be obtained from Figs. 7 to 11,
inclusive. Each of these illustrations shows the entire section of
steak, as well as one steak cut from the piece.

DELMONICO STEAK, which is shown in Fig. 7, is the smallest steak that
can be cut from the loin and is therefore an excellent cut for a small
family. It contains little or no tenderloin. Sometimes this steak is
wrongly called a club steak, but no confusion will result if it is
remembered that a _club steak_ is a porterhouse steak that has most of
the bone and the flank end, or "tail," removed.

[Illustration: Fig. 7]

Porterhouse steak, which is illustrated in Fig 8, contains more
tenderloin than any other steak. This steak also being small in size is
a very good cut for a small number of persons.

[Illustration: Fig. 8]

_Hip-bone steak_, shown in Fig. 9, contains a good-sized piece of
tenderloin. Steak of this kind finds much favor, as it can be served
quite advantageously.

Flat-bone steak, as shown in Fig. 10, has a large bone, but it also
contains a considerable amount of fairly solid meat. When a large
number of persons are to be served, this is a very good steak to select.

Sirloin steak is shown in Fig. 11. As will be observed, this steak
contains more solid meat than any of the other steaks cut from the loin.
For this reason, it serves a large number of persons more advantageously
than the others do.

[Illustration: Fig. 9]

[Illustration: Fig. 10]

42. Steaks Obtained From the Round.--While the steaks cut from the loin
are usually preferred because of their tenderness, those cut from the
upper round and across the rump are very desirable for many purposes. If
these are not so tender as is desired, the surface may be chopped with
a dull knife in order to make tiny cuts through the fibers, or it may be
pounded with some blunt object, as, for instance, a wooden potato
masher. In Fig. 12, the entire round and the way it is sometimes
subdivided into the upper and lower round are shown. What is known as a
round steak is a slice that is cut across the entire round. However,
such a steak is often cut into two parts where the line dividing the
round is shown, and either the upper or the lower piece may be
purchased. The upper round is the better piece and brings a higher price
than the whole round or the lower round including the vein. The quick
methods of cookery may be applied to the more desirable cuts of the
round, but the lower round or the vein is generally used for roasting,
braizing, or stewing.

[Illustration: Fig. 11]

[Illustration: Fig. 12]

43. Broiled Beefsteak.--As has already been explained, the steaks cut
from the loin are the ones that are generally used for broiling. When
one of these steaks is to be broiled, it should never be less than 1
inch thick, but it may be from 1 to 2-1/2 inches in thickness, according
to the preference of the persons for whom it is prepared. As the flank
end, or "tail," of such steaks is always tough, it should be cut off
before cooking and utilized in the making of soups and such dishes as
require chopped meats. In addition, all superfluous fat should be
removed and then tried out. Beef fat, especially if it is mixed with
lard or other fats, makes excellent shortening; likewise, it may be used
for sautéing various foods.

When a steak has been prepared in this manner, wipe it carefully with a
clean, damp cloth. Heat the broiler very hot and grease the rack with a
little of the beef fat. Then place the steak on the rack, expose it
directly to the rays of a very hot fire, and turn it every 10 seconds
until each side has been exposed several times to the blaze. This is
done in order to sear the entire surface and thus prevent the loss of
the juice. When the surface is sufficiently seared, lower the fire or
move the steak to a cooler place on the stove and then, turning it
frequently, allow it to cook more slowly until it reaches the desired
condition. The broiling of a steak requires from 10 to 20 minutes,
depending on its thickness and whether it is preferred well done or
rare. Place the broiled steak on a hot platter, dot it with butter,
season it with salt and pepper, and serve at once.

44. Pan-Broiled Steak.--If it is impossible to prepare the steak in a
broiler, it may be pan-broiled. In fact, this is a very satisfactory way
to cook any of the tender cuts. To carry out this method, place a heavy
frying pan directly over the fire and allow it to become so hot that the
fat will smoke when put into it. Grease the pan with a small piece of
the beef fat, just enough to prevent the steak from sticking fast. Put
the steak into the hot pan and turn it as soon as it is seared on the
side that touches the pan. After it is seared on the other side, turn it
again and continue to turn it frequently until it has broiled for about
15 minutes. When it is cooked sufficiently to serve, dot it with butter
and season it with salt and pepper. Serve hot.

45. ROLLED STEAK, OR MOCK DUCK.--To have a delicious meat, it is not
always necessary to secure the tender, expensive cuts, for excellent
dishes can be prepared from the cheaper pieces. For instance, steaks cut
from the entire round or thin cuts from the rump can be filled with a
stuffing and then rolled to make rolled steak, or mock duck. This is an
extremely appetizing dish and affords the housewife a chance to give her
family a pleasing variety in the way of meat. The steak used for this
purpose should first be broiled in the way explained in Art. 43. Then it
should be filled with a stuffing made as follows:

STUFFING FOR ROLLED STEAK

1 qt. stale bread crumbs
1 c. stewed tomatoes
1 small onion
1 Tb. salt
2 Tb. butter
1/4 Tb. pepper
1 c. hot water

[Illustration: FIG. 13] Mix all together. Pile on top of the broiled
steak and roll the steak so that the edges lap over each other and the
dressing is completely covered. Fasten together with skewers or tie by
wrapping a cord around the roll. Strips of bacon or salt pork tied to
the outside or fastened with small skewers improve the flavor of the
meat. Place in a roasting pan and bake in a hot oven until the steak is
thoroughly baked. This will require not less than 40 minutes. Cut into
slices and serve hot.

46. SKIRT STEAK.--Lying inside the ribs and extending from the second
or third rib to the breast bone is a thin strip of muscle known as a
skirt steak. This is removed before the ribs are cut for roasts, and, as
shown in Fig. 13, is slit through the center with a long, sharp knife to
form a pocket into which stuffing can be put. As a skirt steak is not
expensive and has excellent flavor, it is a very desirable piece
of meat.

To prepare such a steak for the table, stuff it with the stuffing given
for rolled steak in Art. 45, and then fasten the edges together with
skewers. Bake in a hot oven until the steak is well done. Serve hot.

47. SWISS STEAK.--Another very appetizing dish that can be made from the
cheaper steaks is Swiss steak. To be most satisfactory, the steak used
for this purpose should be about an inch thick.

Pound as much dry flour as possible into both sides of the steak by
means of a wooden potato masher. Then brown it on both sides in a hot
frying pan with some of the beef fat. When it is thoroughly browned,
pour a cup of hot water over it, cover the pan tight, and remove to the
back of the stove. Have just enough water on the steak and apply just
enough heat to keep it simmering very slowly for about 1/2 hour. As the
meat cooks, the water will form a gravy by becoming thickened with the
flour that has been pounded into the steak. Serve the steak with
this gravy.

48. HAMBURGER STEAK.--The tougher pieces of beef, such as the flank ends
of the steak and parts of the rump, the round, and the chuck, may be
ground fine by being forced through a food chopper. Such meat is very
frequently combined with egg and then formed into small cakes or patties
to make Hamburger steak. Besides providing a way to utilize pieces of
meat that might otherwise be wasted, this dish affords variety to
the diet.

HAMBURGER STEAK
(Sufficient to Serve Four)

1 lb. chopped beef
1 small onion, chopped
1-1/2 tsp. salt
1 egg (if desired)
1/4 tsp. pepper

Mix the ingredients thoroughly and shape into thin patties. Cook by
broiling in a pan placed in the broiler or by pan-broiling in a hot,
well-greased frying pan. Spread with butter when ready to serve.

49. PLANKED STEAK.--A dish that the housewife generally considers too
complicated for her, but that may very readily be prepared in the home,
is planked steak. Such a steak gets its name from the fact that a part
of its cooking is done on a hardwood plank, and that the steak, together
with vegetables of various kinds, is served on the plank. Potatoes are
always used as one of the vegetables that are combined with planked
steak, but besides them almost any combination or variety of vegetables
may be used as a garnish. Asparagus tips, string beans, peas, tiny
onions, small carrots, mushrooms, cauliflower, stuffed peppers, and
stuffed tomatoes are the vegetables from which a selection is usually
made. When a tender steak is selected for this purpose and is properly
cooked, and when the vegetables are well prepared and artistically
arranged, no dish can be found that appeals more to the eye and
the taste.

To prepare this dish, broil or pan-broil one of the better cuts of steak
for about 8 minutes. Butter the plank, place the steak on the center of
it and season with salt and pepper. Mash potatoes and to each 2 cupfuls
use 4 tablespoonfuls of milk, 1 tablespoonful of butter, and one egg.
After these materials have been mixed well into the potatoes, arrange a
border of potatoes around the edge of the plank. Then garnish the steak
with whatever vegetables have been selected. Care should be taken to see
that these are properly cooked and well seasoned. If onions, mushrooms,
or carrots are used, it is well to sauté them in butter after they are
thoroughly cooked. With the steak thus prepared, place the plank under
the broiler or in a hot oven and allow it to remain there long enough to
brown the potatoes, cook the steak a little more, and thoroughly heat
all the vegetables.

50. VEGETABLES SERVED WITH STEAK.--If an attractive, as well as a tasty,
dish is desired and the housewife has not sufficient time nor the
facilities to prepare a planked steak, a good plan is to sauté a
vegetable of some kind and serve it over the steak. For this purpose
numerous vegetables are suitable, but onions, small mushrooms, and
sliced tomatoes are especially desirable. When onions are used, they
should be sliced thin and then sautéd in butter until they are soft and
brown. Small mushrooms may be prepared in the same way, or they may be
sautéd in the fat that remains in the pan after the steak has been
removed. Tomatoes that are served over steak should be sliced, rolled in
crumbs, and then sautéd.

ROASTS AND THEIR PREPARATION

[Illustration: FIG. 14]

51. FILLET OF BEEF.--A large variety of roasts can be obtained from a
side of beef, but by far the most delicious one is the tenderloin, or
fillet of beef. This is a long strip of meat lying directly under the
chine, or back bone. It is either taken out as a whole, or it is left in
the loin to be cut as a part of the steaks that are obtained from this
section. When it is removed in a whole piece, as shown in Fig. 14, the
steaks that remain in the loin are not so desirable and do not bring
such a good price, because the most tender part of each of them
is removed.

[Illustration: FIG. 15]

Two different methods of cookery are usually applied to the tenderloin
of beef. Very often, as Fig. 14 shows, it is cut into slices about 2
inches thick and then broiled, when it is called _broiled fillet_, or
_fillet_ mignon. If it is not treated in this way, the whole tenderloin
is roasted after being rolled, or larded, with salt pork to supply the
fat that it lacks. Whichever way it is cooked, the tenderloin always
proves to be an exceptionally tender and delicious cut of beef. However,
it is the most expensive piece that can be bought, and so is not
recommended when economy must be practiced.

[Illustration: FIG. 16]

[Illustration: FIG. 17]

52. CHUCK ROASTS.--While the pieces cut from the chuck are not so
desirable as those obtained from the loin or as the prime ribs, still
the chuck yields very good roasts, as Figs. 15 and 16 show. The roast
shown in Fig. 15 is the piece just back of the shoulder, and that
illustrated in Fig. 16 is cut from the ribs in the chuck. These pieces
are of a fairly good quality and if a roast as large as 8 or 10 pounds
is desired, they make an economical one to purchase.

53. RIB ROASTS.--Directly back of the chuck, as has already been
learned, are the prime ribs. From this part of the beef, which is shown
in Figs. 17 and 18, the best rib roasts are secured. Fig. 17 shows the
ribs cut off at about the eighth rib and Fig. 18 shows the same set
turned around so that the cut surface is at about the first rib, where
the best cuts occur. To prepare this piece for roasting, it is often cut
around the dark line shown in Fig. 18, and after the back bone and ribs
have been removed, is rolled into a roll of solid meat. The thin lower
part that is cut off is used for boiling.

[Illustration: FIG. 18]

[Illustration: FIG. 19]

[Illustration: FIG. 20]

54. When only a small roast is wanted, a single rib, such as is shown in
Fig. 19, is often used. In a roast of this kind, the bone is not
removed, but, as will be observed, is sawed in half. Such a roast is
called a _standing rib roast_. Another small roast, called a
_porterhouse roast_, is illustrated in Fig. 20. This is obtained by
cutting a porterhouse steak rather thick. It is therefore a very tender
and delicious, although somewhat expensive, roast. Other parts of the
loin may also be cut for roasts, the portion from which sirloin steaks
are cut making large and very delicious roasts.

[Illustration: FIG. 21]

55. RUMP ROASTS.--Between the loin and the bottom round lies the rump,
and from this may be cut roasts of different kinds. The entire rump with
its cut surface next to the round is shown in Fig. 21, and the various
pieces into which the rump may be cut are illustrated in Figs. 22 to 25.
These roasts have a very good flavor and are very juicy, and if beef in
prime condition can be obtained, they are extremely tender. Besides
these advantages, rump roasts are economical, so they are much favored.
To prepare them for cooking, the butcher generally removes the bone and
rolls them in the manner shown in Fig. 26.

56. ROAST BEEF.--The usual method of preparing the roasts that have just
been described, particularly the tender ones, is to cook them in the
oven. For this purpose a roasting pan, such as the one previously
described and illustrated, produces the best results, but if one of
these cannot be obtained, a dripping pan may be substituted. When the
meat is first placed in the oven, the oven temperature should be 400 to
450 degrees Fahrenheit, but after the meat has cooked for about 15
minutes, the temperature should be lowered so that the meat will cook
more slowly.

[Illustration: FIG. 22]

[Illustration: FIG. 23]

[Illustration: FIG. 24]

[Illustration: FIG. 25]

Before putting the roast in the oven, wipe it thoroughly with a damp
cloth. If its surface is not well covered with a layer of fat, place
several pieces of salt pork on it and tie or skewer them fast. Then,
having one of the cut sides up so that it will be exposed to the heat of
the oven, set the piece of meat in a roasting pan or the utensil that is
to be substituted. Dredge, or sprinkle, the surface with flour, salt,
and pepper, and place the pan in the oven, first making sure that the
oven is sufficiently hot. Every 10 or 15 minutes baste the meat with the
fat and the juice that cooks out of it; that is, spoon up this liquid
and pour it over the meat in order to improve the flavor and to prevent
the roast from becoming dry. If necessary, a little water may be added
for basting, but the use of water for this purpose should generally be
avoided. Allow the meat to roast until it is either well done or rare,
according to the way it is preferred. The length of time required for
this process depends so much on the size of the roast, the temperature
of the oven, and the preference of the persons who are to eat the meat,
that definite directions cannot well be given. However, a general idea
of this matter can be obtained by referring to the Cookery Time Table
given in _Essentials of Cookery_, Part 2, and also to Table I of this
Section, which gives the time required for cooking each pound of meat.
If desired, gravy may be made from the juice that remains in the pan,
the directions for making gravy being given later.

[Illustration: FIG. 26]

57. BRAIZED BEEF.--An excellent way in which to cook a piece of beef
that is cut from the rump or lower round is to braize it. This method
consists in placing the meat on a rack over a small quantity of water in
a closed pan and then baking it in the oven for about 4 hours.
Vegetables cut into small pieces are placed in the water and they cook
while the meat is baking. As meat prepared in this way really cooks in
the flavored steam that rises from the vegetables, it becomes very
tender and has a splendid flavor; also, the gravy that may be made from
the liquid that remains adds to its value. In serving it, a spoonful of
the vegetables is generally put on the plate with each piece of meat.

BRAIZED BEEF
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

3 lb. beef from rump or lower round
Flour
Salt
Pepper
2 thin slices salt pork
1/4 c. diced carrots
1/4 c. diced turnips
1/4 c. diced onions
1/4 c. diced celery
3 c. boiling water

Wipe the meat with a damp cloth, and dredge, or sprinkle, it with the
flour, salt, and pepper. Try out the pork and brown the entire surface
of the meat in the fat thus obtained. Then place the meat on a rack in a
deep granite pan, an earthen bowl, or a baking dish, and surround it
with the diced vegetables. Add the boiling water, cover the dish tight,
and place in a slow oven. Bake for about 4 hours at a low temperature.
Then remove the meat to a hot platter, strain out the vegetables, and
make a thickened gravy of the liquid that remains, as explained later.

58. POT-ROASTED BEEF.--The usual, and probably the most satisfactory,
method of preparing the cheaper cuts of beef is to cook them in a heavy
iron pot over a slow fire for several hours. If the proper attention is
given to the preparation of such a roast, usually called a pot roast, it
will prove a very appetizing dish. Potatoes may also be cooked in the
pot with the meat. This is a good plan to follow for it saves fuel and
at the same time offers variety in the cooking of potatoes.

When a piece of beef is to be roasted in a pot, try out in the pot a
little of the beef fat. Then wipe the meat carefully and brown it on all
sides in the fat. Add salt, pepper, and 1/2 cupful of boiling water and
cover the pot tightly. Cook over a slow fire until the water is
evaporated and the meat begins to brown; then add another 1/2 cupful of
water. Continue to do this until the meat has cooked for several hours,
or until the entire surface is well browned and the meat tissue very
tender. Then place the meat on a hot platter and, if desired, make gravy
of the fat that remains in the pan, following the directions given
later. If potatoes are to be cooked with the roast, put them into the
pot around the meat about 45 minutes before the meat is to be removed,
as they will be cooked sufficiently when the roast is done.

59. BEEF LOAF.--Hamburger steak is not always made into small patties
and broiled or sautéd. In fact, it is very often combined with cracker
crumbs, milk, and egg, and then well seasoned to make a beef loaf. Since
there are no bones nor fat to be cut away in serving, this is an
economical dish and should be used occasionally to give variety to the
diet. If desired, a small quantity of salt pork may be combined with the
beef to add flavor.

BEEF LOAF
(Sufficient to Serve Ten)

3 lb. beef
2 Tb. salt
1/4 lb. salt pork
1/4 Tb. pepper
1 c. cracker crumbs
1 small onion
1 c. milk
2 Tb. chopped parsley
1 egg

Put the beef and pork through the food chopper; then mix thoroughly with
the other ingredients. Pack tightly into a loaf-cake pan. Bake in a
moderate oven for 2 1/2 to 3 hours. During the baking, baste frequently
with hot water to which a little butter has been added. Serve either hot
or cold, as desired.


PREPARATION OP STEWS AND CORNED BEEF

60. Cuts Suitable for Stewing and Corning.--Because of the large variety
of cuts obtained from a beef, numerous ways of cooking this meat have
been devised. The tender cuts are, of course, the most desirable and the
most expensive and they do not require the same preparation as the
cheaper cuts. However, the poorer cuts, while not suitable for some
purposes, make very good stews and corned beef. The cuts that are most
satisfactory for stewing and coming are shown in Figs. 27 to 30. A part
of the chuck that is much used for stewing and coming is shown in Fig.
27, _a_ being the upper chuck, _b_ the shoulder, and _c_ the lower
chuck. Fig. 28 shows a piece of the shoulder cut off just at the leg
joint, Fig. 29, the neck, and Fig. 30, a piece of the plate called a
flat-rib piece. Besides these pieces, the brisket, the lower part of the
round, and any of the other chuck pieces that do not make good roasts
are excellent for this purpose. In fact, any part that contains bone and
fat, as well as lean, makes well-flavored stew.

[Illustration: FIG. 27]

[Illustration: FIG. 28]

[Illustration: FIG. 29]

[Illustration: FIG. 30]

61. Beef Stew.--Any of the pieces of beef just mentioned may be used
with vegetables of various kinds to make beef stew. Also left-over
pieces of a roast or a steak may be utilized with other meats in the
making of this dish. If the recipe here given is carefully followed, a
very appetizing as well as nutritious stew will be the result.

BEEF STEW
(Sufficient to Serve Eight)

4 lb. beef
2/3 c. diced carrots
2 Tb. salt
1 small onion, sliced
1/4 Tb. pepper
3 c. potatoes cut into 1/4 in. slices
2/3 c. diced turnips
2 Tb. flour

Wipe the meat and cut it into pieces about 2 inches long. Try out some
of the fat in a frying pan and brown the pieces of meat in it, stirring
the meat constantly so that it will brown evenly. Put the browned meat
into a kettle with the remaining fat and the bone, cover well with
boiling water, and add the salt and pepper. Cover the kettle with a
tight-fitting lid. Let the meat boil for a minute or two, then reduce
the heat, and allow it to simmer for about 2 hours. For the last hour,
cook the diced turnips, carrots, and onions with the meat, and 20
minutes before serving, add the potatoes. When the meat and vegetables
are sufficiently cooked, remove the bones, fat, and skin; then thicken
the stew with the flour moistened with enough cold water to pour. Pour
into a deep platter or dish and serve with or without dumplings.

62. When dumplings are to be served with beef stew or any dish of this
kind, they may be prepared as follows:

DUMPLINGS

2 c. flour
2 Tb. fat
1/2 Tb. salt
3/4 to 1 c. milk
4 tsp. baking powder

Mix and sift the flour, salt, and baking powder. Chop in the fat with a
knife. Add the milk gradually and mix to form a dough. Toss on a floured
board and roll out or pat until it is about 1 inch thick. Cut into
pieces with a small biscuit cutter. Place these close together in a
buttered steamer and steam over a kettle of hot water for 15 to 18
minutes. Serve with the stew.

If a softer dough that can be cooked with the stew is preferred, 1 1/2
cupfuls of milk instead of 3/4 to 1 cupful should be used. Drop the
dough thus prepared by the spoonful into the stew and boil for about 15
minutes. Keep the kettle tightly covered while the dumplings
are boiling.

63. CORNED BEEF.--It is generally the custom to purchase corned beef,
that is, beef preserved in a brine, at the market; but this is not
necessary, as meat of this kind may be prepared in the home. When the
housewife wishes to corn beef, she will find it an advantage to procure
a large portion of a quarter of beef, part of which may be corned and
kept to be used after the fresh beef has been eaten. Of course, this
plan should be followed only in cold weather, for fresh meat soon spoils
unless it is kept very cold.

To corn beef, prepare a mixture of 10 parts salt to 1 part saltpeter and
rub this into the beef until the salt remains dry on the surface. Put
the meat aside for 24 hours and then rub it again with some of the same
mixture. On the following day, put the beef into a large crock or stone
jar and cover it with a brine made by boiling 2-1/2 gallons of water
into which have been added 2 quarts salt, 2 ounces saltpeter, and 3/4
pound brown sugar. Be careful to cool the brine until it entirely cold
before using it. Allow the beef to remain in the brine for a week before
attempting to use it. Inspect it occasionally, and if it does not appear
to be keeping well, remove it from the brine, rub it again with the salt
mixture, and place it in fresh brine. Beef that is properly corned will
keep an indefinite length of time, but it should be examined, every 2 or
3 days for the first few weeks to see that it is not spoiling.

64. BOILED CORNED BEEF.--The usual way to prepare beef corned in the
manner just explained or corned beef bought at the market is to boil it.
After it becomes sufficiently tender by this method of cooking, it may
be pressed into a desired shape and when cold cut into thin slices. Meat
of this kind makes an excellent dish for a light meal such as luncheon
or supper.

To boil corned beef, first wipe it thoroughly and roll and tie it. Then
put it into a kettle, cover it with boiling water, and set it over the
fire. When it comes to the boiling point, skim off the scum that forms
on the top. Cook at a low temperature until the meat is tender enough to
be pierced easily with a fork. Then place the meat in a dish or a pan,
pour the broth over it, put a plate on top that will rest on the meat,
and weight it down with something heavy enough to press the meat into
shape. Allow it to remain thus overnight. When cold and thoroughly set,
remove from the pan, cut into thin slices, and serve.

65. BOILED DINNER.--Corned beef is especially adaptable to what is
commonly termed a boiled dinner. Occasionally it is advisable for the
housewife to vary her meals by serving a dinner of this kind. In
addition to offering variety, such a dinner affords her an opportunity
to economize on fuel, especially if gas or electricity is used, for all
of it may be prepared in the same pot and cooked over the same burner.

BOILED DINNER
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

3 lb. corned beef
1 c. sliced turnips
1 small head of cabbage cut into eighths
1 c. sliced potatoes
Pepper and salt
1 c. sliced carrots

Cook the corned beef in the manner explained in Art. 64. When it has
cooked sufficiently, remove it from the water. Into this water, put the
cabbage, carrots, turnips, and potatoes; then add the salt and pepper,
seasoning to taste. Cook until the vegetables are tender. Remove the
vegetables and serve them in vegetable dishes with some of the meat
broth. Reheat the meat before serving.


BEEF ORGANS AND THEIR PREPARATION

66. BOILED TONGUE.--The tongue of beef is much used, for if properly
prepared it makes a delicious meat that may be served hot or cold. It is
usually corned or smoked to preserve it until it can be used. In either
of these forms or in its fresh state, it must be boiled in order to
remove the skin and prepare the meat for further use. If it has been
corned or smoked, it is likely to be very salty, so that it should
usually be soaked overnight to remove the salt.

When boiled tongue is desired, put a fresh tongue or a smoked or a
corned tongue from which the salt has been removed into a kettle of cold
water and allow it to come to a boil. Skim and continue to cook at a low
temperature for 2 hours. Cool enough to handle and then remove the skin
and the roots. Cut into slices and serve hot or cold.

67. PICKLED TONGUE.--A beef tongue prepared in the manner just explained
may be treated in various ways, but a method of preparation that meets
with much favor consists in pickling it. Pickled tongue makes an
excellent meat when a cold dish is required for a light meal or meat for
sandwiches is desired. The pickle required for one tongue contains the
following ingredients:

PICKLE

1-1/2 c. vinegar
2 c. water
1/4 c. sugar
1 Tb. salt
1/4 Tb. pepper
6 cloves
1 stick cinnamon

Boil all of these ingredients for a few minutes, then add the tongue,
and boil for 15 minutes. Remove from the stove and let stand for 24
hours. Slice and serve cold.

68. BRAIZED TONGUE.--The process of braizing may be applied to tongue as
well as to other parts of beef. In fact, when tongue is cooked in this
way with several kinds of vegetables, it makes a delicious dish that is
pleasing to most persons.

BRAIZED TONGUE
(Sufficient to Serve Eight)

1 fresh tongue
1/3 c. diced carrots
1/3 c. diced onions
1/3 c. diced celery
1 c. stewed tomatoes
2 c. water in which tongue is boiled

Boil the tongue as previously directed, and then skin it and remove the
roots. Place it in a long pan and pour over it the carrots, onions,
celery, stewed tomatoes, and the water. Cover tight and bake in a slow
oven for 2 hours. Serve on a platter with the vegetables and sauce.

69. STUFFED HEART.--If a stuffed meat is desired, nothing more
appetizing can be found than stuffed heart. For this purpose the heart
of a young beef should be selected in order that a tender dish
will result.

After washing the heart and removing the veins and the arteries, make a
stuffing like that given for rolled beefsteak in Art. 45. Stuff the
heart with this dressing, sprinkle salt and pepper over it, and roll it
in flour. Lay several strips of bacon or salt pork across the top, place
in a baking pan, and pour 1 cupful of water into the pan. Cover the pan
tight, set it in a hot oven, and bake slowly for 2 or 3 hours, depending
on the size of the heart. Add water as the water in the pan evaporates,
and baste the heart frequently. When it has baked sufficiently, remove
to a platter and serve at once.


MAKING GRAVY

70. To meats prepared in various ways, gravy--that is, the sauce made
from the drippings or juices that cook out of steaks, roasts, and stews,
or from the broth actually cooked from the meat as for soup--is a
valuable addition, particularly if it is well made and properly
seasoned. A point to remember in this connection is that gravy should be
entirely free from lumps and not too thick. It will be of the right
thickness if 1 to 2 level tablespoonfuls of flour is used for each pint
of liquid. It should also be kept in mind that the best gravy is made
from the brown drippings that contain some fat.

To make gravy, remove any excess of fat that is not required, and then
pour a little hot water into the pan in order to dissolve the drippings
that are to be used. Add the flour to the fat, stirring until a smooth
paste is formed. Then add the liquid, which may be water or milk, and
stir quickly to prevent the formation of lumps. Season well with salt
and pepper. Another method that also proves satisfactory is to mix the
flour and liquid and then add them to the fat that remains in the pan in
which the meat has been cooked.


TRYING OUT SUET AND OTHER FATS

71. The suet obtained from beef is a valuable source of fat for cooking,
and it should therefore never be thrown away. The process of obtaining
the fat from suet is called _trying_, and it is always practiced in
homes where economy is the rule.

To try out suet, cut the pieces into half-inch cubes, place them in a
heavy frying pan, and cover them with hot water. Allow this to come to a
boil and cook until the water has evaporated. Continue the heating until
all the fat has been drawn from the tissue. Then pour off all the liquid
fat and squeeze the remaining suet with a potato masher or in a fruit
press. Clean glass or earthen jars are good receptacles in which to keep
the fat thus recovered from the suet.

To try out other fats, proceed in the same way as for trying out suet.
Such fats may be tried by heating them in a pan without water, provided
the work is done carefully enough to prevent them from scorching.


PREPARATION OF LEFT-OVER BEEF

72. As has been shown, meat is both an expensive and a perishable food.
Therefore, some use should be made of every left-over bit of it, no
matter how small, and it should be disposed of quickly in order to
prevent it from spoiling. A point that should not be overlooked in the
use of left-over meats, however, is that they should be prepared so as
to be a contrast to the original preparation and thus avoid monotony in
the food served. This variation may be accomplished by adding other
foods and seasonings and by changing the appearance as much as possible.
For instance, what remains from a roast of beef may be cut in thin
slices and garnished to make an attractive dish; or, left-over meat may
be made very appetizing by cutting it into cubes, reheating it in gravy
or white sauce, and serving it over toast or potato patties. Then there
is the sandwich, which always finds a place in the luncheon. The meat
used for this purpose may be sliced thin or it may be chopped fine, and
then, to increase the quantity, mixed with salad dressing, celery,
olives, chopped pickles, etc. An excellent sandwich is made by placing
thin slices of roast beef between two slices of bread and serving hot
roast-beef gravy over the sandwich thus formed. Still other appetizing
dishes may be prepared from left-over beef as the accompanying
recipes show.

73. MEXICAN BEEF--An extremely appetizing dish, known as Mexican beef,
can be made from any quantity of left-over beef by serving it with a
vegetable sauce. Such a dish needs few accompaniments when it is served
in a light meal, but it may be used very satisfactorily as the main dish
in a heavy meal.

MEXICAN BEEF

2 Tb. butter
1/2 tsp. salt
1 onion, chopped
1/8 tsp. pepper
1 red pepper
1 tsp. celery salt
1 green pepper
Thin slices roast beef
3/4 c. canned tomatoes

Brown the butter, add the chopped onion, and cook for a few minutes.
Then add the chopped peppers, tomatoes, salt, pepper, and celery salt.
Cook all together for a few minutes and add the thinly sliced roast
beef. When the meat has become thoroughly heated, it is ready to serve.

74. COTTAGE PIE.--A very good way to use up left-over mashed potatoes
as well as roast beef is to combine them and make a cottage pie. In this
dish, mashed potatoes take the place of the crust that is generally put
over the top of a meat pie. If well seasoned and served hot, it makes a
very palatable dish.

To make a cottage pie, cover the bottom of a baking dish with a 2-inch
layer of well-seasoned mashed potatoes. Over this spread left-over roast
beef cut into small pieces. Pour over the meat and potatoes any
left-over gravy and a few drops of onion juice made by grating raw
onion. Cover with a layer of mashed potatoes 1 inch deep. Dot with
butter and place in a hot oven until the pie has heated through and
browned on top. Serve hot.

75. BEEF PIE.--No housewife need be at a loss for a dish that will tempt
her family if she has on hand some left-over pieces of beef, for out of
them she may prepare a beef pie, which is always in favor. Cold roast
beef makes a very good pie, but it is not necessary that roast beef be
used, as left-over steak or even a combination of left-over meats, will
do very well.

Cut into 1-inch cubes whatever kinds of left-over meats are on hand.
Cover with hot water, add a sliced onion, and cook slowly for 1 hour.
Thicken the liquid with flour and season well with salt and pepper. Add
two or three potatoes, cut into 1/4-inch slices, and let them boil for
several minutes. Pour the mixture into a buttered baking dish and cover
it with a baking-powder biscuit mixture. Bake in a hot oven until the
crust is brown. Serve hot.

76. BEEF HASH.--One of the most satisfactory ways in which to utilize
left-over roast beef or corned beef is to cut it into small pieces and
make it into a hash. Cold boiled potatoes that remain from a previous
meal are usually combined with the beef, and onion is added for flavor.
When hash is prepared to resemble an omelet and is garnished with
parsley, it makes an attractive dish.

To make beef hash, remove all skin and bone from the meat, chop quite
fine, and add an equal quantity of chopped cold-boiled potatoes and one
chopped onion. Season with salt and pepper. Put the mixture into a
well-buttered frying pan, moisten with milk, meat stock, or left-over
gravy, and place over a fire. Let the hash brown slowly on the bottom
and then fold over as for an omelet. Serve on a platter garnished
with parsley.

77. FRIZZLED BEEF.--While the dried beef used in the preparation of
frizzled beef is not necessarily a left-over meat, the recipe for this
dish is given here, as it is usually served at a meal when the preceding
left-over beef dishes are appropriate. Prepared according to this
recipe, frizzled beef will be found both nutritious and appetizing.

FRIZZLED BEEF
(Sufficient to Serve Four)

2 Tb. butter
1/4 lb. thinly sliced dried beef
2 Tb. flour
1 c. milk
4 slices of toast

Brown the butter in a frying pan and add the beef torn into small
pieces. Allow it to cock until the beef becomes brown. Add the flour and
brown it. Pour the milk over all, and cook until the flour thickens the
milk. Serve over the toast.


MEAT (PART 1)

EXAMINATION QUESTIONS

(1) (_a_) What is meat? (_b_) What substance in meat makes it a valuable
food?

(2) (_a_) What do protein foods do for the body? (_b_) How does meat
compare in cost with the other daily foods?

(3) What harm may occur from eating meat that is not thoroughly cooked?

(4) (_a_) Describe the structure of meat, (_b_) How do the length and
the direction of the fibers affect the tenderness of meat?

(5) (_a_) How may gelatine be obtained from meat? (_b_) What use is made
of this material?

(6) (_a_) Describe the two kinds of fat found in meat, (_b_) What does
this substance supply to the body?

(7) (_a_) What is the value of water in the tissues of meat? (_b_) How
does its presence affect the cookery method to choose for
preparing meat?

(8) (_a_) What are extractives? (_b_) Why are they of value in meat?

(9) (_a_) Name the ways by which the housewife may reduce her meat bill,
(_b_) How should meat be cared for in the home?

(10) Give three reasons for cooking meat.

(11) (_a_) Describe the effect of cooking on the materials contained in
meat, (_b_) How does cooking affect the digestibility of meat?

(12) What methods of cookery are used for: (_a_) the tender cuts of
meat? (_b_) the tough cuts? (_c_) Mention the cuts of meat that have the
most flavor.

(13) (_a_) How should the temperature of the oven vary with the size of
the roast to be cooked? (_b_) Give the reason for this.

(14) Describe beef of good quality.

(15) In what parts of the animal are found: (_a_) the cheaper cuts of
beef? (_b_) the more expensive cuts?

(16) (_a_) Name the steaks obtained from the loin, (_b_) Which of these
is best for a large family? (_c_) Which is best for a small family?

(17) Describe the way in which to broil steak.

(18) (_a_) What is the tenderloin of beef? (_b_) Explain the two ways of
cooking it.

(19) (_a_) Name the various kinds of roasts, (_b_) Describe the roasting
of beef in the oven.

(20) (_a_) What cuts of beef are most satisfactory for stews? (_b_)
Explain how beef stew is made.

       *       *       *       *       *



MEAT (PART 2)

       *       *       *       *       *

VEAL

NATURE OF VEAL

1. Veal is the name applied to the flesh of a slaughtered calf. This
kind of meat is at its best in animals that are from 6 weeks to 3 months
old when killed. Calves younger than 6 weeks are sometimes slaughtered,
but their meat is of poor quality and should be avoided. Meat from a
calf that has not reached the age of 3 weeks is called bob veal. Such
meat is pale, dry, tough, and indigestible and, consequently, unfit for
food. In most states the laws strictly forbid the sale of bob veal for
food, but constant vigilance must be exercised to safeguard the public
from unscrupulous dealers. A calf that goes beyond the age of 3 months
without being slaughtered must be kept and fattened until it reaches the
age at which it can be profitably sold as beef, for it is too old to be
used as veal.

2. The nature of veal can be more readily comprehended by comparing it
with beef, the characteristics of which are now understood. Veal is
lighter in color than beef, being more nearly pink than red, and it
contains very little fat, as reference to Fig. 1, _Meat_, Part 1, will
show. The tissues of veal contain less nutriment than those of beef, but
they contain more gelatine. The flavor of veal is less pronounced than
that of beef, the difference between the age of animals used for veal
and those used for beef being responsible for this lack of flavor. These
characteristics, as well as the difference in size of corresponding
cuts, make it easy to distinguish veal from beef in the market.

CUTS OF VEAL, AND THEIR USES

[Illustration: Fig. 1]

3. The slaughtered calf from which veal is obtained is generally
delivered to the butcher in the form shown in Fig. 1; that is, with the
head, feet, and intestines removed and the carcass split into halves
through the spine. He divides each half into quarters, known as the
_fore quarter_ and the _hind quarter_, and cuts these into
smaller pieces.

4. FORE QUARTER.--The fore quarter, as shown in Fig. 1, is composed of
the neck, chuck, shoulder, fore shank, breast, and ribs. Frequently, no
distinction is made between the neck and the chuck, both of these pieces
and the fore shank being used for soups and stews. The shoulder is cut
from the ribs lying underneath, and it is generally used for roasting,
often with stuffing rolled inside of it. The breast, which is the under
part of the fore quarter and corresponds to the plate in beef, is
suitable for either roasting or stewing. When the rib bones are removed
from it, a pocket that will hold stuffing can be cut into this piece.
The ribs between the shoulder and the loin are called the _rack_; they
may be cut into chops or used as one piece for roasting.

5. HIND QUARTER.--The hind quarter, as Fig. 1 shows, is divided into the
loin, flank, leg, and hind shank. The loin and the flank are located
similarly to these same cuts in beef. In some localities, the part of
veal corresponding to the rump of beef is included with the loin, and in
others it is cut as part of the leg. When it is part of the leg, the leg
is cut off just in front of the hip bone and is separated from the lower
part of the leg, or hind shank, immediately below the hip joint. This
piece is often used for roasting, although cutlets or steaks may be cut
from it. The hind shank, which, together with the fore shank, is called
a _knuckle_, is used for soup making. When the loin and flank are cut in
a single piece, they are used for roasting.

6. VEAL ORGANS.--Certain of the organs of the calf, like those of beef
animals, are used for food. They include the heart, tongue, liver, and
kidneys, as well as the thymus and thyroid glands and the pancreas. The
heart and tongue of veal are more delicate in texture and flavor than
those of beef, but the methods of cooking them are practically the same.
The liver and kidneys of calves make very appetizing dishes and find
favor with many persons. The thymus and thyroid glands and the pancreas
are included under the term _sweetbreads_. The thymus gland, which lies
near the heart and is often called the _heart sweetbread_, is the best
one. The thyroid gland lies in the throat and is called the _throat
sweetbread_. These two glands are joined by a connecting membrane, but
this is often broken and each gland sold as a separate sweetbread. The
pancreas, which is the _stomach sweetbread_, is used less often than
the others.

7. Table of Veal Cuts.--The various cuts of veal, together with their
uses, are arranged for ready reference in Table I. Therefore, so that
the housewife may become thoroughly familiar with these facts about
veal, she is urged to make a careful study of this table.

TABLE I

NAMES OF VEAL CUTS AND ORGANS AND THEIR USES

NAME OF LARGE CUT      NAME OF SMALL CUT      USES OF CUTS

                     / Head             Soup, made dishes, gelatine
                     | Breast           Stew, made dishes, gelatine
Fore Quarter         | Ribs             Stew, made dishes, chops
                     | Shoulder         Stew, made dishes
                     \ Neck             Stew or stock, made dishes

                     / Loin             Chops, roasts
Hind Quarter         | Leg              Cutlets or fillet, sautéing, or roasting
                     \ Knuckle          Stocks, stews

                     / Brains           Made dishes, chafing dish
                     | Liver            Broiling, sautéing
Veal Organs          | Heart            Stuffed, baked
                     | Tongue           Broiled, braised
                     | Sweetbreads      Made dishes, chafing dish
                     \ Kidneys          Boiled, stew


COOKING OF VEAL

VEAL CUTS AND THEIR PREPARATION

8. In the preparation of veal, an important point to remember is that
meat of this kind always requires thorough cooking. It should never be
served rare. Because of the long cooking veal needs, together with the
difficulty encountered in chewing it and its somewhat insipid flavor,
which fails to excite the free flow of gastric juice, this meat is more
indigestable than beef. In order to render it easier to digest, since it
must be thoroughly cooked, the long, slow methods of cookery should be
selected, as these soften the connective tissue. Because of the lack of
flavor, veal is not so good as beef when the extraction of flavor is
desired for broth. However, the absence of flavor makes veal a valuable
meat to combine with chicken and the more expensive meats, particularly
in highly seasoned made dishes or salads. Although lacking in flavor,
veal contains more gelatine than other meats. While this substance is
not very valuable as a food, it lends body to soup or broth and assists
in the preparation of certain made dishes. To supply the flavor needed
in dishes of this kind, pork is sometimes used with the veal.

9. Veal Steaks or Cutlets.--Strictly speaking, veal cutlets are cut from
the ribs; however, a thin slice cut from the leg, as shown in Fig. 2,
while in reality a steak, is considered by most housewives and butchers
as a cutlet. A piece cut from the leg of veal corresponds to a cut of
round steak in beef.

10. Pan-Broiled Veal Steak or Cutlets.--Several methods of preparing
veal steak or cutlets are in practice, but a very satisfactory one is to
pan-broil them. This method prevents the juices from being drawn out of
the meat and consequently produces a tender, palatable dish.

[Illustration: FIG. 2]

To pan-broil veal steak or cutlets, grease a hot frying pan with fat of
any desirable kind, place the pieces of meat in it, and allow them to
sear, first on one side and then on the other. When they are completely
seared, lower the temperature, and broil for 15 to 20 minutes, or longer
if necessary. Season well with salt and pepper. When cooked, remove to a
platter and, just before serving, pour melted butter over the meat.

11. Veal Cutlets in Brown Sauce.--To improve the flavor of veal cutlets,
a brown sauce is often prepared and served with them. In fact, the
cutlets are cooked in this sauce, which becomes thickened by the flour
that is used to dredge the meat.

To cook cutlets in this way, dredge them with flour, season them with
salt and pepper, and sauté them in hot fat until the flour is quite
brown. Then pour 1 cupful of milk and 1 cupful of water over the meat,
cover the pan securely, and allow to cook slowly for about 3/4 hour. The
sauce should be slightly thick and quite brown. Serve the cutlets in the
brown sauce.

12. Veal Roasts.--Several different cuts of veal make very good roasts.
The most economical one is a 5 or 6-inch slice cut from the leg of veal
in the same way as the steak shown in Fig. 2.

[Illustration: FIG. 3, Shoulder of veal.]

Both the loin and the best end of the neck are excellent for roasting.
The shoulder of veal, which is shown in Fig. 3, is sometimes roasted,
but it is more often used for stew. Veal breast from which the ribs have
been removed and veal rack, which is the portion of the ribs attached to
the neck, may also be used for roasting. When they are, they are usually
cut so as to contain a deep slit, or pocket, that may be filled with
stuffing. In fact, whenever it is possible, the bone is removed from a
piece of roasting veal and stuffing is put in its place.

To roast any of these pieces, wipe the meat, dredge it with flour, and
season it with salt and pepper. Place it in a roasting pan and put it
into a hot oven. Bake for 15 minutes; then lower the temperature of the
oven and continue to bake slowly until the meat is well done, the
length of time depending on the size of the roast. Baste frequently
during the roasting. Remove the roast to a hot platter. Then place the
roasting pan over the flame, and make gravy by browning 2 tablespoonfuls
of flour in the fat that it contains, adding to this 1-1/2 cupfuls of
water, and cooking until the flour has thickened the water. Serve the
gravy thus prepared in a gravy bowl.

13. Stuffed Veal Breast.--A breast of veal in which a pocket has been
cut for stuffing is shown in Fig. 4. When such a piece is
desired for roasting, it is advisable to have the butcher prepare it.
The stuffing required should be made as follows:

[Illustration: FIG. 4]

STUFFING FOR VEAL

4 Tb. butter or bacon or ham fat
1/2 Tb. salt
1/8 Tb. pepper
1 Tb. celery salt
2 sprigs of parsley, chopped
1 pimiento, chopped
1-1/2 c. water
1 qt. stale bread crumbs

Melt the fat, and to it add the salt, pepper, celery salt, parsley,
pimiento, and water. Pour this mixture over the crumbs, and mix all
thoroughly. Stuff into the opening in the breast. Place the meat thus
stuffed in a baking pan and bake in a moderately hot oven for 1 to
1-1/2 hours.

14. Veal Potpie.--A good way in which to impart the flavor of meat to a
starchy material and thus not only economize on meat, but also provide
an appetizing dish, is to serve meat with dumplings in a veal potpie.
For such a dish, a piece of veal from the shoulder, like that shown in
Fig. 3, is the best cut. To give variety, potatoes may be used, and to
improve the flavor at least one onion is cooked with the meat.

To prepare a veal potpie, wipe the meat, cut it into pieces of the right
size for serving, and to it add a few pieces of salt pork or bacon. Put
these over the fire in enough cold water to cover the meat well and add
a small onion, sliced. Bring to the boiling point and skim; then simmer
until the meat is tender. Season with salt and pepper a few minutes
before the meat has finished cooking. Next, make a baking-powder biscuit
dough, roll it 1/4 inch thick, and cut it into 1-1/2-inch squares. Then
examine the meat to see how much of the liquid has evaporated. If the
liquid is too thick, add boiling water to thin it. Drop in the squares
of dough, cover the pot tight, and boil for 15 minutes without
uncovering.

If potatoes are desired in a pie of this kind, cut them into thick
slices and add the slices about 10 minutes before the dough is to be put
into the broth, so that they will have sufficient time in which to cook.

15. Veal Stew.--The cheaper cuts of veal can be used to advantage for
making veal stew. Such a dish is prepared in the same way as beef stew,
which is explained in _Meat_, Part 1, except that veal is substituted
for the beef. Vegetables of any desired kind may be used in veal stew,
and the stewed or boiled dumplings mentioned in the beef-stew recipe may
or may not be used. As the vegetables and the dumplings, provided
dumplings are used, increase the quantity of meat-flavored food, only
small portions of the meat need be served.

16. Jellied Veal.--The large amount of gelatine contained in veal may be
utilized in the preparation of jellied veal. The most satisfactory piece
for making jellied veal is the knuckle, or shank. No more attractive
meat dish than this can be found for luncheon or supper, for it can be
cut into thin slices and served on a nicely garnished platter.

JELLIED VEAL
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

Knuckle of veal
1 Tb. salt
1/4 c. chopped celery
1 Tb. chopped parsley
1 Tb. chopped onion

Put the knuckle in a pot and add enough water to cover it. Add the salt,
celery, parsley, and onion. Cook until the meat is very tender and then
strain off the liquid. Cut the meat from the bones and chop it very
fine. Boil the liquid until it is reduced to 1 pint, and then set aside
to cool. Place the meat in a mold and when cold pour the broth over it.
Keep in a cool place until it has set. Slice and serve cold.


VEAL ORGANS AND THEIR PREPARATION

17. Getting Sweetbreads Ready for Cooking--The throat glands and the
pancreas of calves, which, as has already been learned, are called
sweetbreads, can be cooked in various ways for the table. The first
process in their preparation, however, is the same for all recipes. When
this is understood, it will be a simple matter to make up attractive
dishes in which sweetbreads are used. It is generally advisable to buy
sweetbreads in pairs, as the heart and throat sweetbreads are preferable
to the one that lies near the stomach. Sweetbreads spoil very quickly.
Therefore, as soon as they are brought into the kitchen, put them in
cold water and allow them to remain there for 1/2 hour or more. Then put
them to cook in boiling water for 20 minutes in order to parboil them,
after which place them in cold water again. Unless they are to be used
immediately, keep them in cold water, as this will prevent them from
discoloring. Before using sweetbreads in the recipes that follow, remove
the skin and stringy parts.

18. Broiled Sweetbreads.--Because of their tenderness, sweetbreads are
especially suitable for broiling. When prepared in this way and served
with sauce of some kind, they are very palatable.

In order to broil sweetbreads, first parboil them in the manner just
explained. Then split each one lengthwise and broil them over a clear
fire for 5 minutes or pan-broil them with a small amount of butter until
both surfaces are slightly browned. Season with salt and pepper.
Serve hot.

19. Creamed Sweetbreads.--If an especially dainty dish is desired for a
light meal, sweetbreads may be creamed and then served over toast or in
patty shells or timbale cases, the making of which is taken up later. If
desired, mushrooms may be combined with sweetbreads that are served in
this way. Diced cold veal or calves' brains creamed and served in this
way are also delicious. Instead of creaming sweetbreads and calves'
brains, however, these organs are sometimes scrambled with eggs.

To prepare creamed sweetbreads, parboil them and then separate them
into small pieces with a fork or cut them into cubes. Reheat them in a
cupful of white sauce, season well, and then serve them in any of the
ways just mentioned. If mushrooms are to be used, cook and dice them
before combining them with the sweetbreads.

20. Kidneys.--The kidneys of both lamb and veal are used for food. The
cooking of them, however, must be either a quick, short process or a
long, slow one. When a quick method is applied, the tissues remain
tender. Additional cooking renders them tough, so that a great deal more
cooking must be done to make them tender again. Whatever method is
applied, kidneys must always be soaked in water for 1 hour or more so as
to cleanse them, the outside covering then pared off, and the meat
sliced or cut into cubes or strips. After being thus prepared, kidneys
may be broiled or sautéd, or, if a long method of cookery is preferred,
they may be boiled or stewed with or without vegetables.

21. Calves' Liver and Bacon.--Beef liver is sometimes used for food, but
it is not so good as liver from the calf. In fact, calves' liver,
especially when combined with bacon, is very appetizing. The bacon
supplies the fat that the liver lacks and at the same time
provides flavor.

To prepare calves' liver and bacon, cut the liver into 1/2-inch slices,
cover these with boiling water, and let them stand for 5 minutes. Remove
from the water, dip into flour, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. For
each slice of liver pan-broil a slice of bacon. Remove the bacon to a
hot platter, and then place the slices of liver in the bacon fat and
sauté them for about 10 minutes, turning them frequently. Serve the
liver and bacon together.


PREPARATION OF LEFT-OVER VEAL

22. Veal Rolls.--The portion of a veal roast that remains after it has
been served hot can be combined with dressing to make veal rolls, a dish
that will be a pleasing change from the usual cold sliced meat.

To make veal rolls, slice the veal and into each slice roll a spoonful
of stuffing. Tie with a string, roll in flour, and sprinkle with salt
and pepper. Brown the rolls in hot butter. Then pour milk, stock, or
gravy over the rolls and simmer for 10 minutes. Remove the strings and
serve on toast.

23. Left-Over Jellied Veal.--While jellied veal is usually made from a
piece of veal bought especially for this purpose, it can be made from
the left-overs of a veal roast. However, when the roast is purchased,
some veal bones should be secured. Wash these bones, cover them with
cold water, and to them add 1 onion, 1 bay leaf, and 1 cupful of diced
vegetables, preferably celery, carrots, and turnips. Allow these to
simmer for 2 hours. To this stock add the bones that remain after the
roast has been served and simmer for 1 or 2 hours more. Strain the
stock, skim off the fat, and season well with salt and pepper. Chop fine
the left-over veal and 2 hard-cooked eggs. Put in a loaf-cake pan and
pour the stock over it. When it has formed a mold, slice and serve cold.

24. Creamed Veal on Biscuits.--A very good substitute for chicken and
hot biscuits is creamed veal served on biscuits. This is an especially
good dish for a light meal, such as luncheon or supper. Any left-over
veal may be chopped or cut up into small pieces and used for this
purpose. After the veal has been thus prepared, reheat it with white
sauce and season it well with paprika, salt, and pepper. Make
baking-powder biscuits. To serve, split the hot biscuits, lay them open
on a platter or a plate, and pour the hot creamed veal over them.

25. Scalloped Veal with Rice.--A very palatable dish can be prepared
from left-over veal by combining it with rice and tomatoes. To prepare
such a dish, season cooked rice with 1 teaspoonful of bacon fat to each
cupful of rice. Place a layer of rice in a baking dish, and over it put
a layer of chopped veal. Pour a good quantity of stewed tomatoes over
the veal and season well with salt and pepper. Over the tomatoes put a
layer of rice, and cover the top with buttered crumbs. Set in a hot oven
and bake until the crumbs are browned and the ingredients
thoroughly heated.

26. Veal Salad.--A salad is always a delightful addition to a meal and
so usually finds favor. When it is made of meat, such as veal, it can be
used as the main dish for luncheon or supper. As shown in the
accompanying recipe, other things, such as celery, peas, and hard-cooked
eggs, are usually put in a salad of this kind.

VEAL SALAD
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 c. cold diced veal
1 c. diced celery
1/2 c. canned peas
3 hard-cooked eggs
4 Tb. olive oil
2 Tb. vinegar
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper

Combine the veal, celery, peas, and eggs chopped fine. Mix the olive
oil, vinegar, salt, and pepper to make a dressing. Marinate the
ingredients with this dressing. Serve on lettuce leaves with any salad
dressing desired.



MUTTON AND LAMB

COMPARISON OF MUTTON AND LAMB

[Illustration: FIG. 5]

27. The term mutton is usually applied to the flesh of a sheep that is 1
year or more old, while lamb is the flesh of sheep under 1 year of age.
The popularity of these meats varies very much with the locality. In the
United States, a preference for lamb has become noticeable, but in
England mutton is more popular and is more commonly used. Both of these
meats, however, are very palatable and nutritious, so that the choice
of one or the other will always be determined by the taste or market
conditions.

[Illustration: FIG. 6]

28. Lamb that is 6 weeks to 3 months old is called _spring lamb_, and
usually comes into the market in January or February. The meat of sheep
1 year old is called _yearling_. Good mutton is cut from sheep that is
about 3 years old. Lamb may be eaten as soon as it is killed, but mutton
requires ripening for 2 or 3 weeks to be in the best condition for food.
Mutton differs from lamb very much as beef differs from veal, or as the
meat of any other mature animal differs from a young one of the same
kind. In mutton there is a smaller percentage of water and a larger
percentage of fat, protein, extractives, and flavoring substances.

There is also a difference in the appearance of these two meats. Lamb is
pink and contains only small amounts of fat, while mutton is brick red
and usually has considerable firm white fat. The bones of lamb are pink,
while those of mutton are white. The outside of lamb is covered with a
thin white skin that becomes pink in mutton. The size of the pieces of
meat often aids in distinguishing between these two meats, mutton, of
course, coming in larger pieces than lamb.

29. If there is any question as to whether the meat from sheep is lamb
or mutton, and it cannot be settled by any of the characteristics
already mentioned, the front leg of the dressed animal may be examined
at the first joint above the foot. Fig. 5 shows this joint in both lamb
and mutton. In lamb, which is shown at the left, the end of the bone can
be separated from the long bone at the leg, as indicated, while in
mutton this joint grows fast and looks like the illustration at the
right. The joint is jagged in lamb, but smooth and round in mutton.


CUTS OF MUTTON AND LAMB

METHOD OF OBTAINING CUTS

30. Mutton and lamb are usually cut up in the same way, the dressed
animal being divided into two pieces of almost equal weight. The line of
division occurs between the first and second ribs, as is indicated by
the heavy middle line in Fig. 6. The back half of the animal is called
the _saddle_ and the front half, the _rack_. In addition to being cut in
this way, the animal is cut down the entire length of the backbone and
is thus divided into the fore and hind quarters.

The method of cutting up the racks and saddles varies in different
localities, but, as a rule, the method illustrated in Fig. 7 is the one
that is used. As here shown, the rack, or fore quarter, is cut up into
the neck, chuck, shoulder, rib chops, and breast; and the saddle, or
hind quarter, is divided into the loin, flank, and leg.

The way in which the front and the back of a dressed sheep appear is
shown in Fig. 8. The membrane, which extends from the legs down over the
ribs, is the omentum, or covering of the intestines, and is known as the
_caul_. This must be removed from any part that it covers before the
meat is cooked. The kidneys incased in fat are also shown in the view
at the left.


NAMES AND USES OF CUTS

31. Distinguishing Features of Cuts.--When the uses of the cuts of lamb
and mutton are to be considered, attention must be given to the anatomy
of the animal and the exercise that the different parts have received
during life. This is important, because the continued action of the
muscles tends to make the flesh tough, but, at the same time, it
increases the amount of extractives or flavoring material. Therefore,
meat taken from a part that has been subjected to much muscular action
is likely to need longer cooking than that taken from portions that have
not been exercised so much.

[Illustration: FIG. 8]

In lamb and mutton, as in beef and veal, the hind quarter is exercised
less in life than the fore quarter and consequently is, on the average,
more tender. The cuts from this part are therefore more expensive and
more suitable for roasting and broiling. The fore quarter, although
having the disadvantage of containing more bone and being tougher, is
more abundantly supplied with extractives and flavoring materials. Most
of the pieces obtained from this portion are particularly suitable for
broths, soups, stews, etc. The rib is an exception, for this is usually
higher in price than the hind-quarter pieces and is used for chops
and roasts.

32. Table of Mutton and Lamb Cuts.--The various cuts of mutton and lamb
and the uses to which they can be put are given in Table II, which may
be followed as a guide whenever there is doubt as to the way in which a
cut of either of these meats should be cooked.

TABLE II

NAMES AND USES OF MUTTON AND LAMB CUTS

NAME OF LARGE CUT     NAME OF SMALL CUT     USES OF CUTS
Fore quarter:
              Neck...................Broth, stew
              Chuck.................. Stew, steamed
              Shoulder................Boiled, steamed, braised, roast
              Rack ribs...............Chops, crown roast
              Breast.................. Stew, roast, braised, stuffed

Hind quarter:
              Loin.................... Seven chops, roast, boiling
              Flank................... Stew
              Leg..................... Roast, braising, broiling
              Saddle.................. Roast


COOKING OF MUTTON AND LAMB


PREPARATION OF ROASTS, CHOPS, AND STEWS

33. The cookery processes applied in preparing mutton and lamb for the
table do not differ materially from those applied in the preparation of
other meats. However, directions for cooking mutton and lamb in the most
practical ways are here given, so that the housewife may become
thoroughly familiar with the procedure in preparing roasts, chops,
and stews.

[Illustration: FIG. 9 (_a_)]

[Illustration: FIG. 9 (_b_)]

34. Roast Leg of Mutton or Lamb.--Of all the principal cuts of mutton or
lamb, the leg contains the smallest percentage of waste. It is,
therefore, especially suitable for roasting and is generally used for
this purpose. In Fig. 9 are shown two views of a leg of lamb or mutton.
That in (_a_) illustrates the leg with part of the loin attached, and
that in (_b_), the leg trimmed and ready for cooking. In order to make
the leg smaller, a slice resembling a round steak of beef is sometimes
cut for broiling, as here shown. If desired, the leg may be boned and
then stuffed before roasting. Since these meats are characterized by a
very marked flavor, something tart or acid is generally served
with them.

To roast a leg of lamb or mutton, remove the caul, the pink skin, and
the superfluous fat. Dredge the leg with flour, salt, and pepper, set in
a roasting pan, and place in a hot oven. After the meat has cooked for
15 minutes, lower the temperature, and bake for 2 hours. Baste
frequently with water to which has been added a small amount of bacon or
ham fat and which should be put in the pan with the meat. Serve hot with
something acid, such as mint sauce, currant or mint jelly, or
spiced fruit.

A mint sauce that will be found satisfactory for this purpose is made as
follows:

MINT SAUCE

2 Tb. powdered sugar
1/2 c. vinegar
1/4 c. finely chopped mint leaves,
  or 2 Tb. dried mint

Add the sugar to the vinegar and heat. Pour this over the mint and steep
on the back of the stove for 30 minutes.

35. Roast Saddle of Mutton.--While saddle is the name applied to the
hind quarters of lamb and mutton, this term, as used in the cooking of
such meat, refers to the piece that consists of the two sides of the
loin cut off in one piece. It may be cut with or without the flank. In
either form, it is rolled and then skewered or tied into shape.

To roast such a piece, remove all superfluous fat, dredge with flour,
salt, and pepper, place in a pan, and sear in a hot oven. Then reduce
the heat, place a small quantity of water in the pan, and bake for 2-1/2
to 3 hours, basting from time to time during this cooking process. Serve
with or without mint sauce, as desired.

36. Crown Roast of Lamb.--A very attractive roast is made by cutting the
same number of corresponding ribs from each side of the lamb and
trimming back the meat from the end of each rib. Such a roast is called
a crown roast. Fig. 10 shows a crown roast with the ribs trimmed, the
two pieces fastened together, and paper frills placed on the ends of the
bones. Such frills are usually added by the butcher, but they may be
purchased in supply stores and put on in the home.

[Illustration: FIG. 10]

To prepare a roast of this kind, cook in the same way as a roast leg or
saddle. When it is sufficiently baked, fill the center with a cooked and
seasoned vegetable. Brussels sprouts, peas, string beans, asparagus, and
cauliflower are especially suitable for this purpose. Just before
serving, cover the ends of the bones with paper frills, as shown in the
illustration.

37. Lamb and Mutton Chops.--Chops of mutton or lamb are obtained from
two sources. They may be cut from the ribs and have one bone in each cut
or they may be cut from the loin, when they correspond to the steaks
in beef. The loins and ribs of lamb, which are sometimes used for
rolled racks, but from which chops are usually cut, are shown in
Fig. 11. A rib chop cut from this piece has only a small part
of solid lean meat and contains one rib bone. Such a chop can
be made into a French chop, as shown in Fig. 12, by trimming
the meat from the bone down to the lean part, or "eye," of the chop.
Just before being served, a paper frill may be placed over the bone of a
chop of this kind. Chops cut from the loin often have a strip of bacon
or salt pork rolled around the edge and fastened with a skewer, as shown
in Fig. 13.

[Illustration: FIG. 11]

[Illustration: Fig. 12]

38. The most satisfactory way in which to prepare chops is either to
broil them in a broiler or to pan-broil them. Apply to the cooking of
them the same principles that relate to the preparation of steaks; that
is, have the pan or broiler hot, sear the chops quickly on both sides,
and then cook them more slowly until well done, turning them
frequently. The broiling of lamb chops should require only from 8 to 10
minutes, as they are seldom more than 1 inch thick.

39. Lamb and Mutton Stews.--The cheaper cuts of lamb and mutton, such as
the neck, chuck, and flank, are used for the making of stews. Mutton,
however, is not so satisfactory as lamb for such dishes, as its flavor
is too strong. If mutton must be used, its flavor can be improved by
adding 1 or 2 tablespoonfuls of vinegar during the cooking. The chief
object in the making of lamb and mutton stews is, as in the case of beef
and veal stews, to draw from the meat as much as possible of the
flavoring and nutritive materials.

[Illustration: FIG. 13]

This can be accomplished by cutting up the meat into small pieces so as
to increase the amount of surface exposed and by keeping the temperature
low enough to prevent the proteins from coagulating.

With these points in mind, proceed in the making of lamb or mutton stew
in the same way as for beef stew. To improve the flavor of the stew,
cook with it savory herbs and spices, such as bay leaf, parsley,
and cloves.


PREPARATION OF LEFT-OVER LAMB AND MUTTON

40. Turkish Lamb.--No left-over meat lends itself more readily to the
preparation of made dishes than lamb. Combined with tomatoes and rice
and flavored with horseradish, it makes a very appetizing dish called
Turkish lamb. The accompanying recipe should be carefully followed in
preparing this dish.

TURKISH LAMB
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 Tb. butter
1 onion, chopped
1/2 c. rice
1 c. water
1 c. stewed tomatoes
1-1/2 c. diced lamb or mutton
1 Tb. horseradish
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper

Put the butter in a frying pan and to it add the chopped onion and the
dry rice. Cook until the rice is browned. Then pour in the water and
tomatoes and add the meat, horseradish, salt, and pepper. Simmer gently
until the rice is completely cooked.

41. MINCED LAMB ON TOAST.--Any lamb that remains after a meal may be
minced by chopping it fine or putting it through the food chopper. If it
is then heated, moistened well with water or stock, and thickened
slightly, it makes an excellent preparation to serve on toast.

After mincing lean pieces of left-over lamb until they are very fine,
put them in a buttered frying pan. Dredge the meat well with flour and
allow it to brown slightly. Add enough water or stock to moisten well.
Season with salt and pepper, cook until the flour has thickened, and
then serve on toast.

42. SCALLOPED LAMB OR MUTTON.--As a scalloped dish is usually pleasing
to most persons, the accompanying recipe for scalloped lamb or mutton
will undoubtedly find favor. Both macaroni and tomatoes are combined
with the meat in this dish, but rice could be substituted for the
macaroni, if desired.

To make scalloped lamb or mutton, arrange a layer of buttered crumbs in
a baking dish, and on top of them place a layer of cooked macaroni, a
layer of meat, and then another layer of macaroni. Over this pour enough
stewed tomato to moisten the whole well. Season each layer with salt,
pepper, and butter. Over the top, place a layer of buttered crumbs. Bake
in a medium-hot oven until the whole is thoroughly heated.

43. SPANISH STEW.--Left-over pieces of mutton or lamb may also form the
foundation of a very appetizing dish known as Spanish stew. Here
tomatoes are also used, and to give the stew flavor chilli sauce
is added.

SPANISH STEW
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 Tb. butter.
1 onion, sliced
1 Tb. flour
2 c. lamb or mutton, diced
1-1/2 c. stewed tomatoes
1 c. stock or gravy
1 Tb. chilli sauce
1 red pepper, cut fine
2 tsp. salt

Put the butter in a frying pan and brown the sliced onion in it. Add the
flour and meat, and after browning them pour in the stewed tomatoes and
the stock or gravy. Season with the chilli sauce, the red pepper, and
the salt. Cover and let simmer until the whole is well thickened
and blended.

44. INDIVIDUAL LAMB PIES.--Individual pies are always welcome, but when
they are made of lamb or mutton they are especially attractive. The
proportions required for pies of this kind are given in the
accompanying recipe.

INDIVIDUAL LAMB PIES

2 c. diced lamb or mutton
1/2 c. diced carrots
1/2 c. peas, cooked or canned
1 c. gravy or thickened stock

Cut into small pieces any left-over lamb or mutton. Cook the carrots
until they are soft, add them, together with the peas, to the meat, and
pour the gravy or thickened stock over all. Simmer gently for a few
minutes. Line patty pans with a thin layer of baking-powder biscuit
dough, fill with the mixture, and cover the top with another thin layer
of the dough. Bake in a quick oven until the dough is baked.

       *       *       *       *       *

PORK

GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF PORK

45. PORK is the flesh of slaughtered swine used as food. It is believed
to be more indigestible than other meats, but if it is obtained from a
young and properly fed animal, it is not only digestible, but highly
appetizing, and, when eaten occasionally, it is very wholesome.

The age of the animal from which pork is cut can be determined by the
thickness of the skin; the older the animal, the thicker the skin. To be
of the best kind, pork should have pink, not red, flesh composed of
fine-grained tissues, and its fat, which, in a well-fattened animal,
equals about one-eighth of the entire weight, should be white and firm.
Although all cuts of pork contain some fat, the proportion should not be
too great, or the pieces will not contain as much lean as they should.
However, the large amount of fat contained in pork makes its food value
higher than that of other meats, unless they are excessively fat, and
consequently difficult of digestion.

46. One of the chief advantages of pork is that about nine-tenths of
the entire dressed animal may be preserved by curing and smoking.
Originally, these processes required a period of 2 to 3 months for their
completion, but they have gradually been shortened until now only a few
days are required for the work. Pork cured and smoked by the new
methods, however, does not possess such excellent flavor and such good
keeping qualities as that so treated by the longer process. Any one who
has the right storage facilities to care for the meat properly will find
it much more economical to purchase a whole carcass or a part of one and
then salt, smoke, or pickle the various pieces that can be treated in
this way than to purchase this meat cut by cut as it is needed
or desired.


CUTS OF PORK

47. NAMES OF PORK CUTS.--The butcher usually buys a whole carcass of
pork. He first divides it into halves by splitting it through the spine,
and then cuts it up into smaller pieces according to the divisions shown
in Fig. 14, which illustrates the outside and the inside of a dressed
hog. As will be observed, the method of cutting up a hog differs greatly
from the cutting of the animals already studied. After the head is
removed, each side is divided into the shoulder, clear back fat, ribs,
loin, middle cut, belly, ham, and two hocks.

48. USES OF PORK CUTS.--Hogs are usually fattened before they are
slaughtered, and as a result there is a layer of fat under the skin
which is trimmed off and used in the making of lard. The best quality of
lard, however, is made from the fat that surrounds the kidneys. This is
called _leaf lard_, because the pieces of fat are similar in shape to
leaves. Such lard has a higher melting point and is more flaky than that
made from fat covering the muscles.

49. The head of pork does not contain a great deal of meat, but, as the
quality of this meat is very good, it is valuable for a number of
special dishes, such as headcheese and scrapple.

The hocks contain considerable gelatine, so they are used for dishes
that solidify, or become firm, after they are made.

[Illustration: Fig. 14]

[Illustration: FIG. 15]

[Illustration: FIG. 16]

[Illustration: FIG. 17]

50. A shoulder of pork cut roughly from the carcass is shown in Fig. 15.
This piece provides both roasts and steaks, or, when trimmed, it may
be cured or smoked. The front leg, which is usually cut to include the
lower part of the shoulder, is shown in Fig. 16. The ribs inside this
cut, when cut from underneath, are sold as spareribs. This piece, as
shown in Fig. 17, is generally trimmed to make what is known as
shoulder ham.

[Illustration: FIG. 18]

51. The ribs and the loin cut in one piece are shown in Fig. 18. From
this piece are obtained the most desirable chops and roasts. When a
roast is desired, the rib bones are removed from the rib cut, which then
resembles the piece shown in Fig. 19. Directly under the backbone in
these cuts is the tenderest piece of pork to be had. When this is
removed in one piece, it is, as in beef, called the _tenderloin_. Very
often, however, it is left in to be cut up with the rest of the loin.

[Illustration: FIG. 19]

52. The middle cut is commonly used for bacon, while the belly is most
suitable for salt pork. These two cuts consist of large quantities of
fat and only narrow layers of lean. They are especially valuable for
enriching and flavoring foods, such as beans, that are neither rich in
fat nor highly flavored.

[Illustration: FIG. 20]

53. The hind leg, or untrimmed ham, just as it is cut from the carcass,
is shown in Fig. 20. When this piece is trimmed and ready for curing or
for roasting, it appears as shown in Fig. 21. As will be noticed, the
outside skin, or rind, is not removed from either the shoulder or
the ham.

[Illustration: FIG. 21]

54. TABLE OF PORK CUTS.--As is done in explaining the meats that have
been considered previously, there is here presented a table, designated
as Table III, that gives the names of the pork cuts and the uses to
which they may be put. This table will assist the housewife materially
in learning the names and uses of the various cuts of pork.

TABLE III

NAMES AND USES OF PORK CUTS

NAMES OF CUTS                  USES OF CUTS

Head                           Headcheese, boiling, baking
Shoulder                       Steaks, roasting, curing, smoking
Spareribs                      Roasting, boiling
Belly                          Salt pork, curing
Middle cut                     Bacon, curing, smoking
Ribs                           Chops, roasting
Loin                           Chops, roasting
Ham                            Roasting, curing, smoking
Back fat                       Lard
Hock                           Boiling, making jelly
Internal organs and trimmings  Sausage

       *       *       *       *       *

COOKING OF PORK

FRESH PORK AND ITS PREPARATION

55. ROAST PORK.--In the preparation of pork for the table, and a roast
in particular, several points must be taken into consideration. Unlike
beef, which is often served rare, pork must be well done in order to be
satisfactory. Rare pork to most persons is repulsive. Also, as a large
part of the surface of a pork roast, especially one cut from the
shoulder, loin, or ribs, is covered with a layer of fat, pork does not
have to be seared to prevent the loss of juice, nor does it have to be
put into such a hot oven as that required for beef. In fact, if the
temperature of the oven is very high, the outside will finish cooking
before the heat has had a chance to penetrate sufficiently to cook the
center. While this makes no difference with meat that does not need to
be thoroughly cooked, it is a decided disadvantage in the case of pork.

56. When a shoulder of pork is to be roasted, it makes a very
satisfactory dish if it is boned and stuffed before roasting. To bone
such a piece, run a long, narrow knife all around the bone and cut it
loose; then pick up the bone by one end and shake it until it will pull
out. Fill the opening thus formed with bread or cracker stuffing.

If an especially inviting roast of pork is desired, a _crown roast_
should be selected, for this is just as attractive as a crown roast of
lamb. It is made by cutting corresponding pieces from each side of the
rib piece, trimming the bones clean as far back as the lean part of the
chops, and fastening the pieces together. A garnish of fried apple rings
is very attractive for such a roast.

57. To cook a roast of any of these varieties, wipe the meat thoroughly,
dredge it with flour, salt, and pepper, and place it on a rack in a
dripping pan. Bake about 3 hours, depending on the size of the roast,
and baste every 15 minutes with fat from the bottom of the dripping pan.

After the roast is removed from the roasting pan, make a gravy as for
any other roast. Serve with apple sauce, baked apples, cranberry sauce,
chilli sauce, pickles, or some other acid dish. Such an accompaniment
aids considerably in the digestion of pork, for it cuts the large amount
of fat that this meat contains and that so often retards the digestion,
and hastens the fat through the stomach.

58. ROAST PIG.--In some households, roasted pig is the favorite meat for
the Thanksgiving or the Christmas dinner. There is sufficient reason for
its popularity, for when properly prepared and attractively garnished,
roasted pig offers a pleasing change from the meat usually served on
such days.

To be suitable for roasting, a pig should be not more than 1 month or 6
weeks old and should not weigh more than 7 or 8 pounds after it is
cleaned. The butcher should prepare it for cooking by scalding off the
hair, washing the pig thoroughly, inside and out, and withdrawing the
entrails of the animal through an incision made in the under part of
the body.

59. When the pig is received in the home, wash it thoroughly, within and
without, wipe it dry, and fill it with stuffing. To make a stuffing
suitable for this purpose, season 2 quarts of fine bread crumbs with 4
tablespoonfuls of chopped onion, 2 teaspoonfuls of salt, 1 teaspoonful
of pepper, and cupful of melted butter. Mix thoroughly and add 3 beaten
eggs. If the stuffing needs moisture, add water or milk. Stuff the pig
firmly with this stuffing, using every effort to restore its original
shape. Then sew up the opening and truss the animal; that is, draw the
hind legs forwards and bend the front legs backwards under the body, and
skewer and tie them into place.

With the animal in this shape, wipe it off with a damp cloth, dredge it
with flour, and place it in a dripping pan, adding 1 cupful of boiling
water in which 1 teaspoonful of salt has been dissolved. Roast in a
moderate oven for at least 1-1/2 hours, or 20 minutes for each pound of
pig. Baste frequently, first with butter and water and later with
drippings. When the skin begins to brown slightly, rub over it a clean
piece of cloth dipped in melted butter. Repeat this operation every 10
minutes until the meat is well done. Then remove the pig to a hot
platter and garnish with parsley, lettuce, celery, or fried or baked
apples. If a more ornamental garnishing is desired, place a lemon in the
mouth and use cranberries for the eyes. In carving, cut the head off,
split through the spine lengthwise, remove the legs, and cut the ribs so
as to form chops.

60. SAUTÉD OR BROILED PORK.--Slices cut from the ribs and loin of pork
are called chops, and those obtained from the shoulder and hind legs are
called steaks. These, together with the tenderloin, the small piece of
lean, tender meat lying under the bones of the loin and seldom weighing
more than a pound, are especially suitable for sautéing or broiling.
When they are to be prepared by these processes, sauté or broil them as
any other meat, remembering, however, that pork must be well done.
Because of this fact, a more moderate temperature must be employed than
that used for beefsteak.

61. PORK CHOPS IN TOMATO SAUCE.--A slight change from the usual way of
preparing pork chops can be had by cooking them with tomatoes. The
combination of these two foods produces a dish having a very
agreeable flavor.

First brown the chops in their own fat in a frying pan, turning them
frequently so that the surfaces will become evenly browned. When they
have cooked for 15 minutes, pour enough strained stewed tomatoes over
them to cover them well, and season with salt and pepper. Cover the pan
tight, and allow them to simmer until the tomatoes become quite thick.
Place the chops on a hot platter, pour the tomato sauce over them, and
serve hot.

62. SAUTÉD TENDERLOIN OF PORK.--Since the tenderloin of pork is a very
tender piece of meat, it needs no accompaniment to make it a delicious
dish, but sometimes a change of preparation is welcomed in order to give
variety to the diet. The accompanying directions should therefore be
followed when something different from broiled tenderloin is desired.

Cut the tenderloin into lengthwise slices and brown these slices in
melted butter, turning them several times. Then remove to a cooler part
of the stove, and let them cook slowly in the butter for 15 minutes,
taking care to have them closely covered and turning them once or twice
so that they will cook evenly. At the end of this time, pour enough milk
or cream in the pan to cover the meat well and cook for 15 minutes
longer. With a skimmer, remove the meat, which should be very tender by
this time, from the pan, and put it where it will keep hot. Make a gravy
of the drippings that remain in the pan by thickening it with 1
tablespoonful of flour, stirring it until it is thick and smooth and
seasoning it to taste with salt and pepper. Pour the gravy over the meat
and serve hot.

63. PORK SAUSAGE.--The trimmings and some of the internal organs of pork
are generally utilized to make sausage by chopping them very fine and
then highly seasoning the chopped meat. Pork in this form may be bought
fresh or smoked and loose or in casings. It usually contains
considerable fat and therefore shrinks upon being cooked, for the fat is
melted by the heat and runs out of the sausage.

To cook pork sausages put up in casings, place the required number in a
hot frying pan with a small quantity of hot water. Cover the pan with a
lid and allow the sausages to cook. When they have swelled up and the
skins, or casings, look as if they would burst, remove the cover and
thoroughly prick each one with a sharp fork, so as to allow the fat and
the water to run out. Then allow the water to evaporate and sauté the
sausages in their own fat, turning them frequently until they are
well browned.

To cook loose pork sausage, shape it into thin, flat cakes. Grease a
frying pan slightly, in order to keep the cakes from sticking to the
surface, place the cakes in the pan, and allow them to cook in the fat
that fries out, turning them occasionally until both sides are
well browned.


CURED PORK AND ITS PREPARATION

64. Under the heading of cured pork may be included many of the cuts of
pork, for a large part of a pork carcass can be preserved by curing.
However, this term is usually restricted to include salt pork, bacon,
and ham. As has already been learned, salt pork is obtained from the
belly; bacon, from the middle cut; and ham, from the two hind legs
of pork.

65. SALT PORK.--As the cut used for salt pork is almost entirely fat,
this piece is seldom used alone for the table. Occasionally, it is
broiled to be served with some special food, such as fried apples, but
for the most part it is used for _larding_; that is, slices of it are
laid across the surface of meat and fish that are lacking in fat and
that therefore cook better and have a more agreeable flavor when fat in
some form is added. Pork of this kind is usually bought by the pound and
then sliced by the housewife as it is needed for cooking purposes.

[Illustration: FIG. 22]

66. BACON.--The middle cut of pork, upon being cured by smoking, is
regarded as bacon. It is sometimes used for larding purposes, but as it
contains more lean than salt pork, has a very pleasing flavor, and is
the most easily digested fat known, it is much used for food. A piece
that contains the usual proportion of fat and lean is shown in Fig. 22.
The strip of fat that occurs between the rind, or outer coat, and the
first layer of lean is the firmest and the best for larding. The fat
that fries out of bacon is excellent for use in the cooking and
seasoning of other foods, such as vegetables and meats. When bacon is
cooked for the table, its flavor will be improved if it is broiled
rather than fried in its own fat. The rind of bacon should, as a rule,
be trimmed off, but it should never be wasted, for it may be used to
grease a pancake griddle or any pan in which food is to be cooked,
provided the bacon flavor will not be objectionable.

In purchasing bacon, it is usually more economical to buy the whole
side, or the entire middle cut, but if smaller quantities are desired,
any amount, either in one piece or in slices, may be bought. The
commercially cut bacon, which is very thin and becomes very crisp in its
preparation, may be bought with the rind retained or removed. In both of
these forms, it is often put up in jars or packed neatly in flat
pasteboard boxes. While such bacon is undoubtedly the most popular kind,
it should be remembered that the more preparation that is put on such a
food before it enters the home, the more expensive it becomes. Very
satisfactory results can be obtained from bacon bought in the piece if
care is used in cutting it. To secure very thin, even slices, a knife
having a thin blade that is kept sharp and in good condition should
always be used.

67. BACON AND EGGS.--There are many combinations in which bacon is one
of the foods, but no more palatable one can be found than bacon and
eggs. This is generally a breakfast dish; still there is no reason why
it cannot be used at times for luncheon or supper to give variety.

To prepare this combination of foods, first pan-broil the desired number
of slices of bacon in a hot frying pan until they are crisp and then
remove them to a warm platter. Into the fat that has fried out of the
bacon, put the required number of eggs, which have first been broken
into a saucer. Fry them until they reach the desired degree of hardness,
and then remove to the platter containing the bacon. Serve by placing a
slice or two of bacon on the plate with each egg.

68. BACON COMBINED WITH OTHER FOODS.--Many other foods may be fried in
the same way as eggs and served with bacon. For instance, sliced apples
or sliced tomatoes fried in bacon fat until they become tender, but not
mushy, are delicious when served with crisp pieces of bacon. Also, cold
cereals, such as cream of wheat, oatmeal, corn-meal mush, etc., may be
sliced and fried until crisp and then served with bacon.

69. HAM.--The hind leg of pork, when cured and smoked, is usually known
as ham. Fig. 23 shows a ham from which the rind has not been removed. In
such a ham, the proportion of fat and lean is about right, but when ham
is bought with the rind removed, much of the fat is also taken off. The
best hams weigh from 8 to 15 pounds, and have a thin skin, solid fat,
and a small, short tapering leg or shank.

Several ways of cooking ham are in practice. Very often slices
resembling slices of round steak are cut from the whole ham and then
fried or broiled. If a larger quantity is desired, the entire ham or a
thick cut may be purchased. This is boiled or baked and then served hot
or cold. It is a good idea to purchase an entire ham and keep it in
supply, cutting off slices as they are desired. In such an event, the
ham should be kept carefully wrapped and should be hung in a cool, dry
place. In cutting a ham, begin at the large end, as in Fig. 23, and cut
off slices until the opposite end becomes too small to make good slices.
The piece that remains may be cooked with vegetables, may be boiled and
served either hot or cold, or, if it is only a small piece, may be used
for making soup.

[Illustration: FIG. 23]

70. BROILED HAM.--The methods of broiling and pan broiling are very
satisfactory when applied to ham that is cut in slices. Ham is
pan-broiled in the same way as other meats. To broil ham, place slices 1
inch thick on the hot broiler rack and sear quickly on both sides. Then
reduce the temperature and broil for 15 to 18 minutes, turning the ham
every few minutes until done. Remove to a hot platter. Add a little
water to the drippings in the broiler pan, pour this over the meat, and
serve at once.

71. HAM BAKED IN MILK.--A change from the usual ways of preparing
slices of ham can be had by baking them in milk. A point to remember in
carrying out this method is that the meat must bake slowly in order to
be tender when it is done.

Secure a 2-inch slice of ham, place it in a dripping pan, and completely
cover it with milk. Put in a moderate oven and cook for 2 or more hours.
When the ham is done, its surface should be brown and the milk should be
almost entirely evaporated. If the liquid added in the beginning is not
sufficient, more may be added during the baking.

72. BOILED HAM.--Sometimes it is desired to cook an entire ham,
particularly when a large number of persons are to be served. The usual
way to prepare a whole ham is to boil it. When it is sufficiently
cooked, it may be served hot or kept until it is cold and then served in
slices. Nothing is more appetizing for a light meal, as luncheon or
supper, or for picnic lunches than cold sliced ham. Then, too, boiled
ham is very delicious when it is fried until the edges are crisp.

To prepare boiled ham, first soak the ham in cold water for several
hours and then remove it and scrub it. Place it in a large kettle with
the fat side down and cover well with cold water. Put over a slow fire
and allow to come to the boiling point very slowly. Boil for 15 minutes
and skim off the scum that has risen. Simmer slowly for about 5 hours,
or at least 25 minutes for each pound of ham. Take from the kettle and
remove the skin about two-thirds of the way back. It will be found that
the skin will peel off easily when the ham is cooked enough. Garnish in
any desirable way and serve hot or cold.

73. BAKED HAM.--Another very appetizing way in which to cook an entire
ham is to bake it. This involves both cooking in water on the top of the
stove and baking in the oven. While this recipe, as well as those
preceding, specifies ham, it should be remembered that shoulder may be
cooked in the same ways.

For baked ham, proceed in the way just explained for boiled ham, but
boil only 12 minutes for each pound. Take the ham from the kettle and
allow it to cool enough to permit it to be handled. Remove the skin.
Then place the ham in a roasting pan and pour over it 1 cupful of water.
Bake 12 minutes for each pound and baste frequently while baking. Serve
hot or cold.

PREPARATION OP LEFT-OVER PORK

74. COLD PORK WITH FRIED APPLES.--A combination that most persons find
agreeable and that enables the housewife to use up left-over pork, is
cold pork and fried apples. To prepare this dish, remove the cores from
sour apples and cut the apples into 1/2-inch slices. Put these in a
frying pan containing hot bacon fat and fry until soft and well browned.
Slice cold pork thin and place in the center of a platter. Arrange the
apples around the pork in a border.

75. SCALLOPED PORK AND CABBAGE.--If not enough pork remains to serve
alone, it can be combined with cabbage to make a most appetizing
scalloped dish. The accompanying recipe shows just how to prepare such
a dish.

SCALLOPED PORK AND CABBAGE
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 c. small thin slices of pork
1-1/2 c. cooked chopped cabbage
1-1/2 c. thin white sauce
1/4 c. buttered crumbs

Arrange the pork and cabbage in layers in a baking dish, having a layer
of cabbage on top. Pour the white sauce over all and sprinkle the crumbs
on top. Bake until the sauce boils and the crumbs are brown.

76. MOCK CHICKEN SALAD.--The similarity in appearance of pork to chicken
makes it possible to prepare a salad of cold pork that is a very good
substitute for chicken salad. A salad of this kind can be used as the
main dish in such a meal as luncheon or supper.

MOCK CHICKEN SALAD
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

4 Tb. vinegar
2 c. diced pork
1-1/2 c. diced celery
Salad dressing

Heat the vinegar and pour it over the diced pork. Set aside to chill.
When ready to serve, add the diced celery and mix well. Pour the salad
dressing over all and serve on crisp lettuce leaves.


SERVING AND CARVING OF MEAT

77. The manner of carving and serving meat in the home depends to some
extent on the kind of meat that is to be served. A way that is favored
by some is to carve the meat before it is placed on the table and then
serve it according to the style of service used. However, the preferable
way is to place the platter containing the meat on the table, together
with the plates, in front of the person who is to do the carving
and serving.

The carver should use considerable care in cutting and serving the meat
so that the platter and the surrounding tablecloth will not become
unsightly. To make each portion as attractive as possible, it should be
cut off evenly and then placed on the plate with the best side up.
Furthermore, the carving should be done in an economical way in order
that whatever remains after the first serving may be served later in the
same meal, and what is not eaten at the first meal may be utilized to
advantage for another. To obtain the best results in carving, a good
carving knife should be secured and it should always be kept well
sharpened.

78. With the general directions clear in mind, the methods of carving
and serving particular kinds of meat may be taken up. Chops, of course,
require no carving. By means of a large fork, one should be placed on
each person's plate. Steaks and roasts, however, need proper cutting in
order that equally good pieces may be served to each person dining. To
carve a steak properly, cut it across from side to side so that each
piece will contain a portion of the tender part, as well as a share of
the tougher part. When cut, the pieces should be strips that are about
as wide as the steak is thick. It is often advisable to remove the bone
from some steaks before placing them on the table.

79. Roasts require somewhat more attention than steaks. Before they are
placed on the table, any cord used for tying should be cut and removed
and all skewers inserted to hold the meat in shape should be pulled out.
To carve a roast of any kind, run the fork into the meat deeply enough
to hold it firmly and then cut the meat into thin slices across the
grain. In the case of a roast leg that contains the bone, begin to carve
the meat from the large end, cutting each slice down to the bone and
then off so that the bone is left clean. Place round of beef and rolled
roasts on the platter so that the tissue side, and not the skin side, is
up, and then cut the slices off in a horizontal direction. To carve a
rib roast properly, cut it parallel with the ribs and separate the
pieces from the backbone.


SAUSAGES AND MEAT PREPARATIONS

80. In addition to the fresh, raw meats that the housewife can procure
for her family, there are on the market numerous varieties of raw,
smoked, cooked, and partly cooked meats, which are generally included
under the term SAUSAGES. These meats are usually highly seasoned, so
they keep better than do fresh meats. They should not be overlooked by
the housewife, for they help to simplify her labor and at the same time
serve to give variety to the family diet. Still, it should be remembered
that when meats are made ready for use before they are put on the
market, the cost of the labor involved in their manufacture is added to
the price charged for them. For this reason, the housewife must be
prepared to pay more for meats of this kind than she would pay if she
could prepare them at home. However, she need not be concerned regarding
their safety, for the government's inspection and regulations prevent
any adulteration of them.

81. Among the numerous varieties of these meats, many of them are
typical of certain localities, while others have a national or an
international reputation. They also vary in the kind of meat used to
make them. Some of them are made from beef, as _frankfurters_ and
certain kinds of _bologna_, while others are made from pork and include
the smoked and unsmoked sausages, _Liverwurst_ is made from the livers
of certain animals, and may be purchased loose or in skins.

Some of these sausages are used so often in certain combinations of
foods that they are usually thought of in connection with the foods that
it is customary for them to accompany. Frankfurters and sauerkraut, pork
sausage and mashed potatoes, liverwurst and fried corn-meal mush are
well-known combinations of this kind.

82. Closely allied to these sausages, although not one of them, is a
meat preparation much used in some localities and known as _scrapple_,
or _ponhasse_. This is prepared by cooking the head of pork, removing
the meat from the bones, and chopping it very fine. The pieces of meat
are then returned to the broth in which the head was cooked and enough
corn meal to thicken the liquid is stirred in. After the whole has
boiled sufficiently, it is turned into molds and allowed to harden. When
it is cold and hard, it can be cut into slices, which are sautéd in
hot fat.

83. Besides scrapple, numerous other meat preparations, such as _meat
loaves_ of various kinds and _pickled pig's feet_, can usually be
obtained in the market. While the thrifty housewife does not make a
habit of purchasing meats of this kind regularly, there are times when
they are a great convenience and also afford an opportunity to vary
the diet.

       *       *       *       *       *

PREPARATION OF FOODS BY DEEP-FAT FRYING

PRINCIPLES OF DEEP-FAT FRYING

84. Up to this point, all frying of foods has been done by sautéing
them; that is, frying them quickly in a small amount of fat. The other
method of frying, which involves cooking food quickly in deep fat at a
temperature of 350 to 400 degrees Fahrenheit, is used so frequently in
the preparation of many excellent meat dishes, particularly in the use
of left-overs, that specific directions for it are here given, together
with several recipes that afford practice in its use. No difficulty will
be experienced in applying this method to these recipes or to other
recipes if the underlying principles of deep-fat frying are thoroughly
understood and the proper utensils for this work are secured.

85. In the first place, it should be remembered that if foods prepared
in this way are properly done, they are not so indigestible as they are
oftentimes supposed to be, but that incorrect preparation makes for
indigestibility in the finished product. For instance, allowing the food
to soak up quantities of fat during the frying is neither economical nor
conducive to a digestible dish. To avoid such a condition, it is
necessary that the mixture to be fried be made of the proper materials
and be prepared in the right way. One of the chief requirements is that
the surface of the mixture be properly coated with a protein material,
such as egg or egg and milk, before it is put into the fat or that the
mixture contain the correct proportion of egg so that its outside
surface will accomplish the same purpose. The reason for this
requirement is that the protein material is quickly coagulated by the
hot fat and thus prevents the entrance of fat into the inside material
of the fried food.

Care must be taken also in the selection of the fat that is used for
deep-fat frying. This may be in the form of an oil or a solid fat and
may be either a vegetable or an animal fat. However, a vegetable fat is
usually preferred, as less smoke results from it and less flavor of the
fat remains in the food after it is cooked.

[Illustration: Fig. 24]

86. The utensils required for deep-fat frying are shown in Fig. 24. They
consist of a wire basket and a pan into which the basket will fit. As
will be observed, the pan in which the fat is put has an upright metal
piece on the side opposite the handle. Over this fits a piece of wire
with which the basket is equipped and which is attached to the side
opposite the handle of the basket. This arrangement makes it possible to
drain the fat from whatever food has been fried without having to hold
the basket over the pan.


APPLICATION OF DEEP-FAT FRYING

87. With the principles of deep-fat frying well in mind, the actual work
of frying foods by this method may be taken up. Numerous foods and
preparations may be subjected to this form of cookery, but attention is
given at this time to only croquettes and timbale cases. _Croquettes_
are small balls or patties usually made of some finely minced food and
fried until brown. _Timbale cases_ are shells in which various creamed
foods are served. As these two preparations are representative of the
various dishes that can be cooked by frying in deep fat, the directions
given for these, if carefully mastered, may be applied to many
other foods.

88. FRYING OF CROQUETTES.--After the mixture that is to be fried has
been prepared, and while the croquettes are being shaped, have the fat
heating in the deep pan, as in Fig. 24. Before the food is immersed,
test the temperature of the fat in the manner shown in Fig. 25, to make
sure that it is hot enough. To do this, put a 1/2-inch cube of bread in
the hot fat and keep it there for 40 seconds. If at the end of this time
it is a golden brown, it may be known that the fat is sufficiently hot
for any mixture. Be careful to regulate the heat so as to keep the fat
as near this temperature as possible, for it should be remembered that
each time a cold food is immersed in hot fat, the temperature is
lowered. Usually, a few minutes' frying is necessary to assure this
regulation of the temperature.

[Illustration: Fig. 25]

As soon as the correct temperature is reached, put several of the
croquettes in the basket and set the basket in the pan of hot fat so
that the croquettes are entirely covered. Fry until a good brown color
is secured. Then lift the basket out of the fat and allow it to drain
until all the fat possible has dripped from it. Finally remove the
croquettes from the basket and place them on any kind of paper that will
absorb the excessive fat. Serve at once or keep hot until ready
to serve.

89. VEAL CROQUETTES.--Veal that remains from a roast after it has been
served once can be utilized in no better way than in the making of
croquettes; or, if desired, veal may be cooked especially for this
purpose. When such croquettes are served with a sauce of any desirable
kind, such as white sauce or tomato sauce, or with left-over gravy, no
more appetizing dish can be found.

VEAL CROQUETTES
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 c. cold ground veal
1 c. thick white sauce
2 Tb. chopped onion
1 Tb. chopped parsley
Salt and pepper
1 egg
Fine crumbs

Mix the ground veal with the white sauce, add the onion and parsley, and
salt and pepper to taste. Shape into oblong croquettes. Roll first in
the beaten egg, which, if necessary, may be increased by the addition of
a little milk, and then in the crumbs. Fry in deep fat until a golden
brown. Serve with or without sauce.

90. SWEETBREAD CROQUETTES.--An extremely palatable dish can be made by
frying in deep fat sweetbreads cut any desirable shape and size. These
are usually served with a vegetable, and often a sauce of some kind is
served over both.

To prepare the sweetbreads, parboil them according to the directions
given in Art. 17. Cut them into the kind of pieces desired, sprinkle the
pieces with salt and pepper, and dip them into beaten egg and then into
crumbs. Fry in deep fat and serve with a vegetable or a sauce or both.

91. RICE-AND-MEAT PATTIES.--Sometimes not enough meat remains after a
meal to make a tasty dish by itself. In such a case, it should be
combined with some other food, especially a starchy one, so as to extend
its flavor and produce a dish that approaches nearer a balanced ration
than meat alone does. A small amount of any kind of meat combined with
rice and the mixture then formed into patties, or croquettes, provides
both an appetizing and a nutritious dish.

RICE-AND-MEAT PATTIES
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 c. finely chopped left-over meat
1 c. cold steamed rice
1/2 c. thick white sauce
1 Tb. chopped onion
1 tsp. celery salt
Salt and pepper
1 egg
Fine crumbs

Mix the meat and rice, stir into them the white sauce, onion, and celery
salt, and salt and pepper to taste. Shape into croquettes, or patties;
roll first in the egg and then in the crumbs. Fry in deep fat until
golden brown and serve with any desirable sauce.

[Illustration: FIG. 26]

92. TIMBALE CASES.--Such foods as creamed sweetbreads, creamed
sweetbreads and mushrooms, and other delicate foods that are served in
small quantities can be made very attractive by serving them in timbale
cases. These are made out of a batter by means of a timbale iron and
fried in deep fat until brown. In serving them, place them either on a
small plate or on the dinner plate with the rest of the dinner. To make
them especially attractive, dip the edge into egg white and then into
very finely chopped parsley. Fig. 26 shows creamed sweetbreads served in
a timbale case.

[Illustration: FIG. 27]

93. To prepare timbale cases, a _timbale iron_, such as is shown in Fig.
27, is required. Such an iron consists of a fluted piece of metal that
is either solid or hollow and that has attached to it a handle long
enough to keep the hand sufficiently far away from the hot fat.

The batter required for timbale cases and the directions for combining
them are as follows:

TIMBALE-CASE BATTER
(Sufficient to Make Twenty)

1 egg
1/2 c. milk
1/2 tsp. salt
1 tsp. sugar
3/4 c. flour

Beat the egg with a fork just enough to break it up thoroughly. Add the
milk, salt, and sugar. Stir in the flour with as little beating as
possible. After preparing this mixture, allow it to stand for 1/2 hour,
so that any air it contains in the form of bubbles may escape and thus
prevent the formation of holes and bubbles in the finished
timbale cases.

[Illustration: Fig. 28]

When about to use the batter, pour it into a cup or some other small
utensil that is just large enough to admit the iron easily. The iron
must be nearly covered with batter, but a large amount of it will not be
needed if a small utensil is used. Place the iron in the hot fat, as
shown in Fig. 27, until it is hot, or for about 4 minutes. Then let it
drip and place it in the batter, as in Fig. 28, being careful not to
permit the batter to come quite to the top of the iron, and remove it at
once. Place it immediately into the hot fat, as in Fig. 29, allowing the
fat to come higher on the iron than the batter does. This precaution
will prevent the formation of a ridge of bubbles around the top of the
timbale case. Fry in the deep fat until the case is nicely browned, as
shown in Fig. 26. Remove the iron from the fat, and allow it to drip.
Then carefully remove the timbale case from the iron with a fork and
place it on paper that will absorb the fat.

[Illustration: Fig. 29]

If your timbales are soft instead of crisp, you will know that the
mixture is too thick and should be diluted. Too hot or too cold an iron
will prevent the mixture from sticking to it.


MEAT (PART 2)

EXAMINATION QUESTIONS

(1) (_a_) What is veal? (_b_) From animals of what age is the best veal
obtained?

(2) Compare veal and beef as to characteristics.

(3) What cuts of veal are most suitable for: (_a_) roasts? (_b_)
cutlets? (_c_) soup and stews? (_d_) chops?

(4) (_a_) What organs of veal are used for foods? (_b_) What are
sweetbreads?

(5) (_a_) Why is veal more indigestible than beef? (_b_) What important
point must be remembered concerning the cooking of veal?

(6) (_a_) What substance in veal is utilized in the preparation of
jellied veal? (_b_) Explain how this dish is prepared.

(7) (_a_) At what age is sheep sold as lamb? (_b_) How do lamb and
mutton differ as to food substances?

(8) Compare the flesh of lamb and mutton as to appearance.

(9) As they apply to lamb and mutton, explain the terms: (_a_) rack;
(_b_) saddle.

(10) Explain why some cuts of lamb and mutton are tough and others
tender.

(11) What is: (_a_) a crown roast of lamb? (_b_) a French chop?

(12) (_a_) Describe pork of the best kind. (_b_) Why is the food value
of pork higher than that of other meats?

(13) (_a_) Name the cuts of pork. (_b_) What is meant by leaf lard?

(14) What important points must be taken into consideration in the
cooking of pork?

(15) (_a_) Name some of the accompaniments that are usually served with
pork. (_b_) What is the purpose of these accompaniments?

(16) (_a_) For what purpose is salt pork generally used? (_b_) What is
bacon? (_c_) To what uses is bacon put?

(17) (_a_) Give the general directions for the carving and serving of
meat. (_b_) Explain how to carve and serve a steak.

(18) (_a_) What is meant by deep-fat frying? (_b_) Why must a food that
is to be fried in deep fat contain or be coated with a protein material?

(19) (_a_) What utensils are necessary for deep-fat frying? (_b_)
Explain the procedure in frying croquettes in deep fat.

(20) (_a_) For what purpose are timbale cases used? (_b_) Explain how to
make a batter for timbale cases.


ADDITIONAL WORK

Select a cut of beef that you consider most desirable from an economical
standpoint. Buy a quantity that may be used to the greatest advantage
for your family. Prepare it in any way you desire.

State the number of pounds purchased, the price of the meat, the number
of meals in which it was served, and the number of persons (tell how
many adults and how many children) served at each meal. Estimate the
cost of each portion by dividing the cost of the whole by the number of
persons served.

Make up an original dish in which left-over meat is used and submit the
recipe to us.

       *       *       *       *       *




POULTRY

       *       *       *       *       *

POULTRY AS A FOOD

1. POULTRY is the term used to designate birds that have been
domesticated, or brought under the control of man, for two purposes,
namely, the eggs they produce and the flesh food they supply. All the
common species of domestic fowls--chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys,
guinea fowls, and pigeons--are known as poultry. However, none of these
species is included under this term unless it is raised for at least one
of the two purposes mentioned. As the term is to be understood in this
Section, poultry includes all domestic fowls that are killed in order
that their flesh may be cooked and used as food for human beings. Of
course, many wild birds are killed for the flesh food they furnish, but
they are classed under the term _game_.

2. Poultry is probably never a necessity in the ordinary dietary, and
when prices are high it is a decided luxury. Still it does aid
materially in relieving the monotony of the usual protein foods, and it
supplies that "something out of the ordinary" for special occasions.
Then, too, it is often valuable in the diet of an invalid or some person
with a poor appetite. Poultry is, of course, used more in some homes
than in others; yet there is scarcely a home in which it is not served
some time or another. A knowledge of this food and its preparation and
serving will therefore prove to be a valuable asset to any housewife.

3. To arrive at a knowledge of the use of poultry as a food, the
housewife must necessarily become familiar with its selection and
purchase. Then she must give attention to both its preparation for
cooking and its actual cooking, and, finally, to its serving. In all
these matters she will do well to adhere to the practice of economy,
for, at best, poultry is usually an expensive food. Before entering into
these matters in detail, however, it will be well to look into them in a
general way.

4. In the selection of poultry, the housewife should realize that
poultry breeders have so developed certain breeds, even of the same
species, that they are better for table use than others. The flesh of
any breed of poultry may be improved by feeding the birds good food and
giving them proper care; and it is by applying these principles that the
breeders are enabled to better the quality of this food. Other things
also influence the quality of poultry flesh as food, as, for example,
the way in which the poultry is prepared for market and the care it
receives in transportation and storage. Unless these are as they should
be, they have a detrimental effect on poultry, because such food is
decidedly perishable.

It is possible to exercise economy in the purchase of poultry, but
before the housewife can do this she must be able to judge the age of
each kind she may desire. On the age depends to a great extent the
method of cookery to be followed in preparing the poultry for the table.
Likewise, she must know the marks of cold-storage poultry, as well as
those of poultry that is freshly killed; and she must be familiar with
the first marks of deterioration, or decay, that result from storing the
food too long or improperly.

Economy may also be practiced in preparing poultry for cooking. To bring
this about, however, the housewife should realize that the best method
of preparing any kind of poultry for cooking is always the most
economical. It means, too, that she should understand thoroughly the
methods of drawing and cutting, so that she may either do this work
herself or direct it.

The way in which poultry is cooked has a bearing on the cost of this
food, too. For example, a young, tender bird prepared by a wrong method
not only is a good dish spoiled, but is a waste of expensive material.
Likewise, an older bird, which has more flavor but tougher tissues, is
almost impossible as food if it is not properly prepared. Both kinds
make appetizing dishes and do not result in waste if correct methods of
cooking are followed in their preparation.

Even the way in which poultry is served has a bearing on the cost of
this food. For this reason, it is necessary to know how to carve, as
well as how to utilize any of this food that may be left over, if the
housewife is to get the most out of her investment.

       *       *       *       *       *

SELECTION OF POULTRY

GENERAL INFORMATION

5. The selection of any kind of poultry to be used as food is a matter
that should not be left to the butcher. Rather, it should be done by
some one who understands the purpose for which the poultry is to be
used, and, in the home, this is a duty that usually falls to the
housewife. There are a number of general facts about poultry, and a
knowledge of them will assist the housewife greatly in performing
her tasks.

6. CLASSIFICATION OF POULTRY.--Poultry breeders and dealers divide the
domestic fowls into three classes. In the first class are included those
which have combs, such as chickens, turkeys, and guinea fowls. Quails
and pheasants belong to this class also, but they are very seldom
domesticated. The birds in this class are distinguished by two kinds of
tissue--light meat on the breast and dark meat on the other parts of the
body. In the second class are included those fowls which swim, such as
ducks and geese. These are characterized by web feet and long thick
bills, and their meat is more nearly the same color over the entire
body. The third class is comprised of birds that belong to the family of
doves. Pigeons, which are called _squabs_ when used as food, are the
only domesticated birds of this class. They stand between the other two
classes with respect to their flesh, which has some difference in color
between the breast and other muscles, but not so much as chicken and
other fowls of the first class.

7. INFLUENCE OF FEEDING AND CARE ON QUALITY.--To some extent, the breed
affects the quality of poultry as food; still this is a far less
important matter than a number of things that the purchaser is better
able to judge. Among the factors that greatly influence the quality are
the feeding and care that the birds receive up to the time of slaughter.
These affect not only the flavor and the tenderness of the tissue, as
well as the quantity of tissue in proportion to bone, but also the
healthfulness of the birds themselves. To keep the birds in good health
and to build up sufficient flesh to make them plump, with as much meat
as possible on the bones and a fair amount of fat as well, the food they
get must be clean and of the right kind. Likewise, the housing
conditions must be such that the birds are kept dry and sufficiently
warm. The living space, also, must be adequate for the number that are
raised. Domestic fowls are not discriminating as to their food, and when
they are forced to live in dirt and filth they will eat more or less of
it and thus injure the quality of their flesh. Poultry that comes into
the market looking drawn and thin, with blue-looking flesh and no fat,
shows evidence of having had poor living conditions and inadequate
feeding. Such poultry will be found to have a less satisfactory flavor
than that which has received proper care.

8. EFFECT OF SEX ON QUALITY.--When birds of any kind are young, sex has
very little to do with the quality of the flesh. But as they grow older
the flesh of males develops a stronger flavor than that of females of
the same age and also becomes tougher. However, when birds, with the
exception of mature ones, are dressed, it would take an expert to
determine the sex. The mature male is less plump than the female, and it
is more likely to be scrawny. Likewise, its spurs are larger and its
bones are large in proportion to the amount of flesh on them.

Very often the reproductive organs of young males are removed, and the
birds are then called _capons_. As the capon grows to maturity, it
develops more of the qualities of the hen. Its body becomes plump
instead of angular, the quality of its flesh is much better than that of
the cock, and the quantity of flesh in proportion to bone is much
greater. In fact, the weight of a capon's edible flesh is much greater
than that of either a hen or a cock. In the market, a dressed capon can
usually be told by the long tail and wing feathers that are left on, as
well as by a ring of feathers around the neck. Female birds that are
spayed are called _poulards_. Spaying, or removing the reproductive
organs, of female birds, however, makes so little improvement that it is
seldom done.

9. PREPARATION OF POULTRY FOR MARKET.--The manner in which poultry is
prepared for market has a great bearing on its quality as food. In some
cases, the preparation falls to the producer, and often, when birds are
raised in quantities, they are sold alive and dressed by the butcher.
However, poultry that is to be shipped long distances and in large
quantities or stored for long periods of time is usually prepared at a
slaughtering place. This process of slaughtering and shipping requires
great care, for if attention is not given to details, the poultry will
be in a state of deterioration when it reaches the consumer and
therefore unfit for food.

In order to avoid the deterioration of poultry that is slaughtered some
distance from the place of its consumption, each bird is well fed up to
within 24 hours before it is killed. Then it is starved so that its
alimentary tract will be as empty as possible at the time of killing.
Such birds are killed by cutting the large blood vessel running up to
the head. When properly done, this method of killing allows almost all
the blood to be drained from the body and the keeping qualities are much
improved. At practically the same time, the brain is pierced by the
knife thrust, and as soon as the bleeding commences the fowl becomes
paralyzed. As the tissues relax, the feathers may be pulled easily from
the skin without immersing the bird in hot water. This method of
plucking, known as _dry plucking_, is preferable when the skin must be
kept intact and the poultry kept for any length of time. The head and
feet are left on and the entrails are not removed. The poultry is then
chilled to the freezing point, but not below it, after which the birds
are packed ten in a box and shipped to the market in refrigerator cars
or placed in cold storage. Unless the poultry is to be cooked
immediately after slaughter, such measures are absolutely necessary, as
its flesh is perishable and will not remain in good condition for a long
period of time.

10. COLD-STORAGE POULTRY.--Poultry that has been properly raised,
killed, transported, and stored is very likely to come into the market
in such condition that it cannot be readily distinguished from freshly
killed birds. When exposed to warmer temperatures, however, storage
poultry spoils much more quickly than does fresh poultry. For this
reason, if there is any evidence that poultry has been in storage, it
should be cooked as soon as possible after purchase.

There are really two kinds of cold-storage poultry: that which is kept
at a temperature just above freezing and delivered within a few weeks
after slaughtering, and that which is frozen and kept in storage a much
longer time. When properly cared for, either one is preferable to
freshly killed poultry that is of poor quality or has had a chance to
spoil. Poultry that has been frozen must be thawed carefully. It should
be first placed in a refrigerator and allowed to thaw to that
temperature before it is placed in a warmer one. It should never be
thawed by putting it into warm water. Thawing it in this way really
helps it to decompose.

A sure indication of cold-storage poultry is the pinched look it
possesses, a condition brought about by packing the birds tightly
against one another. Storage poultry usually has the head and feet left
on and its entrails are not removed. Indeed, it has been determined by
experiment that poultry will keep better if these precautions are
observed. The removal of the entrails seems to affect the internal
cavity of the bird so that it does not keep well, and as a matter of
safety it should be cooked quickly after this has been done in the home.


SELECTION OF CHICKEN

11. To be able to select chicken properly, the housewife must be
familiar with the terms that are applied to chickens to designate their
age or the cookery process for which they are most suitable. _Chicken_
is a general name for all varieties of this kind of poultry, but in its
specific use it means a common domestic fowl that is less than 1 year
old. _Fowl_ is also a general term; but in its restricted use in cookery
it refers to the full-grown domestic hen or cock over 1 year of age, as
distinguished from the chicken or pullet. A _broiler_ is chicken from 2
to 4 months old which, because of its tenderness, is suitable for
broiling. A _frying chicken_ is at least 6 months old, and a _roasting
chicken_ is between 6 months and 1 year old. With these terms
understood, it can readily be seen that if fried chicken is desired a
2-year-old fowl would not be a wise purchase.

The quality of the bird is the next consideration in the selection of
chicken. A number of things have a bearing on the quality. Among these,
as has already been pointed out, are the feeding and care that the bird
has received during its growth, the way in which it has been prepared
for market, and so on. All of these things may be determined by careful
observation before making a purchase. However, if the bird is drawn, and
especially if the head and feet are removed, there is less chance to
determine these things accurately.

[Illustration: FIG. 1]

12. GENERAL MARKS OF GOOD QUALITY.--A chicken older than a broiler that
has been plucked should not be scrawny nor drawn looking like that shown
in Fig. 1, nor should the flesh have a blue tinge that shows through the
skin. Rather, it should be plump and well rounded like the one shown in
Fig. 2. There should be a sufficient amount of fat to give a rich,
yellow color. It should be plucked clean, and the skin should be clear
and of an even color over the entire bird. Tender, easily broken skin
indicates a young bird; tougher skin indicates an older one. The skin
should be whole and unbroken; likewise, when pressed with the fingers,
it should be neither flabby nor stiff, but pliable.

[Illustration: FIG. 2]

13. The increase of age in a chicken is to some extent an advantage,
because with age there is an increase in flavor. Thus, a year-old
chicken will have more flavor than a broiler. However, after more than
a year, the flavor increases to such an extent that it becomes strong
and disagreeable. With the advance of age there is also a loss of
tenderness in the flesh, and this after 1-1/2 or 2 years becomes so
extreme as to render the bird almost unfit for use. As the age of a
chicken increases, the proportion of flesh to bone also increases up to
the complete maturity of the bird. Hence, one large bird is a more
economical purchase than two small ones that equal its weight, because
the proportion of bone to flesh is less in the large bird than in the
small ones.

14. DETERMINING THE AGE OF CHICKEN.--An excellent way in which to
determine the age of a chicken that has been dressed consists in feeling
of the breast bone at the point where it protrudes below the neck. In a
very young chicken, a broiler, for instance, the point of this bone will
feel like cartilage, which is firm, elastic tissue, and may be very
easily bent. If the bird is about a year old, the bone will be brittle,
and in a very old one it will be hard and will not bend.

15. If the head has been left on, the condition of the beak is a means
of determining age. In a young chicken, it will be smooth and unmarred;
in an old one, it will be rough and probably darker in color. If the
feet have been left on, they too will serve to indicate the age. The
feet of a young chicken are smooth and soft; whereas, those of an old
bird are rough, hard, and scaly. The claws of a young one are short and
sharp; but as the bird grows older they grow stronger and become blunt
and marred with use. The spur, which is a projection just above the foot
on the back of each leg, is small in the young chicken, and increases in
size as the age increases. However, the spurs are more pronounced in
males than in females.

16. Another way of telling the age of dressed chicken is to observe the
skin. After plucking, young birds usually have some pin feathers left in
the skin. _Pin feathers_ are small unformed feathers that do not pull
out with the larger ones. Older birds are usually free from pin
feathers, but have occasional long hairs remaining in the skin after the
feathers have been plucked. These do not pull out readily and must be
singed off when the chicken is being prepared for cooking.

17. DETERMINING THE FRESHNESS OF CHICKEN.--There are a number of points
that indicate whether or not a chicken is fresh. In a freshly killed
chicken, the feet will be soft and pliable and moist to the touch; also,
the head will be unshrunken and the eyes full and bright. The flesh of
such a chicken will give a little when pressed, but no part of the flesh
should be softer than another. As actual decomposition sets in, the skin
begins to discolor. The first marks of discoloration occur underneath
the legs and wings, at the points where they are attached to the body.
Any dark or greenish color indicates decomposition, as does also any
slimy feeling of the skin. The odor given off by the chicken is also an
indication of freshness. Any offensive odor, of course, means that the
flesh has become unfit for food.

18. LIVE CHICKENS.--Occasionally chickens are brought to the market and
sold alive. This means, of course, that the birds are subjected to a
certain amount of fright and needless cruelty and that the work of
slaughtering falls to the purchaser. The cost, however, is decreased a
few cents on the pound. Such birds must be chosen first of all by weight
and then by the marks that indicate age, which have already been given.


SELECTION OF POULTRY OTHER THAN CHICKEN

19. The determination of quality, especially freshness, is much the same
for other kinds of poultry as it is for chicken. In fact, the same
points apply in most cases, but each kind seems to have a few
distinguishing features, which are here pointed out.

20. SELECTION OF TURKEYS.--Turkeys rank next to chickens in popularity
as food. They are native to America and are perhaps better known here
than in foreign countries. Turkey is a much more seasonal food than
chicken, it being best in the fall. Cold-storage turkey that has been
killed at that time, provided it is properly stored and cared for, is
better than fresh turkey marketed out of season.

21. The age of a turkey can be fairly accurately told by the appearance
of its feet. Very young turkeys have black feet, and as they mature the
feet gradually grow pink, so that at more than 1 year old the feet will
be found to be pink. However, as the bird grows still older, the color
again changes, and a 3-year-old turkey will have dull-gray or blackish
looking feet. The legs, too, serve to indicate the age of turkeys. Those
of a young turkey are smooth, but as the birds grow older they gradually
become rough and scaly. A young turkey will have spurs that are only
slightly developed, whereas an old turkey will have long, sharp ones.

22. Turkeys are seldom marketed when they are very young. But in spite
of the fact that this is occasionally done, the mature birds are more
generally marketed. Turkeys often reach a large size, weighing as much
as 20 to 25 pounds. A mature turkey has proportionately a larger amount
of flesh and a smaller amount of bone than chicken; hence, even at a
higher price per pound, turkey is fully as economical as chicken.

23. SELECTION OF DUCKS.--Ducks probably come next to turkeys in
popularity for table use. Young ducks are sold in the market during the
summer and are called _spring duck_. The mature ducks may be purchased
at any time during the year, but they are best in the winter months.

The flexibility of the windpipe is an excellent test for the age of
ducks. In the young bird, the windpipe may be easily moved; whereas, in
the old one, it is stationary and quite hard. The meat of ducks is dark
over the entire bird, and the greatest amount is found on the breast.
Its flavor is quite typical, and differs very much from turkey and
chicken. However, there is a comparatively small amount of meat even on
a good-sized duck, and it does not carve to very good advantage; in
fact, more persons can be served from a chicken or a turkey of the same
weight. Young ducks are rather difficult to clean, as a layer of fine
down, which is not easily removed, covers the skin.

24. SELECTION OF GEESE.--Geese are much more commonly used for food in
foreign countries than in America. Their age may be told in the same way
as that of ducks, namely, by feeling of the windpipe. The flesh is dark
throughout and rather strongly flavored. The fat is used quite
extensively for cooking purposes, and even as a butter substitute in
some countries. Because of this fact, geese are generally fattened
before they are slaughtered, and often half the weight of the bird is
fat. The livers of fattened geese reach enormous proportions and are
considered a delicacy. They are used for _pâté de fois gras_. Usually,
this is put up in jars and brings a very high price.

25. SELECTION OF PIGEONS.--Pigeons are raised primarily for their use
as _squabs_. These are young birds about 4 weeks old, and their meat is
tender and agreeable to the taste. The meat of the mature pigeon becomes
quite tough and unpalatable. The breast is the only part of the bird
that has meat on it in any quantity, and this meat is slightly lighter
in color than that which comes from the remainder of the body. Midsummer
is the best season for squabs, but they can be purchased at other times
of the year. The cost of squabs is too high to allow them to be used
extensively as a food in the ordinary household.


TABLE I

GUIDE TO THE SELECTION OF POULTRY

Market Name          Weight          Age          Season
                     Pounds

Squab broiler      3/4   to 1-1/4  6 to 8 wk.     April to July
Broiler            1-1/2 to 2      2 to 4 mo.     May to Sept.
Frying chicken     2-1/2 to 3      6 mo.          June to Oct.
Roasting chicken   3     to 6      6 mo. to 1 yr. All Year
Fowl               4     to 5      over 1 yr.     All Year
Capon              6     to 10     6 to 8 wk.     May to Sept.
Turkey broiler     1-1/2 to 4      2 to 4 mo.     June to Sept.
Roasting turkey    8     to 25     6 mo. to 3 yr. Oct. to Jan.
Spring Duck        1-1/2 to 2-1/2  2 to 6 mo.     May to Dec.
Roasting Duck      4     to 8      6 mo. to 1 yr. Best in winter
Green goose        1-1/2 to 2-1/2  2 to 6 mo.     May to Dec.
Roasting goose     4     to 8      6 mo. to 1 yr. Oct. to Mar.
Squab              1/2   to 3/4    4 wk.          June to Sept.
Guinea hen broiler 1     to 2      2 to 4 mo.     Aug. to Nov.
Guinea fowl        3     to 5      6 mo. to 1 yr. Oct. to Mar.


26. SELECTION OF GUINEA FOWLS.--Guinea fowls are coming into common use
as food. The young birds are preferable to the older ones. They are
ready for the market in early autumn, while the old birds may be
procured at any time. The breast meat of guinea fowls is almost as light
as that of chicken, but all the meat of this bird has a gamy taste,
which is absent in the chicken. If this particular flavor is much
desired, it may be developed to even a greater degree by allowing the
bird to hang after killing until the meat begins to "turn," that is,
become "high." Such meat, however, is not usually desirable in the
ordinary menu.

27. SELECTION OF PHEASANT, PARTRIDGE, AND QUAIL.--Pheasant, partridge,
and quail are usually considered game birds, but certain varieties are
being extensively domesticated and bred for market. Such birds are small
and are used more in the nature of a delicacy than as a common
article of food.

28. TABLE OF POULTRY AND GAME.--In Table I are given the market names of
the various kinds of poultry and game birds, as well as the
corresponding age, the weight, and the season of the year when they are
most desirable. This table will serve as a guide in selecting poultry
that is to be used as food.


COMPOSITION OF POULTRY

29. The composition of poultry is very similar to that of meats. In
fact, poultry is composed of protein, fat, water, mineral salts, and
extractives that do not differ materially from those found in meats. The
protein, which usually varies from 15 to 20 per cent., is a much more
constant factor than the fat, which varies from 8 to 40 per cent. This
variation, of course, makes the total food value high in some kinds of
poultry and low in others. For instance, in a young broiler that has not
been fattened, the food value is extremely low; whereas, in a mature
well-fattened bird, such as a goose, which increases very markedly in
fatty tissue after reaching maturity, it is extremely high. A factor
that detracts considerably from the edible portion of poultry is the
waste material, or refuse. This consists of the bones, cartilage, head,
feet, and entrails, or inedible internal organs. The greater the
proportion of such waste material, the more the total nutritive value of
the flesh is reduced. It is claimed that birds that have light-colored
flesh do not become so fat as those which have dark flesh. This, of
course, makes their nutritive value less, because the fat of poultry is
what serves to supply a large part of the nutrition. There is no
particular difference, as is commonly supposed, between the red and
white meat of poultry. The difference in color is due to a difference in
the blood supply, but this does not affect the composition to
any extent.

       *       *       *       *       *

PREPARATION OF POULTRY FOR COOKING

PREPARATION OF CHICKEN

30. As has been implied, poultry must be properly prepared before it is
ready for cooking; likewise, the method of cookery determines how it
must be prepared. For example, if it is to be roasted, it must be drawn;
if it is to be stewed, it must be drawn and cut into suitable pieces;
and so on. The various steps that must be taken to make poultry suitable
for cooking are therefore considered here in detail.

31. DRESSING A CHICKEN.--Although, as has been shown, the housewife does
not have to dress the chicken that she is to cook--that is, kill and
pluck it--there may be times when she will be called on to perform this
task or at least direct it. A common way of killing chicken in the home
is simply to grasp it firmly by the legs, lay it on a block, and then
chop the head off with a sharp hatchet or a cleaver. If this plan is
followed, the beheaded chicken must be held firmly until the blood has
drained away and the reflex action that sets in has ceased. Otherwise,
there is danger of becoming splashed with blood.

32. After a chicken has been killed, the first step in its preparation,
no matter how it is to be cooked, consists in removing the feathers, or
_plucking_ it, as this operation is called. Plucking can be done dry by
simply pulling out the feathers. However, a bird can be plucked more
readily if it is first immersed in water at the boiling point for a few
minutes. Such water has a tendency to loosen the feathers so that they
can be pulled from the skin easily. Unless the chicken is to be used at
once, though, dry plucking is preferable to the other method. Care
should be taken not to tear or mar the skin in plucking, and the
operation is best performed by pulling out the feathers a few at a time,
with a quick jerk. In a young chicken, small feathers, commonly called
pin feathers, are apt to remain in the skin after plucking. These may be
pulled out by pinching each with the point of a knife pressed against
the thumb and then giving a quick jerk.

[Illustration: FIG. 3]

33. Whether live poultry is dressed by a local butcher or in the home,
the length of time it should be kept after killing demands attention.
Such poultry should either be cooked before rigor mortis, or the
stiffening of the muscles, has had time to begin, or be allowed to
remain in a cool place long enough for this to pass off and the muscles
to become tender again. Naturally, if this softening, or ripening,
process, as it is sometimes called, goes on too long, decomposition will
set in, with the usual harmful effects if the meat is used as food.

[Illustration: FIG. 4]

34. SINGEING A CHICKEN.--On all chickens except very young ones, whether
they are home dressed or not, hairs will be found on the skin; and, as
has been mentioned, the older the bird the more hair will it have. The
next step in preparing a chicken for cooking, therefore, is to singe it,
or burn off these hairs. However, before singeing, provided the head has
not been removed, cut it off just where the neck begins, using a kitchen
cleaver or a butcher knife, as in Fig. 3. To singe a dressed chicken,
grasp it by the head or the neck and the feet and then revolve it over a
gas flame, as shown in Fig. 4, or a burning piece of paper for a few
seconds or just long enough to burn off the hairs without scorching the
skin. After singeing, wash the skin thoroughly with a cloth and warm
water, as shown in Fig. 5. Then it will be ready for drawing and
cutting up.

[Illustration: Fig. 5]

35. DRAWING A CHICKEN.--By drawing a chicken is meant the taking out of
the entrails and removing all parts that are not edible. Although this
work will be done by some butchers, the better plan is to do it at home,
for, as has been stated, chicken or any other poultry must be cooked
very soon after the entrails are removed. Chicken that is to be roasted
is always prepared in this way, as the cavity that remains may be filled
with stuffing. Drawing is also necessary when chicken is to be cooked in
any other way, as by stewing or frying, but in addition it must be cut
up. The procedure in drawing a chicken is simple, but some practice is
required before deftness will result.

[Illustration: Fig. 6]

[Illustration: Fig. 7]

[Illustration: Fig. 8]

[Illustration: Fig. 9]

[Illustration: FIG. 10]

36. In order to draw a chicken, carefully cut a lengthwise slit through
the skin on the neck, and slip the fingers down around the _crop_, which
is a small sack that holds the food eaten by the chicken. Then pull
the crop out, and with it the windpipe, as in Fig. 6, taking pains not
to tear the skin nor to break the crop.

Next, remove the tendons, or thick white cords, from the legs, so as to
improve the meat. These may be easily removed, especially from a chicken
that is freshly killed; that is, one in which the flesh is still moist.
Simply cut through the skin, just above the foot, as in Fig. 7, being
careful not to cut the tendons that lie just beneath the skin; then slip
a skewer or some other small, dull implement, as a fork, under the
tendons, pull down toward the foot until they loosen at the second
joint, and pull them out. This operation is clearly shown in Fig. 8.
With the tendons removed, the feet may be cut off. To do this, cut
through the skin where the two bones join, as shown in Fig. 9. As the
joint separates, cut through the remaining tendons and skin on the back
of the legs.

[Illustration: FIG. 11]

37. Proceed, next, to cut a crosswise slit through the skin between the
legs at a point above the vent, as in Fig. 10, so that the entrails may
be removed. This slit should be just large enough to admit the hand and
no larger. Insert the fingers of one hand in this slit and gently move
them around the mass of the internal organs, keeping them close to the
framework of the bird. This will loosen the entrails at the points where
they are attached to the body. Then, inserting the hand, slip the
fingers around the mass at the top, near the neck, and with one pull
remove the entire internal contents, as Fig. 11 shows. The lungs, or
lights, as they are sometimes called, do not come out with this mass.
They will be found covered with a membrane and tightly fastened inside
the breast bone, and must be removed by pulling them out with the tips
of the fingers. After the entrails are removed, pour clean cold water
into the cavity, rinse it well several times, and pour the water out.

[Illustration: Fig. 12]

[Illustration: FIG. 13]

38. Among the contents drawn from the chicken will be found the heart,
the liver, and the gizzard. These are called the _giblets_. They are the
only edible internal organs, and must be separated from the rest. To do
this, squeeze the blood from the heart, and then cut the large vessels
off close to the top of it. Then cut the liver away. In handling this
part of the giblets extreme care must be taken, for tightly attached to
it, as Fig. 12 shows, is the _gall bladder_, which is a tiny sack filled
with green fluid, called bile. If this sack breaks, anything that its
contents touches will become very bitter and therefore unfit to eat. The
gall bag should be cut out of the liver above the place where it is
attached, so as to be certain that it does not break nor lose any of the
bile. Next, remove the gizzard, which consists of a fleshy part
surrounding a sack containing partly digested food eaten by the
chicken. First trim off any surplus fat, and carefully cut through the
fleshy part just to the surface of the inside sack. Then pull the
outside fleshy part away from the sack without breaking it, as in Fig.
13, an operation that can be done if the work is performed carefully.
After removing the giblets and preparing them as explained, wash them
well, so that they may be used with the rest of the chicken. As a final
step, cut out the _oil sack_, which lies just above the tail, proceeding
in the manner illustrated in Fig. 14.

[Illustration: FIG. 14]

[Illustration: Fig. 15]

[Illustration: FIG. 16]

[Illustration: FIG. 17]

[Illustration: FIG. 18]

[Illustration: Fig. 19]

[Illustration: Fig. 20]

[Illustration: Fig. 21]

[Illustration: Fig. 22]

39. CUTTING UP A CHICKEN.--When chicken that has been drawn is to be
fried, stewed, fricasseed, or cooked in some similar way, it must be cut
into suitable pieces. In order to do this properly, it is necessary to
learn to locate the joints and to be able to cut squarely between the
two bones where they are attached to each other. To sever the legs from
the body of the chicken, first cut through the skin underneath each leg
where it is attached to the body, as in Fig. 15, bend the leg back far
enough to break the joint, and then cut through it, severing the entire
leg in one piece. When the legs are cut off, cut each one apart at the
joint between the thigh and the lower part, as in Fig. 16, making two
pieces. To sever the wings from the body, cut through the skin where the
wing is attached, as in Fig. 17, and bend it back until the joint
breaks. Then cut it off where the ends of the bones are attached to the
joint. When both legs and both wings are removed, proceed to cut the
body apart. As shown in Fig. 18, place the chicken, neck down, on a
table, and cut down through the ribs parallel with the breast and the
back, until the knife strikes a hard bone that it cannot cut. Then
firmly grasp the breast with one hand and the back with the other and
break the joints that attach these parts by pulling the back and the
breast away from each other, as in Fig. 19. Cut through the joints, as
in Fig. 20, so that the back, ribs, and neck will be in one piece and
the breast in another. [Illustration: Fig. 23] If desired, the breast
may be divided into two pieces by cutting it in the manner shown in Fig.
21; also, as the back will break at the end of the ribs, it may be cut
into two pieces there. Finally, cut the neck from the top piece of the
back, as in Fig. 22.

The pieces of chicken thus procured may be rinsed clean with cold
water, but they should never be allowed to stand in water, because this
will draw out some of the extractives, or flavoring material, soluble
albumin, and mineral salts.

40. PREPARING CHICKEN FEET.--Many persons consider that chicken feet are
not worth while for food. This, however, is a mistaken idea, for they
will add to the flavor of soup stock or they may be cooked with the
giblets to make stock for gravy. Chicken feet do not contain much meat,
but what little there is has an excellent flavor and should be removed
for use when creamed chicken or any dish made with left-over chicken is
to be cooked.

To prepare chicken feet for use as food, scrub the feet well and pour
boiling water over them. After a minute or two, remove them from the
water and rub them with a clean cloth to peel off the scaly skin, as
shown in Fig. 23. Finally remove the nails by bending them back.

41. UTILIZING THE WING TIPS.--The last joint, or tip, of chicken wings
has no value as food, but, like the feet, it will help to add flavor to
any stock that is made. This small piece of wing may be removed and then
cooked with the feet and giblets.


PREPARATION OF POULTRY OTHER THAN CHICKEN

42. PREPARATION OF TURKEY.--The preparation of a plucked turkey for
cooking is almost identically the same as that of a plucked chicken.
Begin the preparation by singeing it; that is, hold it over a flame and
turn it so that all the hairs on the skin will be burned off. Then look
the skin over carefully, remove any pin feathers that may not have been
removed in plucking, and wash it thoroughly. Next, cut off the head,
leaving as much of the neck as possible. Draw the tendons from the legs
as in preparing chicken; the ease with which this can be done will
depend greatly on the length of time the turkey has been killed. Then
cut off the legs at the first joint above the foot.

Having prepared the external part of the turkey, proceed to draw it.
First, remove the crop by cutting a slit lengthwise in the neck over the
crop, catching it with the fingers, and pulling it out. Next, cut a slit
between the legs, below the breast bone, and draw out the internal
organs. Clean and retain the giblets. Remove the lungs, wash out the
cavity in the turkey, and cut off the oil bag on the back, just
above the tail.

Turkey prepared in this way is ready to stuff and roast. It is never cut
into pieces in the ordinary household until it has been cooked and is
ready to serve. Directions for carving are therefore given later.

43. PREPARATION OF DUCK AND GOOSE.--The preparation of duck and goose
for cooking does not differ materially from that of turkey or chicken.
Like turkey, duck or goose is generally roasted and not cut up until it
is ready to serve. It will be well to note that young ducks are covered
with small feathers, or down, which is very difficult to remove.
However, the down may be removed by pulling it out with a small knife
pressed against the thumb. When the down is removed, proceed with the
preparation. Singe, wash, remove the head and feet, draw, wash the
inside of the bird, and remove the oil sack. Goose may be prepared for
cooking in the same way.

44. PREPARATION OF SMALL BIRDS.--Squabs, partridge, pheasant, and other
small birds are usually cooked by broiling. To prepare such a bird for
cooking, singe, remove any small feathers that may remain, wash, remove
the head and feet, and draw, following the directions given for drawing
chicken. When it is thus cleaned, lay the bird open. To do this, begin
at the neck and cut down the back along the spine. If desired, however,
the bird may be cut down the back before drawing and the entrails
removed through the cut down the back. Finally, wash the inside and wipe
it dry, when the bird will be ready for broiling.

       *       *       *       *       *

COOKING OF POULTRY

COOKERY METHODS

45. With poultry, as in the case of meats of any kind, it is the
composition that determines the method of cookery; and, as the structure
and composition of the tissue of poultry do not differ materially from
those of meats, the application of the various cooking methods is
practically the same. Young and tender birds that have comparatively
little flesh, such as young chickens, squabs, and guinea fowl, are
usually prepared by such rapid methods as frying and broiling.
Medium-sized poultry, including chickens, turkeys, guinea fowl, ducks,
and geese, require more cooking, and this, of course, must be done at a
lower temperature; therefore, such poultry is generally roasted. Old
poultry, particularly old chicken, or fowl, which is apt to be tough,
requires still more cooking, and for this reason is stewed, braized, or
fricasseed. The recipes for the cooking of various kinds of poultry here
given will serve to make clear the cookery method to employ, as well as
how to carry it out to advantage.


PREPARATION BY BROILING

46. The method of broiling in the case of poultry of all kinds does not
differ in any way from the same method applied to cuts of meat. Since
broiling is a rapid method of cookery and heat is applied at a high
temperature, it is necessary that the poultry chosen for broiling be
young and tender and have a comparatively small amount of meat on
the bones.

[Illustration: FIG. 24]

Broiled poultry is not an economical dish, neither is it one in which
the greatest possible amount of flavor is obtained, since, as in the
case of the meat of animals used for food, the flavor develops with the
age of the birds. However, broiled poultry has value in the diet of
invalids and persons with poor appetite and digestion, for if it is
properly done it is appetizing and easily digested.

[Illustration: Fig. 25]

47. BROILED POULTRY.--Poultry that is to be broiled must first be
dressed, drawn, and cleaned. Then, as has been mentioned for the
preparation of small birds, lay the bird open by cutting down along the
spine, beginning at the neck, as shown in Fig. 24. This will permit the
bird to be spread apart, as in Fig. 25. When it is thus made ready,
washed, and wiped dry, heat the broiler and grease it. Then place the
bird on the broiler in the manner shown in Fig. 26 and expose it to
severe heat. Sear quickly on one side, and turn and sear on the other
side. Then reduce the heat to a lower temperature and broil more slowly,
turning often. To prevent burning, the parts that stand up close to the
flame may be covered with strips of bacon fastened on with skewers;
also, to get the best results, the side of the bird on which the flesh
is thick should be exposed to the heat for a greater length of time than
the other side. If there is any danger of the high places burning in the
broiler, the bird may be removed and the cooking continued in a hot
oven. Broiled poultry should be well done when served. This means, then,
particularly in the case of chickens, that the broiling process should
be carried on for about 20 minutes. When the bird is properly cooked,
remove it from the broiler, place it on a hot platter, dot it with
butter, sprinkle with salt and pepper, garnish, and serve.

[Illustration: Fig. 26]


PREPARATION BY FRYING

48. As has been mentioned, birds slightly older and larger than those
used for broiling should be fried, because frying is a slower method and
gives the flesh a more thorough cooking. However, most of the dishes
commonly known as fried poultry are not fried, but sautéd in shallow
fat. The same principles employed in sautéing any food are applied in
the cooking of poultry by this method; that is, the surface is seared as
quickly as possible and the cooking is finished at a lower temperature.
Often in this cooking process, the pieces to be sautéd are dipped into
batter or rolled in flour to assist in keeping the juices in the meat.

49. FRIED CHICKEN.--To many persons, fried chicken--or, rather, sautéd
chicken, as it should be called--is very appetizing. Chicken may be
fried whole, but usually it is cut up, and when this is done it serves
to better advantage. Likewise, the method of preparation is one that
adds flavor to young chicken, which would be somewhat flavorless if
prepared in almost any other way.

Frying is not a difficult cookery process. To prepare chickens, which
should be young ones, for this method of preparation, draw, clean, and
cut them up in the manner previously explained. When they are ready,
wash the pieces and roll them in a pan of flour, covering the entire
surface of each piece. Then, in a frying pan, melt fat, which may be
chicken fat, bacon fat, part butter, lard, or any other frying fat that
will give an agreeable flavor. When the fat is thoroughly hot, place in
it the pieces of floured chicken and sprinkle them with salt and pepper.
As soon as the pieces have browned on one side, turn them over and brown
on the other side. Then reduce the heat, cover the frying pan with a
tight-fitting lid, and continue to fry more slowly. If, after 25 or 30
minutes, the meat can be easily pierced with a fork, it is ready to
serve; if this cannot be done, add a small quantity of hot water,
replace the cover, and simmer until the meat can be pierced readily. To
serve fried chicken, place the pieces on a platter and garnish the dish
with parsley so as to add to its appearance.

50. GRAVY FOR FRIED CHICKEN.--If desired, brown gravy may be made and
served with fried chicken. After the chicken has been removed from the
frying pan, provided an excessive amount of fat remains, pour off some
of it. Sprinkle the fat that remains with dry flour, 1 tablespoonful to
each cupful of liquid that is to be used, which may be milk, cream,
water, or any mixture of the three. Stir the flour into the hot fat.
Heat the liquid and add this hot liquid to the fat and flour in the
frying pan. Stir rapidly so that no lumps will form, and, if necessary,
season with more salt and pepper to suit the taste.

Gravy may also be made in this manner: Stir cold liquid slowly into the
flour in the proportion of 1 tablespoonful of flour to 1 cupful of
liquid, which may be milk, cream, water, or any mixture of the three.
Add the cold liquid and flour to the frying pan containing a small
amount of fat in which the chicken was fried. Stir rapidly until the
gravy has thickened and there are no lumps.

Very often the giblets, that is, the liver, heart, and gizzard of
chicken, are used in making gravy. For example, the giblets may be
cooked in water until they are tender and then sautéd in butter to
serve, and when this is done the water in which they were cooked may be
used for making gravy. Again, if it is not desired to eat them in this
way, they may be chopped fine and added to gravy made from the fat that
remains from frying.

51. MARYLAND FRIED CHICKEN.--Maryland fried chicken is a popular dish
with many persons. As a rule, corn fritters are used as a garnish and
Served with the chicken, and strips of crisp bacon are placed over the
top of it. Often, too, potato croquettes are served on the same platter,
a combination that makes almost an entire meal.

To prepare Maryland fried chicken, draw, clean, and cut up young
chickens. Then wash the pieces and dry them with a soft cloth. Sprinkle
the pieces with salt and pepper, and dip each into fine cracker crumbs
or corn meal, then into beaten egg, and again into the crumbs or the
corn meal. Next, melt in a frying pan chicken or bacon fat, part butter,
lard, or any other fat for frying. When it is hot, place the pieces of
chicken in it. Fry them until they are brown on one side; then turn and
brown them on the other side. Lower the temperature and continue to fry
slowly until the meat may be easily pierced with a fork. When the
chicken is done, pour 2 cupfuls of white sauce on a hot platter and
place the chicken in it. Then garnish and serve.

52. FRIED CHICKEN WITH PAPRIKA SAUCE.--Chickens that are a trifle older
than those used for plain fried chicken may be prepared to make what is
known as fried chicken with paprika sauce. If in preparing this dish the
chicken does not appear to be tender after frying, it may be made so by
simmering it in the sauce.

To prepare this chicken dish, which is tempting to many, draw, clean,
and cut up a chicken as for frying. Then melt fat in a frying pan, place
the pieces in the hot fat, sprinkle them with salt and pepper, and brown
on both sides quickly. When both sides are brown, continue to fry the
pieces until they are tender. Then sprinkle all with 2 level
tablespoonfuls of flour, add 2 cupfuls of milk or thin cream, and allow
this to thicken. Then sprinkle with paprika until the sauce is pink. Let
the chicken simmer slowly until the sauce penetrates the meat a little.
Serve on a platter with a garnish.


PREPARATION BY ROASTING

53. Roasting is the cookery process that is commonly employed for
preparing chickens that are of good size, as well as turkeys, ducks, and
geese. It is also followed at times for cooking guinea fowl, partridges,
pheasants, and similar small birds. As a rule, birds prepared in this
way are filled with stuffing, which may be made in so many ways that
roasted stuffed poultry makes a delightful change in the regular
routine of meals.

[Illustration: Fig. 27]

54. ROAST CHICKEN.--Roasting is the best method to employ for the
preparation of old chicken unless, of course, it is extremely old and
tough. Then stewing is about the only method that is satisfactory.
Chicken for roasting should weigh no less than 3 pounds. Chicken
prepared according to the following directions makes a dish that is very
appetizing.

[Illustration: Fig. 28]

To prepare chicken for roasting, clean and draw it in the manner
previously given. When it is made clean, rub salt and pepper on the
inside of the cavity, and stuff the cavity of the chicken, as shown in
Fig. 27, with any desirable stuffing. Directions for preparing stuffing
are given later. Also, fill with stuffing the space from which the crop
was removed, inserting it through the slit in the neck. Thread a large
darning needle with white cord and sew up the slit in the neck, as well
as the one between the legs, as in Fig. 28, so that the stuffing will
not fall out. Also, force the neck inside of the skin, and tie the skin
with a piece of string, as in Fig. 29. Then, as Fig. 29 also shows,
truss the chicken by forcing the tip of each wing back of the first wing
joint, making a triangle; also, tie the ends of the legs together and
pull them down, tying them fast to the tail, as in Fig. 30. Trussing in
this manner will give the chicken a much better appearance for serving
than if it were not so fastened; but, of course, before it is placed on
the table, the strings must be cut and removed. After stuffing and
trussing, put the chicken on its back in a roasting pan, sprinkle it
with flour, and place it in a very hot oven. Sear the skin quickly. Then
reduce the temperature slightly and pour a cupful of water into the
roasting pan. Baste the chicken every 10 or 15 minutes with this water,
until it is well browned and the breast and legs may be easily pierced
with a fork. Remove to a platter and serve. If gravy is desired, it may
be made in the roasting pan in the same way as for fried chicken. The
giblets may be cut into pieces and added or they may be left out and
served after first cooking and then browning them.

[Illustration: Fig. 29]

55. ROAST TURKEY.--In America, roast turkey is usually considered as a
holiday dish, being served most frequently in the homes on Thanksgiving
day. However, at times when the price is moderate, it is not an
extravagance to serve roast turkey for other occasions. Roasting is
practically the only way in which turkey is prepared in the usual
household, and it is by far the best method of preparation.
Occasionally, however, a very tough turkey is steamed before roasting in
order to make it sufficiently tender.

[Illustration: Fig. 30]

The preparation of roast turkey does not differ materially from the
method given for the preparation of roast chicken. After the turkey is
cleaned, drawn, and prepared according to the directions previously
given, rub the inside of the cavity with salt and pepper. Then stuff
with any desirable stuffing, filling the cavity and also the space under
the skin of the neck where the crop was removed. Then sew up the
opening, draw the skin over the neck and tie it, and truss the turkey by
forcing the tip of each wing back of the first wing joint in a
triangular shape and tying both ends of the legs to the tail. When thus
made ready, place the turkey in the roasting pan so that the back rests
on the pan and the legs are on top. Then dredge with flour, sprinkle
with salt and pepper, and place in a hot oven. When its surface is well
browned, reduce the heat and baste every 15 minutes until the turkey is
cooked. This will usually require about 3 hours, depending, of course,
on the size of the bird. For basting, melt 4 tablespoonfuls of butter or
bacon fat in 1/2 cupful of boiling water. Pour this into the roasting
pan. Add water when this evaporates, and keep a sufficient amount for
basting. Turn the turkey several times during the roasting, so that the
sides and back, as well as the breast, will be browned. When the turkey
can be easily pierced with a fork, remove it from the roasting pan, cut
the strings and pull them out, place on a platter, garnish, and serve.
Gravy to be served with roast turkey may be made in the manner
mentioned for making gravy to be served with fried chicken.

56. ROAST DUCK.--While young duck is often broiled, the usual method of
preparing this kind of poultry is by roasting; in fact, roasting is an
excellent way in which to cook duck that is between the broiling age and
full maturity.

57. Duck is roasted in practically the same way as chicken or turkey. In
the case of a _young duck_, or _spring duck_, however, stuffing is not
used. After it is drawn and cleaned, truss it by folding back the wings
and tying the ends of the legs to the tail, so as to give it a good
appearance when served. Season with salt and pepper and dredge with
flour, and, over the breast, to prevent it from burning, place strips of
bacon or salt pork. When thus made ready, put the duck in a roasting
pan, pour in 1/2 cupful of water, and cook it in a hot oven until it is
very tender, basting it about every 15 minutes during the roasting.
About 15 minutes before the roasting is done, remove the strips of bacon
or pork, so as to permit the breast underneath them to brown. Serve on a
platter with a garnish. Make gravy if desired.

58. In the case of an _old duck_, proceed as for roasting chicken or
turkey; that is, draw, clean, stuff, and truss it. In addition, place
strips of bacon or salt pork over its breast. Place it in a roasting
pan, pour 1/2 cupful of water into the pan, and put it in a hot oven.
During the roasting baste the duck every 15 minutes; also, as in
roasting a young duck, remove the bacon or salt pork in plenty of time
to permit the part underneath to brown. When the surface is well browned
and the meat may be easily pierced with a fork, place the duck on a
platter, remove the strings used to sew it up, garnish, and serve. Make
gravy if desired.

59. ROAST GOOSE.--Specific directions for roasting goose are not given,
because the methods differ in no way from those already given for
roasting duck. Very young goose, or green goose, is usually roasted
without being stuffed, just as young duck. Older goose, however, is
stuffed, trussed, and roasted just as old duck. A very old goose may be
placed in a roasting pan and steamed until it is partly tender before
roasting. Apples in some form or other are commonly served with goose.
For example, rings of fried apple may be used as a garnish, or apple
sauce or stewed or baked apples may be served as an accompaniment. Make
gravy if desired.

60. ROAST SMALL BIRDS.--Such small birds as guinea fowl, partridge,
pheasant, quail, etc. may be roasted if desired, but on account of being
so small they are seldom filled with stuffing. To roast such poultry,
first clean, draw, and truss them. Then lard them with strips of bacon
or salt pork, and place in a roasting pan in a very hot oven. During the
roasting, turn them so as to brown all sides; also, baste every 15
minutes during the roasting with the water that has been poured into the
roasting pan. Continue the roasting until the flesh is very soft and the
joints can be easily pulled apart. Serve with a garnish. Make gravy
if desired.

61. STUFFING FOR ROAST POULTRY.--As has been mentioned, stuffing, or
dressing, of some kind is generally used when poultry is roasted.
Therefore, so that the housewife may be prepared to vary the stuffing
she uses from time to time, recipes for several kinds are here given.
Very often, instead of using the giblets for gravy, they are cooked in
water and then chopped and added to the stuffing. Giblets are not
included in the recipes here given, but they may be added if desired.
The quantities stated in these recipes are usually sufficient for a bird
of average size; however, for a smaller or a larger bird the ingredients
may be decreased or increased accordingly.

BREAD STUFFING

4 c. dry bread crumbs
1/2 c. butter
1 small onion
1 beaten egg
1 tsp. salt
1 tsp. celery salt, or 1/2 tsp. celery seed
1/4 tsp. powdered sage (if desired)
1/4 tsp. pepper

Pour a sufficient amount of hot water over the bread crumbs to moisten
them well. Melt the butter and allow it to brown slightly. Add the
onion, chopped fine, to the butter and pour this over the bread crumbs.
Add the beaten egg, salt, celery salt, and other seasonings, mix
thoroughly, and stuff into the bird.

CRACKER STUFFING

3 c. cracker crumbs
1 small onion (if desired)
1/3 c. butter
1/2 tsp. salt
1/4 tsp. powdered sage (if desired)
1/4 tsp. pepper

Moisten the cracker crumbs with hot milk or water until they are quite
soft. Brown the chopped onion with the butter and pour over the
crackers. Add the seasonings, mix thoroughly, and stuff into the bird.

OYSTER STUFFING

3 c.  dry bread crumbs
1/4 c. butter
1 tsp. salt
1/4 tsp. pepper
1 c. oysters
| c. chopped celery

Moisten the bread crumbs with a sufficient amount of hot water to make
them quite soft. Brown the butter slightly and add it, with the
seasonings, to the bread. Mix with this the oysters and chopped celery.
Stuff into the bird.

CHESTNUT STUFFING

1 pt. blanched chestnuts
1 pt. bread crumbs
1/4 c. butter
1 tsp. salt
1/4 tsp. pepper
2 Tb. chopped parsley

Blanch the chestnuts in boiling water to remove the dark skin that
covers them. Cook them until they are quite soft, and then chop them or
mash them. Moisten the bread crumbs with hot water and add the
chestnuts. Brown the butter slightly and pour it over the mixture. Add
the seasonings and chopped parsley and stuff.

GREEN-PEPPER STUFFING

1 qt. dried bread crumbs
1 c. stewed tomatoes
1/4 c. melted butter
2 Tb. bacon fat
1 small onion, chopped
1/4 c. finely chopped green pepper
2 Tb. chopped parsley
1 tsp. salt
1/4 tsp. pepper

Moisten the bread crumbs with the stewed tomatoes and add a sufficient
amount of hot water to make the crumbs quite soft. Melt the butter and
bacon fat, add the onion, green pepper, and the seasonings, and pour
over the crumbs. Mix thoroughly and stuff.

RICE STUFFING

2 c. steamed rice
2 c. bread crumbs
1 c. stewed tomatoes
1/4 c. chopped pimiento
2 Tb. chopped parsley
1 small onion, chopped
1 tsp. salt
1/4 tsp. pepper
1/4 c. butter
4 small strips bacon, diced and fried brown

Mix the steamed rice with the bread crumbs. Add the stewed tomatoes,
pimiento, chopped parsley, chopped onion, salt, pepper, melted butter,
bacon and bacon fat, and a sufficient amount of hot water to moisten the
whole well. Mix thoroughly and stuff.

PEANUT STUFFING FOR ROAST DUCK

1 pt. cracker crumbs
1 c. shelled peanuts, finely chopped
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash of Cayenne pepper
1/4 c. butter
Hot milk

Mix the crumbs and the chopped peanuts. Add the salt, pepper, and
Cayenne pepper, and pour over them the melted butter and a sufficient
amount of hot milk to soften the whole. Stuff into the duck.

LIVER STUFFING FOR ROAST DUCK

1 duck liver
1/4 c. butter
1 small onion, chopped
2 c. dry bread crumbs
1/2 tsp. salt
1/4 tsp. pepper
1 Tb. chopped parsley
1 egg

Chop the liver and sauté in the butter to which has been added the
chopped onion. Pour over the bread crumbs. Then add the salt, pepper,
finely chopped parsley, and the beaten egg. Pour over all a sufficient
amount of water to moisten well. Stuff into the duck.


BONED CHICKEN

62. To offer variety in the serving of chicken, as well as to present an
easily carved bird, the process known as _boning_ is often resorted to.
Boning, as will be readily understood, consists in removing the flesh
from the bones before the bird is cooked. Boned chicken may be prepared
by roasting or broiling. In either case, the cookery process is the same
as that already given for poultry that is not boned. If it is to be
roasted, the cavity that results from the removal of the bones and
internal organs should be filled with stuffing or forcemeat, so that the
bird will appear as if nothing had been removed. If it is to be broiled,
stuffing is not necessary. Cooked boned chicken may be served either hot
or cold. Of course, other kinds of poultry may be boned if desired, and
if the directions here given for boning chicken are thoroughly learned
no difficulty will be encountered in performing this operation on any
kind. Boning is not a wasteful process as might be supposed, because
after the flesh is removed from the bones, they may be used in the
making of soup.

[Illustration: FIG. 31]

[Illustration: FIG. 32]

[Illustration: FIG. 33]

[Illustration: FIG. 34]

[Illustration: FIG. 35]

[Illustration: FIG. 36]

[Illustration: FIG. 37]

63. Before proceeding to bone a chicken, singe it, pull out the pin
feathers, cut off the head, remove the tendons from the legs, and
take out the crop through the neck. The bird may be drawn or not before
boning it, but in any event care must be taken not to break any part of
the skin. With these matters attended to, wash the skin well and wipe it
carefully. First, cut off the legs at the first joint, and, with the
point of a sharp knife, as shown in Fig. 31, loosen the skin and muscles
just above the joint by cutting around the bone. Cut the neck off close
to the body, as in Fig. 32. Then, starting at the neck, cut the skin
clear down the back to the tail, as in Fig. 33. [Illustration: FIG. 38]
Begin on one side, and scrape the flesh, with the skin attached to it,
from the back bone, as in Fig. 34. When the shoulder blade is reached,
push the flesh from it with the fingers, as in Fig. 35, until the wing
joint is reached. Disjoint the wing where it is attached to the body, as
in Fig. 36, and loosen the skin from the wing bone down to the second
joint. Disjoint the bone here and remove it up to this place, as Fig. 37
illustrates. The remaining bone is left in the tip of the wing to give
it shape. When the bone from one wing is removed, turn the chicken
around and remove the bone from the other wing. Next, start at the back,
separating the flesh from the ribs, as in Fig. 38, taking care not to
penetrate into the side cavity of the chicken, provided it has not
[Illustration: FIG. 39] been drawn. Push the flesh down to the thigh, as
in Fig. 39, disjoint the bone here, and remove it down to the second
joint, as in Fig. 40. Disjoint the bone at the other joint, and
remove the skin and meat from the bone by turning them inside out, as in
Fig. 41. If the bone has been properly loosened at the first joint of
the leg, there will be no trouble in slipping it out. When this is done,
turn the meat and skin back again, so that they will be right side out.
Then proceed in the same way with the other leg. Next, free the flesh
from the collar bone down to the breast bone on both sides, proceeding
as in Fig. 42. When the ridge of the breast bone is reached, care must
be taken not to break the skin that lies very close to the bone. The
fingers should be used to separate the flesh at this place. When the
sides and front have been thus taken care of, free the skin and the
flesh from the bones over the rump. After this is done, the skeleton and
internal organs of the undrawn bird may be removed, leaving the flesh
intact. The skeleton of a chicken will appear as in Fig. 43.

[Illustration: Fig. 40]

[Illustration: Fig. 41]

[Illustration: Fig. 42]

[Illustration: FIG. 43]

[Illustration: FIG. 44]

[Illustration: FIG. 45]

If the boned chicken is to be roasted, the entire chicken, including the
spaces from which the wing and leg bones were removed, may be filled
with highly seasoned stuffing. When this is done, shape the chicken as
much as possible to resemble its original shape and sew up the back. The
chicken will then be ready to roast. If the boned chicken is to be
broiled, shape it on the broiler as shown in Fig. 44 and broil. When
broiled, boned chicken should appear as in Fig. 45.


PREPARATION BY STEWING AND OTHER COOKING METHODS

64. CHICKEN STEW WITH DUMPLINGS OR NOODLES.--Perhaps the most common way
of preparing chicken is to stew it. When chicken is so cooked, such an
addition as dumplings or noodles is generally made because of the
excellent food combination that results. For stewing, an old chicken
with a great deal of flavor should be used in preference to a young one,
which will have less flavor.

In order to prepare chicken by stewing, clean, draw, and cut up the bird
according to directions previously given. Place the pieces in a large
kettle and cover them well with boiling water. Bring all quickly to the
boiling point and add 2 teaspoonfuls of salt. Then remove the scum,
lower the temperature, and continue to cook at the simmering point. Keep
the pieces well covered with water; also, keep the stew pot covered
during the cooking. When the chicken has become tender enough to permit
the pieces to be easily pierced with a fork, remove them to a deep
platter or a vegetable dish. Dumplings or noodles may be cooked in the
chicken broth, as the water in which the chicken was stewed is called,
or they may be boiled or steamed separately. If they are cooked
separately, thicken the broth with flour and serve it over the chicken
with the noodles or dumplings.

65. FRICASSEE OF CHICKEN.--For chicken that is tough, fricasseeing is an
excellent cooking method to employ. Indeed, since it is a long method of
cookery, a rather old, comparatively tough fowl lends itself best to
fricasseeing. Fricassee of chicken also is a dish that requires a great
deal of flavor to be drawn from the meat, and this, of course, cannot be
done if a young chicken is used.

To prepare fricassee of chicken, clean and cut the bird into pieces
according to the directions previously given. Put these into a saucepan,
cover with boiling water, add 2 teaspoonfuls of salt, bring to the
boiling point quickly, skim, and reduce the temperature so that the meat
will simmer slowly until it is tender. Next, remove the pieces of
chicken from the water in which they were cooked, roll them in flour,
and sauté them in butter or chicken fat until they are nicely browned.
If more than 2 or 2 1/2 cupfuls of broth remains, boil it until the
quantity is reduced to this amount. Then moisten 2 or 3 tablespoonfuls
of flour with a little cold water, add this to the stock, and cook until
it thickens. If desired, the broth may be reduced more and thin cream
may be added to make up the necessary quantity. Arrange the pieces of
chicken on a deep platter, pour the sauce over them, season with salt
and pepper if necessary, and serve. To enhance the appearance of this
dish, the platter may be garnished with small three-cornered pieces of
toast, tiny carrots, or carrots and green peas.

66. CHICKEN PIE.--A good change from the usual ways of serving chicken
may be brought about by means of chicken pie. Such a dish is simple to
prepare, and for it may be used young or old chicken.

To prepare chicken pie, dress, clean, and cut up a chicken in the usual
manner. Put it into a saucepan, add a small onion and a sprig of
parsley, cover with boiling water, and cook slowly until the meat is
tender. When the meat is cooked, add 2 teaspoonfuls of salt and 1/4
teaspoonful of pepper, and when it is perfectly tender remove it from
the stock. Thicken the stock with 1 tablespoonful of flour to each
cupful of liquid. Next, arrange the chicken in a baking dish. It may be
left on the bones or cut into large pieces and the bones removed. To it
add small carrots and onions that have been previously cooked until
tender and pour the thickened stock over all. Cover this with
baking-powder biscuit dough made according to the directions given in
_Hot Breads_ and rolled 1/4 inch thick. Make some holes through the
dough with the point of a sharp knife to let the steam escape, and bake
in a moderate oven until the dough is well risen and a brown crust is
formed. Then remove from the oven and serve.

67. CHICKEN CURRY.--Chicken combined with rice is usually an agreeable
food combination, but when flavored with curry powder, as in the recipe
here given, it is a highly flavored dish that appeals to the taste of
many persons.

CHICKEN CURRY

1 3 lb. chicken
2 Tb. butter
2 onions
1 Tb. curry powder
2 tsp. salt
2 c. steamed rice

Clean, dress, and cut up the chicken as for stewing. Put the butter in a
hot frying pan, add the onions, sliced thin, then the pieces of chicken,
and cook for 10 minutes. Parboil the liver, gizzard, and heart, cut them
into pieces and add them to the chicken in the frying pan. Sprinkle the
curry powder and the salt over the whole. Add boiling water or the stock
in which the giblets were cooked, and simmer until the chicken is
tender. Remove the meat from the frying pan and place it on a deep
platter. Surround it with a border of steamed rice. Thicken the stock in
the frying pan slightly with flour and pour the gravy over the chicken.
Serve hot.

68. CHICKEN EN CASSEROLE.--Food prepared in casseroles always seems to
meet with the approval of even the most discriminating persons; and
chicken prepared in this way with vegetables is no exception to the
rule. For such a dish should be selected a chicken of medium size that
is neither very old nor very young. Any flavor that the bird contains is
retained, so a strong flavor is not desirable.

In preparing chicken en casserole, first clean, dress, and cut it up in
the manner directed for stewed chicken. Place the pieces in a casserole
dish, together with 1 cupful of small carrots or larger carrots cut into
strips. Fry a finely chopped onion with several strips of bacon, and
cut these more finely while frying until the whole is well browned. Then
add them to the meat in the casserole dish. Also, add 1 cupful of potato
balls or 1 cupful of diced potatoes. Season well with salt and pepper,
add 2 tablespoonfuls of flour, and over the whole pour sufficient hot
water to cover. Cover the casserole dish, place it in a moderate oven,
and cook slowly until the chicken is tender. Serve from the dish.

69. JELLIED CHICKEN.--The housewife who desires to serve an unusual
chicken dish will find that there is much in favor of jellied chicken.
Aside from its food value, jellied chicken has merit in that it appeals
to the eye, especially if the mold used in its preparation has a
pleasing shape.

JELLIED CHICKEN

1 3 or 4 lb. chicken
2 tsp. salt
Several slices of onion
1 hard-cooked egg
1 pimiento
Several sprigs of parsley

Clean, dress, and cut up the chicken. Put it into a saucepan and cover
with boiling water. Season with the salt and add the slices of onion.
Cook slowly until the meat will fall from the bones. Remove the chicken
from the saucepan, take the meat from the bones, and chop it into small
pieces. Reduce the stock to about 1 1/2 cupfuls, strain it, and skim off
the fat. With this done, place slices of the hard-cooked egg in the
bottom of a wet mold. Chop the pimiento and sprigs of parsley and mix
them with the chopped meat. Put the mixture on top of the sliced egg,
and pour the stock over the whole. Keep in a cool place until it is set.
If the stock is not reduced and more jelly is desired, unflavored
gelatine may be dissolved and added to coagulate the liquid. To serve
jellied chicken, remove from the mold, turn upside down, so that the
eggs are on top and act as a garnish, and then cut in thin slices.

70. CHICKEN BECHAMEL.--Still another chicken dish that may be used to
break the monotony of meals is chicken bechamel, the word bechamel being
the name of a sauce invented by Béchamel, who was steward to Louis XIV,
a king of France.

CHICKEN BECHAMEL

1 good-sized chicken
2 tsp. salt
1/4 tsp. pepper
1 c. small mushrooms
1/4 c. chopped pimiento
3 Tb. flour
1 c. thin cream

Clean, dress, and cut up the chicken. Place the pieces into a saucepan,
and cover with boiling water. Add the salt and the pepper, and allow to
come to the boiling point. Remove the scum and simmer the chicken slowly
until it is tender. Remove the chicken from the liquid, take the meat
from the bones, and cut it into small pieces. Add to these the mushrooms
and chopped pimiento. Reduce the stock to 1 cupful and thicken it with
the flour added to the thin cream. Cook until the sauce is thickened.
Then add to it the chopped chicken with the other ingredients. Heat all
thoroughly and serve on toast points or in timbale cases, the making of
which is explained in _Meat_, Part 2.

71. COOKING OF GIBLETS.--As has been pointed out, the giblets--that is,
the liver, heart, and gizzard of all kinds of fowl--are used in gravy
making and as an ingredient for stuffing. When poultry is stewed, as in
making stewed chicken, it is not uncommon to cook the giblets with the
pieces of chicken. The gizzard and heart especially require long, slow
cooking to make them tender enough to be eaten. Therefore, when poultry
is broiled, fried, or roasted, some other cookery method must be
resorted to, as these processes are too rigid for the preparation of
giblets. In such cases, the best plan is to cook them in water until
they are tender and then sauté them in butter. When cooked in this way,
they may be served with the poultry, for to many persons they are very
palatable.


DISHES FROM LEFT-OVER POULTRY

72. Left-over poultry of any kind is too valuable to be wasted, but even
if this were not so there are so many practical ways in which such
left-overs may be used to advantage that it would be the height of
extravagance not to utilize them. The bones that remain from roast fowl
after carving are especially good for soup making, as they will yield
quite a quantity of flavor when they are thoroughly cooked. If
sufficient meat remains on the carcass to permit of slicing, such meat
may be served cold. However, if merely small pieces are left or if fried
or broiled poultry remains, it will be advisable to make some other use
of these left-overs. It is often possible for the ingenious housewife to
add other foods to them so as to increase the quantity and thus make
them serve more. For example, a small quantity of pork or veal may be
satisfactorily used with chicken, as may also pieces of hard-cooked
eggs, celery, mushrooms, etc. In fact, salads may be made by combining
such ingredients and salad dressings. To show the use of left-overs
still further, there are here given a number of recipes that may well
be used.

73. Chicken Salad.--A common way in which to utilize left-over chicken
is in chicken salad. Such salad may be served to advantage for luncheons
and other light meals.

CHICKEN SALAD

2 c. cold diced chicken
1 c. chopped celery
1 small onion, chopped
Salad dressing
2 hard-cooked eggs

Mix the meat with the chopped celery and onion. Marinate with
well-seasoned vinegar or a little lemon juice. French dressing may be
used for this if oil is desired. Just before serving pour off any excess
liquid. Add any desired salad dressing. Heap the salad on lettuce leaves
and garnish with slices of the hard-cooked eggs.

74. Chicken á la King.--Chicken à la king is not necessarily a left-over
dish, for it may be made from either left-over chicken or, if desired,
chicken cooked especially for it. It makes an excellent dish to prepare
in a chafing dish, but it may be conveniently prepared in a saucepan on
the fire and served in any desirable way.

CHICKEN À LA KING

3 Tb. fat (butter or bacon fat or part of each)
2 Tb. flour
3/4 c. chicken stock
1 c. milk or thin cream
1 tsp. salt
1/2 c. mushrooms
1/4 c. canned pimiento
1-1/2 c. cold chicken
2 eggs

Melt the fat in a saucepan, add the flour, and stir until well mixed.
Heat the stock and the milk or cream, pour this into the mixture, stir
rapidly, and bring to boiling point. Add the salt and the mushrooms,
pimientoes, and cold chicken cut into pieces 1/2 to 1 inch long, allow
the mixture to come to the boiling point again, and add the slightly
beaten eggs. Remove from the fire at once to prevent the egg from
curdling. Serve over pieces of fresh toast and sprinkle with paprika.

75. Chicken Croquettes.--Left-over chicken may be used to advantage for
croquettes made according to the following recipe. When the ingredients
listed are combined with chicken, an especially agreeable food will be
the result. If there is not sufficient cold chicken to meet the
requirements, a small quantity of cold veal or pork may be chopped with
the chicken.

CHICKEN CROQUETTES

3 Tb. fat
1/4 c. flour
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1/4 tsp. paprika
1 c. chicken stock or cream
2 c. cold chicken, chopped
1/4. mushrooms, chopped
1 tsp. parsley, chopped
1 egg
Fine bread crumbs

Melt the fat in a saucepan, add the flour, and stir until well blended.
Add the salt, pepper, and paprika. Heat the stock or cream and add to
the mixture in the saucepan. Stir constantly until the sauce is
completely thickened. Then add the chopped chicken, mushrooms, and
parsley. When cold, shape into oblong croquettes, roll in the egg,
slightly beaten, and then in fine crumbs. Fry in deep fat until brown.
Serve with a garnish or some vegetable, such as peas, diced carrots, or
small pieces of cauliflower, as well as with left-over chicken gravy or
well-seasoned white sauce.

76. TURKEY HASH.--Possibly the simplest way in which to utilize
left-over turkey meat is to make it up into hash. Such a dish may be
used for almost any meal, and when made according to the recipe here
given it will suit the taste of nearly every person.

TURKEY HASH

2 Tb. butter
1/2 c. coarse rye-bread crumbs
1 small onion, sliced
2 c. finely chopped cold turkey
1/2 c. finely chopped raw potato
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1 pt. milk

Melt the butter in a saucepan. When brown, add to it the rye-bread
crumbs and mix well. Then add the sliced onion, chopped turkey, potato,
salt, and pepper. Cook for a short time on top of the stove, stirring
frequently to prevent burning. Pour the milk over the whole, and place
the pan in the oven or on the back of the stove. Cook slowly until the
milk is reduced and the hash is sufficiently dry to serve. Serve on
buttered toast.

77. CHICKEN WITH RICE.--Left-over chicken may be readily combined with
rice to make a nutritious dish. To prepare chicken with rice, add to
left-over gravy any left-over cold chicken cut into small pieces. If
there is not enough gravy to cover the meat, add sufficient white sauce;
if no gravy remains, use white sauce entirely. Heat the chicken in the
gravy or the sauce to the boiling point. Then heap a mound of fresh
steamed or boiled rice in the center of a deep platter or a vegetable
dish and pour the chicken and sauce over it. Serve hot.

78. Baked Poultry With Rice.--A casserole or a baking dish serves as a
good utensil in which to prepare a left-over dish of any kind of
poultry, because it permits vegetables to be added and cooked
thoroughly. Baked poultry with rice is a dish that may be prepared in
such a utensil.

Line a casserole or a baking dish with a thick layer of fresh steamed or
boiled rice. Fill the center with chopped cold poultry, which may be
chicken, turkey, duck, or goose. Add peas, chopped carrots, potato, and
a few slices of onion in any desirable proportion. Over this pour
sufficient left-over gravy or white sauce to cover well. First, steam
thoroughly; then uncover the utensil and bake slowly until the
vegetables are cooked and the entire mixture is well heated. Serve from
the casserole or baking dish.


SERVING AND CARVING POULTRY

79. Poultry of any kind should always be served on a platter or in a
dish that has been heated in the oven or by running hot water over it.
After placing the cooked bird on the platter or the dish from which it
is to be served, it should be taken to the dining room and placed before
the person who is to serve. If it is roasted, it will require carving.
If not, the pieces may be served as they are desired by the individuals
at the table. Poultry having both dark and white meat is usually served
according to the taste of each individual at the table. If no preference
is stated, however, a small portion of each kind of meat is
generally served.

80. The carving of broiled or roast chicken, turkey, duck, or goose may
be done in the kitchen, but having the whole bird brought to the table
and carved there adds considerably to a meal. Carving is usually done by
the head of the family, but in a family in which there are boys each one
should be taught to carve properly, so that he may do the carving in the
absence of another person.

[Illustration: FIG. 46]

[Illustration: FIG. 47]

[Illustration: FIG. 48]

[Illustration: FIG. 49]

For carving, the bird should be placed on the platter so that it rests
on its back; also, a well-sharpened carving knife and a fork should be
placed at the right of the platter and the person who is to serve. To
carve a bird, begin as shown in Fig. 46; that is, thrust the fork firmly
into the side or breast of the fowl and cut through the skin where the
leg joins the body, breaking the thigh joint. Cut through this joint,
severing the second joint and leg in one piece. Then, if desired, cut
the leg apart at the second joint. As the portions are thus cut, they
may be placed on a separate platter that is brought to the table heated.
Next, in the same manner, cut off the other leg and separate it at the
second joint. With the legs cut off, remove each wing at the joint where
it is attached to the body, proceeding as shown in Fig. 47. Then slice
the meat from the breast by cutting down from the ridge of the breast
bone toward the wing, as in Fig. 48. After this meat has been sliced
off, there still remains some meat around the thigh and on the back.
This should be sliced off or removed with the point of the knife, as in
Fig. 49, so that the entire skeleton will be clean, as in Fig. 50. If
the entire bird is not to be served, as much as is necessary may be cut
and the remainder left on the bones. With each serving of meat a
spoonful of dressing should be taken from the inside of the bird,
provided it is stuffed, and, together with some gravy, served on
the plate.

[Illustration: FIG. 50]

       *       *       *       *       *

GAME

GENERAL DESCRIPTION

81. GAME, which includes the meat of deer, bear, rabbit, squirrel, wild
duck, wild goose, partridge, pheasant, and some less common animals,
such as possum, is not a particularly common food. However, it is
sufficiently common to warrant a few directions concerning its use. Game
can be purchased or caught only during certain seasons, designated by
the laws of various states. Such laws are quite stringent and have been
made for the protection of each particular species.

82. The meat of wild animals and birds is usually strong in flavor. Just
why this is so, however, is not definitely known. Undoubtedly some of
the strong flavor is due to the particular food on which the animal or
the bird feeds, and much of this flavor is due to extractives contained
in the flesh.

When game birds and animals have considerable fat surrounding the
tissues, the greater part of it is often rejected because of its
extremely high flavor. By proper cooking, however, much of this flavor,
if it happens to be a disagreeable one, can be driven off.

The general composition of the flesh of various kinds of game does not
differ greatly from that of similar domestic animals or birds. For
instance, the flesh of bear is similar in its composition to that of fat
beef, as bear is one of the wild animals that is very fat. Venison, or
the meat obtained from deer, contains much less fat, and its composition
resembles closely that of very lean beef. Rabbits and most of the wild
birds are quite lean; in fact, they are so lean that it is necessary in
the preparation of them to supply sufficient fat to make them more
appetizing.


RECIPES FOR GAME

83. Only a few recipes for the preparation of game are here given,
because, in the case of wild birds, the cookery methods do not differ
materially from those given for poultry, and, in the case of such
animals as bears, the directions for preparing steaks and other cuts are
identical with the cooking of similar cuts of beef. Rabbit and squirrel
are perhaps the most common game used as food in the home; therefore,
directions for cleaning and cooking them receive the most consideration.

84. PREPARING A RABBIT FOR COOKING.--In order to prepare a rabbit for
cooking, it must first be skinned and drawn, after which it may be cut
up or left whole, depending on the cookery method that is to
be followed.

To skin a rabbit, first chop off the feet at the first joint; then
remove the head at the first joint below the skull and slit the skin of
the stomach from a point between the forelegs to the hind legs. With
this done, remove the entrails carefully, proceeding in much the same
manner as in removing the entrails of a chicken. Then slit the skin from
the opening in the stomach around the back to the opposite side. Catch
hold on the back and pull the skin first from the hind legs and then
from the forelegs. If the rabbit is to be stewed, wash it thoroughly and
separate it into pieces at the joints. If it is to be roasted or
braized, it may be left whole. A rabbit that is left whole presents a
better appearance when it is trussed. To truss a rabbit, force the hind
legs toward the head and fasten them in place by passing a skewer
through the leg on one side, through the body, and into the leg on the
other side. Then skewer the front legs back under the body in the same
way. In such a case, the head may be left on or removed, as desired.

85. ROAST RABBIT.--Roasting is the cookery process often used to prepare
rabbit. To cook it in this way, first skin and clean the animal and
stuff it. Any of the stuffings previously given may be used for this
purpose. Then skewer the legs in position, place strips of bacon across
the back, put in a roasting pan, and dredge with salt and pepper. Also,
add 1/2 cupful of hot water to which has been added a little butter or
bacon fat. Roast in a quick oven, and baste every 15 minutes during the
roasting. A few minutes before the rabbit is tender enough to be pierced
with a fork, remove the strips of bacon so that the flesh underneath may
brown. Then remove from the pan and serve.

86. SAUTÉD RABBIT.--If it is desired to prepare a rabbit by sautéing,
skin and clean it, cut it into pieces, and dry all the pieces with a
soft cloth. Then melt bacon fat in a frying pan, and when it is hot
place the pieces of rabbit in it and allow them to brown. Add several
sprigs of parsley and two small onions, sliced, season with salt and
pepper, add a slice or two of bacon, and pour water over the whole until
it is nearly covered. Place a cover on the frying pan and simmer slowly.
Add water when it is necessary. When the meat is tender, remove it from
the frying pan. Then thicken the fluid that remains with a small amount
of flour so as to make a gravy. Serve hot.

87. RABBIT PIE.--Rabbit made into pie is also a desirable way in which
to serve rabbit. To prepare such a dish, skin and clean one or more
rabbits and cut them up into as small pieces as possible, removing the
largest bones. Put these pieces into a baking dish, and over them place
bacon cut into small strips. Sprinkle all with chopped parsley, salt,
and pepper, and add a few slices of onion, as well as some strips of
carrot and potato, if desired. Pour a sufficient amount of boiling water
over the whole and allow to simmer slowly until the meat is partly
cooked. Then place in the oven and cook until the meat is tender. Next,
dredge the contents of the baking dish with flour and cover with a
1/4-inch layer of baking-powder biscuit dough. Make several slits
through the dough to allow the steam to escape. Bake until the dough
becomes a well-browned crust. Serve hot in the baking dish.

88. BROILED SQUIRREL.--For cooking, squirrel is cleaned in practically
the same way as rabbit. Squirrel may be made ready to eat by stewing,
but as it is so small a creature, broiling is the usual method of
preparation. To broil a squirrel, first remove the skin and clean it.
Then break the bones along the spine, so that the squirrel can be spread
out flat. When thus made ready, place it on a well-greased hot broiler
and sear it quickly on one side; then turn it and sear the other side.
Next, sprinkle it with salt and pepper, place strips of bacon across the
back, and allow it to broil slowly until it is well browned. Squirrel
may be served in the same way as rabbit.

89. CUTS OF VENISON.--The meat obtained from deer, called venison, as
has been mentioned, may be cut up to form cuts similar to those obtained
from beef, such as steaks and roasts. Although such meat is a rarity, it
will be well to be familiar with a few of the methods of cooking it.
These, however, do not differ materially from the methods of cooking
other meats.

90. BROILED VENISON.--To prepare venison for broiling, cut a steak from
1 to 1-1/2 inches thick. Place this on a well-greased broiler and broil
until well done. Serve on a hot platter. Garnish the broiled venison
with parsley and pour over it sauce made as follows:

SAUCE FOR BROILED VENISON

2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
1/4 tsp. ground cinnamon
4 Tb. currant jelly
2 tsp. lemon juice
1/4  c. port wine
6 finely chopped Maraschino cherries

Melt the butter in a saucepan, add the flour, salt, ground cinnamon,
currant jelly, lemon juice, and the port wine, which should be heated
with 1 cupful of water. Cook until the flour has thickened, remove from
the fire, and add the cherries.

91. ROAST FILLET OF VENISON.--If a fillet of venison is to be roasted,
proceed by larding it with strips of salt pork. Then place it in a pan
with one small onion, sliced, a bay leaf, and a small quantity of
parsley, 1 teaspoonful of salt, and 1/4 teaspoonful of pepper. Dilute
1/4 cupful of vinegar with 3/4 cupful of water and add a teaspoonful of
Worcestershire sauce. Pour this over the fillet and place it in a hot
oven. Cook until the liquid has evaporated sufficiently to allow the
venison to brown. Turn, so as to brown on both sides, and when quite
tender and well browned, serve on a hot platter.

92. ROAST LEG OF VENISON.--If a leg of venison is to be roasted, first
remove the skin, wipe the meat with a damp cloth, and cover it with a
paste made of flour and water. Then put it into a roasting pan and roast
in a very hot oven. Baste with hot water every 15 minutes for about 1
1/2 hours. At the end of this time, remove the paste, spread the surface
with butter, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and continue to roast for 1
to 1 1/4 hours longer. Baste every 15 minutes, basting during the last
hour with hot water in which has been melted a small quantity of butter.
Then remove the venison from the pan and serve it on a hot platter with
any desired sauce.


POULTRY AND GAME

EXAMINATION QUESTIONS


(1) Of what value is poultry in the diet?

(2) What effect do the feeding and care of poultry have upon it as food?

(3) Mention briefly the proper preparation of poultry killed for market.

(4) (_a_) What are the most important things to consider when poultry is
to be selected? (_b_) Give the points that indicate good quality
of poultry.

(5) How would you determine the age of a chicken?

(6) How would you determine the freshness of a chicken?

(7) (_a_) What are the marks of cold-storage poultry? (_b_) Should
cold-storage poultry be drawn or undrawn? Tell why.

(8) How should frozen poultry be thawed?

(9) Tell briefly how turkey should be selected.

(10) At what age and season is turkey best?

(11) Discuss the selection of: (_a_) ducks; (_b_) geese.

(12) (_a_) How does the composition of poultry compare with that of
meat? (_b_) What kind of chicken has a high food value?

(13) (_a_) How should a chicken be dressed? (_b_) What care should be
given to the skin in plucking?

(14) Give briefly the steps in drawing a chicken.

(15) Give briefly the steps in cutting up a chicken.

(16) How is poultry prepared for: (_a_) roasting? (_b_) frying? (_c_)
broiling? (_d_) stewing?

(17) (_a_) Describe trussing, (_b_) Why is trussing done?

(18) Give briefly the steps in boning a chicken.

(19) Tell briefly how to serve and carve a roasted bird.

(20) Discuss game in a general way.


ADDITIONAL WORK

Select a fowl by applying the tests given for selection in the lesson.
Prepare it by what seems to you to be the most economical method. Tell
how many persons are served and the use made of the left-overs. Compute
the cost per serving by dividing the cost of the fowl by the number of
servings it made.

At another time, select a chicken for frying by applying the tests given
in the lesson. Compute the cost per serving by dividing the cost of the
chicken by the number of servings it made.

Compare the cost per serving of the fried chicken with that of the fowl,
to find which is the more economical. In each case, collect the bones
after the chicken is eaten and weigh them to determine which has the
greater proportion of bone to meat, the fowl or the frying chicken.
Whether you have raised the poultry yourself or have purchased it in the
market, use the market price in computing your costs. Weigh the birds
carefully before drawing them.

       *       *       *       *       *




FISH AND SHELL FISH

       *       *       *       *       *

FISH

FISH IN THE DIET

1. FISH provides another class of high-protein or tissue-building food.
As this term is generally understood, it includes both vertebrate
fish--that is, fish having a backbone, such as salmon, cod, shad,
etc.--and many other water animals, such as lobsters, crabs, shrimp,
oysters, and clams. A distinction, however, is generally made between
these two groups, those having bones being regarded properly as _fish_
and those partly or entirely encased in shells, as _shell fish_. It is
according to this distinction that this class of foods is considered in
this Section. Because all the varieties of both fish and shell fish are
in many respects similar, the term _sea food_ is often applied to them,
but, as a rule, this term is restricted to designate salt-water products
as distinguished from fresh-water fish.

2. Fish can usually be purchased at a lower price than meat, and for
this reason possesses an economic advantage over it. Besides the price,
the substitution of fish for meat makes for economy in a number of ways
to which consideration is not usually given. These will become clearly
evident when it is remembered that nearly all land animals that furnish
meat live on many agricultural products that might be used for human
food. Then, too, other foods fed to animals, although not actually human
foods, require in their raising the use of soil that might otherwise be
utilized for the raising of food for human beings. This is not true in
the case of fish. They consume the vegetation that grows in lakes,
streams, and the ocean, as well as various kinds of insects, small fish,
etc., which cannot be used as human food and which do not require the
use of the soil. In addition, much of the food that animals, which are
warm-blooded, take into their bodies is required to maintain a constant
temperature above that of their surroundings, so that not all of what
they eat is used in building up the tissues of their bodies. With fish,
however, it is different. As they are cold-blooded and actually receive
heat from their surroundings, they do not require food for bodily
warmth. Practically all that they take into the body is built up into a
supply of flesh that may be used as food for human beings.

3. With fish, as with other foods, some varieties are sought more than
others, the popularity of certain kinds depending on the individual
taste or the preference of the people in a particular locality. Such
popularity, however, is often a disadvantage to the purchaser, because a
large demand for certain varieties has a tendency to cause a rise in
price. The increased price does not indicate that the fish is of more
value to the consumer than some other fish that may be cheaper because
it is less popular, although quite as valuable from a food standpoint.
The preference for particular kinds of fish and the persistent disregard
of others that are edible is for the most part due to prejudice. In
certain localities, one kind of fish may be extremely popular while in
others the same fish may not be used for food at all. Such prejudice
should be overcome, for, as a matter of fact, practically every fish
taken from pure water is fit to eat, in the sense that it furnishes food
and is not injurious to health.

In addition, any edible fish should be eaten in the locality where it is
caught. The transportation of this food is a rather difficult matter,
and, besides, it adds to the cost. It is therefore an excellent plan to
make use of the kind of fish that is most plentiful, as such practice
will insure both better quality and a lower market price.

4. As is well known, fish is an extremely perishable food. Therefore,
when it is caught in quantities too great to be used at one time, it is
preserved in various ways. The preservation methods that have proved to
be the most satisfactory are canning, salting and drying, smoking, and
preserving in various kinds of brine and pickle. As such methods are
usually carried out in the locality where the fish is caught, many
varieties of fish can be conveniently stored for long periods of time
and so distributed as to meet the requirements of the consumer. This
plan enables persons far removed from the Source of supply to procure
fish frequently.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMPOSITION AND FOOD VALUE OF FISH

COMPOSITION OF FISH

5. COMPARISON OF FISH WITH MEAT.--In general, the composition of fish is
similar to that of meat, for both of them are high-protein foods.
However, some varieties of fish contain large quantities of fat and
others contain very little of this substance, so the food value of the
different kinds varies greatly. As in the case of meat, fish is lacking
in carbohydrate. Because of the close similarity between these two
foods, fish is a very desirable substitute for meat. In fact, fish is in
some respects a better food than meat, but it cannot be used so
continuously as meat without becoming monotonous; that is to say, a
person will grow tired of fish much more quickly than of most meats. The
similarity between the composition of fish and that of meat has much to
do with regulating the price of these protein foods, which, as has
already been learned, are the highest priced foods on the market.

6. PROTEIN IN FISH.--In fish, as well as in shell fish, a very large
proportion of the food substances present is protein. This proportion
varies with the quantity of water, bone, and refuse that the particular
food contains, and with the physical structure of the food. In fresh
fish, the percentage of this material varies from 6 to 17 per cent. The
structure of fish is very similar to that of meat, as the flesh is
composed of tiny hollow fibers containing extractives, in which are
dissolved mineral salts and various other materials. The quantity of
extractives found in these foods, however, is less than that found in
meat. Fish extracts of any kind, such as clam juice, oyster juice, etc.,
are similar in their composition to any of the extractives of meat,
differing only in the kind and proportions. In addition to the muscle
fibers of fish, which are, of course, composed of protein, fish contains
a small quantity of albumin, just as meat does. It is the protein
material in fish, as well as in shell fish, that is responsible for its
very rapid decomposition.

The application of heat has the same effect on the protein of fish as it
has on that of meat, fowl, and other animal tissues. Consequently, the
same principles of cookery apply to both the retention and the
extraction of flavor.

7. FAT IN FISH.--The percentage of fat in fish varies from less than 1
per cent. in some cases to a trifle more than 14 per cent. in others,
but this high percentage is rare, as the average fish probably does not
exceed from 3 to 6 or 7 per cent. of fat. This variation affects the
total food value proportionately. The varieties of fish that contain the
most fat deteriorate most rapidly and withstand transportation the least
well, so that when these are secured in large quantities they are
usually canned or preserved in some manner. Fish containing a large
amount of fat, such as salmon, turbot, eel, herring, halibut, mackerel,
mullet, butterfish, and lake trout, have a more moist quality than those
which are without fat, such as cod. Therefore, as it is difficult to
cook fish that is lacking in fat and keep it from becoming dry, a fat
fish makes a more palatable food than a lean fish. The fat of fish is
very strongly flavored; consequently, any that cooks out of fish in its
preparation is not suitable for use in the cooking of other foods.

8. CARBOHYDRATE IN FISH.--Like meat, fish does not contain carbohydrate
in any appreciable quantity. In fact, the small amount that is found in
the tissue, and that compares to the glycogen found in animal tissues,
is not present in sufficient quantities to merit consideration.

9. MINERAL MATTER IN FISH.--In fish, mineral matter is quite as
prevalent as in meat. Through a notion that fish contains large
proportions of phosphorus, and because this mineral is also present in
the brain, the idea that fish is a brain food has become widespread. It
has been determined, however, that this belief has no foundation.


FOOD VALUE OF FISH

10. FACTORS DETERMINING FOOD VALUE.--The total food value of fish, as
has been shown, is high or low, varying with the food substances it
contains. Therefore, since, weight for weight, the food value of fat is
much higher than that of protein, it follows that the fish containing
the most fat has the highest food value. Fat and protein, as is well
known, do not serve the same function in the body, but each has its
purpose and is valuable and necessary in the diet. Some varieties of
fish contain fat that is strong in flavor, and from these the fat should
be removed before cooking, especially if the flavor is disagreeable.
This procedure of course reduces the total food value of the fish, but
it should be done if it increases the palatability.

11. RELATIVE NUTRITIVE VALUE OF FISH AND MEAT.--When fish and meat are
compared, it will be observed that some kinds of fish have a higher food
value than meat, particularly if the fish contains much fat and the meat
is lean. When the average of each of these foods is compared, however,
meat will be found to have a higher food value than fish. To show how
fish compares with meat and fowl, the composition and food value of
several varieties of each food are given in Table I, which is taken from
a United States government bulletin.


TABLE I

COMPARISON OF COMPOSITION AND FOOD VALUE OF FISH AND MEAT

----------------------------------------------------------------
                     |    Composition    |  Total   |Food Value|
                     |-------------------|   Food   | per Pound|
   Edible Portion    | Protein |   Fat   |  Value   |  Due to  |
                     |Per Cent.|Per Cent.|per Pound | Protein  |
                     |         |         | Calories | Calories |
----------------------------------------------------------------
_Fish_:              |         |         |          |          |
  Bass, black........|  20.6   |    1.7  |    443   |    373   |
  Bluefish...........|  19.4   |    1.2  |    401   |    352   |
  Carp...............|  17.4   |    2.6  |    421   |    315   |
  Catfish............|  14.4   |   20.6  |  1,102   |    262   |
  Halibut steak......|  18.6   |    5.2  |    550   |    337   |
  Lake trout.........|  17.8   |    1.0  |    363   |    323   |
  Red snapper........|  19.2   |    1.0  |    389   |    348   |
  Salmon (canned)....|  21.8   |   12.1  |    888   |    396   |
  Whitefish..........|  22.9   |    6.5  |    680   |    415   |
                     |         |         |          |          |
_Meat_:              |         |         |          |          |
  Beef, round,       |         |         |          |          |
    medium fat.......|  20.3   |   13.6  |    895   |    368   |
  Chicken, broilers..|  21.5   |    2.5  |    492   |    390   |
  Fowl...............|  19.3   |   16.3  |  1,016   |    350   |
  Lamb, leg..........|  19.2   |   16.5  |    870   |    348   |
  Pork chops.........|  16.6   |   30.1  |  1,455   |    301   |
----------------------------------------------------------------

12. A study of this table will show that on the whole the percentage of
protein in the various kinds of fish is as much as that in meat, while
in a few instances, it is greater. This proves that so far as the
quantity of protein is concerned, these two foods are equally valuable
in their tissue-forming and tissue-building qualities. It will be seen
also that the percentage of fat in fish varies greatly, some varieties
containing more than meat, but most of them containing less.
Furthermore, the total food value per pound, in calories, is for the
most part greater in meat than in fish, whereas the food value per pound
due to protein is equivalent in most cases, but higher in some of the
fish than in the meat.

13. It must also be remembered that the drying or preserving of fish
does not in any way decrease its food value. In fact, pound for pound,
dried fish, both smoked and salt, contains more nutritive value than
fresh fish, because the water, which decreases the food value of fresh
fish, is driven off in drying. However, when prepared for eating, dried
fish in all probability has more food value than fresh fish, because
water or moisture of some sort must be supplied in its preparation.

14. The method of preparing dried or preserved fish, as well as fresh
fish, has much to do with the food value obtained from it. Just as
nutritive value is lost in the cooking of meat by certain methods, so it
may be lost in the preparation of fish if the proper methods are not
applied. To obtain as much food value from fish as possible, the various
points that are involved in its cookery must be thoroughly understood.
Certain facts concerning the buying of fish must also be kept in mind.
For instance, in canned fish, almost all the bones, skin, and other
inedible parts, except the tails, heads, and fins of very small fish,
have been removed before packing, indicating that practically all the
material purchased is edible. In the case of fresh fish, a large
percentage of what is bought must be wasted in preparation and in
eating, the percentage of waste varying from 5 to 45 per cent.

15. DIGESTIBILITY OF FISH.--The food value of any food is an important
item when its usefulness as a food is taken into account, but of equal
importance is the manner in which the body uses the food; that is,
whether it digests the food with ease or with difficulty. Therefore,
when the value of fish as a food is to be determined, its digestibility
must receive definite consideration. As has already been explained, much
depends on the cooking of the food in question. On the whole, fish is
found to be more easily digested than meat, with the exception perhaps
of a few kinds or certain cuts. That physicians recognize this
characteristic is evidenced by the fact that fish is often used in the
feeding of invalids or sick people when meat is not permitted.

16. The ease with which fish is digested is influenced largely by the
quantity of fat it contains, for this fat, acting in identically the
same way as the fat of meat, has the effect of slowing the digestion
that is carried on in the stomach. It follows, then, that with possibly
one or two exceptions the kinds of fish most easily digested are those
which are lean.

17. In addition to the correct cooking of fish and the presence of fat,
a factor that largely influences the digestibility of this food is the
length of the fibers of the flesh. It will be remembered that the parts
of an animal having long fibers are tougher and less easily digested
than those having short fibers. This applies with equal force in the
case of fish. Its truth is evident when it is known that cod, a lean
fish, is digested with greater difficulty than some of the fat fish
because of the length and toughness of its fibers. This, however, is
comparative, and it must not be thought that fish on the whole is
digested with difficulty.

18. Another factor that influences the digestibility of fish is the
salting of it. Whether fish is salted dry or in brine, the salt hardens
the fibers and tissues. While the salt acts as a preservative in causing
this hardening, it, at the same time, makes the fish preserved in this
manner a little more difficult to digest. This slight difference need
scarcely be considered so far as the normal adult is concerned, but in
case of children or persons whose digestion is not entirely normal its
effect is likely to be felt.


PURCHASE AND CARE OF FISH


TABLE II

NAMES, SEASONS, AND USES OF FRESH FISH

NAME OF FISH       SEASON                  METHOD OF COOKERY
Bass, black....... All the year........... Fried, baked
Bass, sea......... All the year........... Baked, broiled, fried
Bass, striped..... All the year........... Baked, broiled, fried
Bass, lake........ June 1 to January 1.... Baked, broiled, fried
Bluefish.......... May 1 to November 1.... Baked, broiled
Butterfish........ October 1 to May 1..... Fried, sautéd
Carp.............. July 1 to November 1... Baked, broiled, fried
Catfish........... All the year........... Fried, sautéd
Codfish........... All the year........... Boiled, fried, sautéd,
                                             baked, broiled
Eels.............. All the year........... Fried, boiled, baked
Flounder.......... All the year........... Sautéd, fried, baked
Haddock........... All the year........... Steamed, boiled, fried
Halibut........... All the year........... Boiled, fried, creamed
Herring........... October 1 to May 1..... Sautéd, fried, broiled
Kingfish.......... May 1 to November 1.... Boiled, steamed, baked
Mackerel.......... April 1 to October 1... Baked, broiled,
                                             boiled, fried
Perch, fresh...... September 1 to June 1.. Fried, broiled
  water
Pike, or.......... June 1 to January 1.... Fried, broiled, baked
  pickerel, fresh
  water
Porgies, salt..... June 15 to October 15.. Fried, sautéd
  water
Red snapper....... October 1 to April 1... Boiled, steamed
Salmon, Kennebec.. June 1 to October 1.... Broiled, baked, boiled
Salmon, Oregon.... October 1 to June 1.... Broiled, baked, boiled
Shad.............. January 1 to June 1.... Baked, broiled, fried
Shad roe.......... January 1 to June 1.... Broiled, fried
Sheepshead........ June 1 to September 15. Boiled, fried
Smelts............ August 15 to April 15.. Fried, sautéd
Sole, English..... November 1 to May 1.... Baked, broiled, fried
Sunfish........... May 1 to December 1.... Fried, sautéd
Trout, fresh...... April 1 to September 1. Baked, broiled, fried,
  water                                      boiled, sautéd
Weakfish, or...... May 15 to October 15... Baked, broiled
  sea trout
Whitebait......... May 1 to April 1....... Fried, sautéd
Whitefish,........ November 1 to March 1.. Baked, fried, sautéd,
  fresh water                                broiled

19. PURCHASE OF FISH.--The housewife has much to do with the market
price of fish and the varieties that are offered for sale, for these are
governed by the demand created by her. The fisherman's catch depends on
weather conditions, the season, and other uncertain factors. If the
kinds of fish he secures are not what the housewife demands, they either
will not be sent to market or will go begging on the market for want of
purchasers. Such a state of affairs should not exist, and it would not
if every housewife were to buy the kind of fish that is plentiful in her
home market. So that she may become familiar with the varieties that the
market affords, she should carefully study Tables II and III, which give
the names, seasons, and uses of both fresh fish and salt and smoked
fish. With the information given in these tables well in mind, she will
be able not only to select the kind she wants, but to cooperate better
with dealers.

TABLE III

NAMES, SEASONS, AND USES OF SALT AND SMOKED FISH

NAME OF FISH        SEASON         METHOD OF COOKERY

                     SALT FISH

Anchovies........ All the year.. Served as a relish, stuffed
                                   with various highly
                                   seasoned mixtures, used
                                   as flavor for sauce

Codfish, dried... All the year.. Creamed, balls

Herring, pickled. All the year.. Sautéd

Mackerel......... All the year.. Broiled, fried, sautéd

Salmon, salt..... All the year.. Fried, broiled, boiled

                    SMOKED FISH

Haddock, or...... October 15 to. Broiled, baked, creamed
  finnan haddie     April 1

Halibut.......... October 1 to.. Baked, broiled, fried
                    April 1
Herring.......... All the year.. Served as a relish
                                   without cooking

Mackerel......... October 1 to.. Baked, boiled, fried
                    November 1

Smoked salmon.... All the year.. Baked, boiled, fried

Shad............. October 1 to.. Baked, boiled, fried
                    May 1

Sturgeon......... October 1 to.. Baked, boiled, fried
                    May 1

Whitefish........ October 1 to.. Baked, boiled, fried
                    May 1

[Illustration: FIG. 1]

20. Another point to be considered in the purchase of fish is the size.
Some fish, such as halibut and salmon, are so large that they must
usually be cut into slices or steaks to permit the housewife to purchase
the quantity she requires for immediate use. Other fish are of such size
that one is sufficient for a meal, and others are so small that several
must be purchased to meet the requirements. An idea or the difference in
the size of fish can be gained from Figs. 1 and 2. The larger fish in
Fig. 1 is a medium-sized whitefish and the smaller one is a smelt. Fish
about the size of smelts lend themselves readily to frying and sautéing,
whereas the larger kinds, like whitefish, may be prepared to better
advantage by baking either with or without suitable stuffing. The larger
fish in Fig. 2 is a carp and the smaller one is a pike. Much use is made
of pike, but carp has been more shunned than sought after. However, when
carp is properly cooked, it is a very palatable food, and, besides, it
possesses high food value.

[Illustration: FIG. 3]

21. In the purchase of fish, the housewife, provided she is not obliged
to have fish for a particular day, will do well also to get away from
the one-day-a-week purchasing of fish; that is, if she is not obliged to
serve fish on Friday, she should endeavor to serve it on some other day.
Even twice a week is not too often. If such a plan were followed out,
fishermen would be able to market their catch when it is procured and
the waste of fish or the necessity for keeping it until a particular day
would be overcome.

22. Another way in which the housewife can help herself in the selection
of fish is to become familiar with all the varieties of edible fish
caught in or near her community. When she has done this, it will be a
splendid plan for her to give those with which she is unfamiliar a
trial. She will be surprised at the many excellent varieties that are
obtained in her locality and consequently come to her fresher than fish
that has to be shipped long distances.

23. FRESHNESS OF FISH.--In the purchase of fish, the housewife should
not permit herself to be influenced by any prejudice she may have as to
the name or the appearance of the fish. However, too much attention
cannot be paid to its freshness.

Several tests can be applied to fish to determine whether or not it is
fresh; therefore, when a housewife is in doubt, she should make an
effort to apply them. Fish should not give off any offensive odor. The
eyes should be bright and clear, not dull nor sunken. The gills should
have a bright-red color, and there should be no blubber showing. The
flesh should be so firm that no dent will be made when it is touched
with the finger. Fish may also be tested for freshness by placing it in
a pan of water; if it sinks, it may be known to be fresh, but if it
floats it is not fit for use.

24. CARE OF FISH IN THE HOME.--If fish is purchased in good condition,
and every effort should be made to see that it is, the responsibility of
its care in the home until it is presented to the family as a cooked
dish rests on the housewife. If, upon reaching the housewife, it has not
been cleaned, it should be cleaned at once. In case it has been cleaned
either by the fish dealer or the housewife and cannot be cooked at once,
it should be looked over carefully, immediately washed in cold water,
salted slightly inside and out, placed in a covered enamel or porcelain
dish, and then put where it will keep as cold as possible. If a
refrigerator is used, the fish should be put in the compartment from
which odors cannot be carried to foods in the other compartments. In
cold weather, an excellent plan is to put the fish out of doors instead
of in the refrigerator, for there it will remain sufficiently cold
without the use of ice. However, the best and safest way is to cook the
fish at once, so that storing it for any length of time after its
delivery will not be necessary.

Salt and smoked fish do not, of course, require the same care as fresh
fish. However, as many of these varieties are strong in flavor, it is
well to weaken their flavor before cooking them by soaking them or, if
possible, by parboiling them.


PREPARATION OF FISH FOR COOKING

25. CLEANING FISH.--Fish is usually prepared for cooking at the market
where it is purchased, but frequently a fish comes into the home just as
it has been caught. In order to prepare such a fish properly for
cooking, the housewife must understand how to clean it. The various
steps in cleaning fish are illustrated in Figs. 3 to 6. The first step
consists in removing the scales. To do this, place the fish on its side,
as shown in Fig. 3, grasp it firmly by the tail, and [Illustration: FIG.
3] then with the cutting edge of a knife, preferably a dull one, scrape
off the scales by quick motions of the knife toward the head of the
fish. When one side has been scraped clean, or _scaled_, as this
operation is called, turn the fish over and scale the other side.

[Illustration: FIG. 4]

With the fish scaled, proceed to remove the entrails. As shown in Fig.
4, cut a slit in the belly from the head end to the vent, using a sharp
knife. Run the opening up well toward the head, as Fig. 5 shows, and
then through the opening formed draw out the entrails with the fingers.

[Illustration: FIG. 5]

[Illustration: FIG. 6]

If the head is to be removed, it should be cut off at this time. When a
fish is to be baked or prepared in some other way in which the head may
be retained, it is allowed to remain on, but it is kept more for an
ornament than for any other reason. To remove the head, slip a sharp
knife under the gills as far as possible, as Fig. 6 shows, and then cut
it off in such a way as not to remove with it any of the body of
the fish.

Whether the head is removed or not, make sure that the cavity formed by
taking out the entrails is perfectly clean. Then wash the fish with cold
water and, if desired, cut off the fins and tail, although this is not
usually done. The fish, which is now properly prepared, may be cooked at
once or placed in the refrigerator until time for cooking.

[Illustration: FIG. 7]

26. BONING FISH.--In the preparation of some kinds of fish, it is often
desired to bone the fish; that is, to remove the backbone and the ribs.
Figs. 7 to 10 show the various steps in the process of boning. After the
fish has been thoroughly cleaned, insert a sharp-pointed knife in the
back where it is cut from the head, as shown in Fig. 7, and loosen the
backbone at this place. Then, as in Fig. 8, slip the knife along the
ribs away from the backbone on both sides. After getting the bone well
loosened at the end, cut it from the flesh all the way down to the tail,
as shown in Fig. 9. When thus separated from the flesh, the backbone and
the ribs, which comprise practically all the bones in a fish, may be
lifted out intact, as is shown in Fig. 10.

[Illustration: FIG. 8]

[Illustration: FIG. 9]

27. SKINNING FISH.--Some kinds of fish, especially those having no
scales, such as flounder, catfish, and eels, are made more palatable by
being skinned. To skin a fish, cut a narrow strip of the skin along the
spine from the head to the tail, as shown in Fig. 11. At this opening,
loosen the skin on one side where it is fastened to the bony part of the
fish and then, as in Fig. 12, draw it off around toward the belly,
working carefully so as not to tear the flesh. Sometimes it is a good
plan to use a knife for this purpose, working the skin loose from the
flesh with the knife and at the same time pulling the skin with the
other hand. After removing the skin from one side, turn the fish and
take off the skin from the other side in the same way. Care should be
taken to clean the fish properly before attempting to skin it. If the
fish is frozen, it should first be thawed in cold water.

[Illustration: FIG. 10]

[Illustration: FIG. 11]

28. FILLETING FISH.--As many recipes require fish to be cut into
_fillets_, that is, thick, flat slices from which the bone is removed,
it is well for the housewife to understand just how to accomplish this
part of the preparation. Figs. 13 to 15 show the filleting of a
flounder. While this process varies somewhat in the different varieties
of fish, the usual steps are the ones here outlined. After thoroughly
cleaning the flounder and removing the skin, lay the fish out flat and
cut the flesh down through the center from the head end to the tail, as
shown in Fig. 13. Then, with a knife, work each half of the flesh loose
from the bones, as in Fig. 14. With these two pieces removed, turn the
fish over, cut the flesh down through the center, and separate it from
the bones in the same manner as before. If a meat board is on hand, it
is a good plan to place the fish on such a board before removing the
flesh. At the end of the filleting process, the flounder should appear
as shown in Fig. 15, the long, narrow strips on the right being the
flesh and that remaining on the board being the bones intact. The strips
thus produced may be cut into pieces of any preferred size.

[Illustration: FIG. 12]

[Illustration: FIG. 13]

       *       *       *       *       *

RECIPES FOR FISH AND FISH ACCOMPANIMENTS

METHODS OF COOKING FISH

29. As Tables II and III show, practically all methods of cookery are
applicable in the cooking of fish. For instance, fish may be boiled,
steamed, baked, fried, broiled, sautéd, and, in addition, used for
various kinds of bisques, chowders, and numerous other made dishes. The
effect of these different methods is exactly the same on fish as on
meat, since the two foods are the same in general construction. The
cookery method to select depends largely on the size, kind, quality, and
flavor of the fish. Just as an old chicken with well-developed muscles
is not suitable for broiling, so a very large fish should not be broiled
unless it can be cut into slices, steaks, or thin pieces. Cook cutting
fish with knife. Such a fish is usually either stuffed and baked or
baked without stuffing, but when it is cut into slices, the slices may
be sautéd, fried, broiled, or steamed.

[Illustration: FIG. 14]

[Illustration: FIG. 15 Fish on cutting board]

Some varieties of fish are more or less tasteless. These should be
prepared by a cookery method that will improve their flavor, or if the
cooking fails to add flavor, a highly seasoned or highly flavored sauce
should be served with them. The acid of vinegar or lemon seems to assist
in bringing out the flavor of fish, so when a sauce is not used, a slice
of lemon is often served with the fish.


RECIPES FOR FISH SAUCES AND STUFFINGS

30. As many of the recipes for fish call for sauce and stuffing, recipes
for these accompaniments are taken up before the methods of cooking fish
are considered. This plan will make it possible for the beginner to
become thoroughly familiar with these accompaniments and thus be better
prepared to carry out the recipes for cooking fish.

31. SAUCES FOR FISH.--Sauces are generally served with fish to improve
their flavor and increase their nutritive value. Some kinds of fish,
such as salmon, shad, butterfish, Spanish mackerel, etc., contain more
than 6 per cent. of fat, but as many of the fish that are used for food
contain less than this, they are somewhat dry and are improved
considerably by the addition of a well-seasoned and highly flavored
sauce. Then, too, some fish contain very few extractives, which, when
present, as has been learned, are the source of flavor in food. As some
of the methods of cooking, boiling in particular, dissolve the few
extractives that fish contain and cause the loss of much of the
nutritive material, it becomes almost necessary to serve a sauce with
fish so prepared, if a tasty dish is to be the result.

32. The sauces that may be used with fish are numerous, and the one to
select depends somewhat on the cookery method employed and the
preference of those to whom the fish is served. Among the recipes that
follow will be found sauces suitable for any method that may be used in
the preparation of fish. A little experience with them will enable the
housewife to determine the ones that are most satisfactory as to both
flavor and nutritive value for the different varieties of fish she uses
and the methods of cookery she employs.

LEMON CREAM SAUCE

2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1 c. thin cream
Salt and pepper
Juice of 1 lemon or 1 Tb. vinegar

Melt the butter in a saucepan, stir in the flour, and continue stirring
until the two are well mixed. Add to this the thin cream and stir until
the mixture is thick and boils. Season with salt, pepper, and the juice
of the lemon or the vinegar.

SPANISH SAUCE

2 Tb. butter
1 slice of onion
2 Tb. flour
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1 c. milk
1/4 c. tomato purée
1/4 c. chopped pimiento

Brown the butter with the onion, add the flour, salt, and pepper, and
stir until well blended. Add the milk and allow the mixture to cook
until it thickens. To this add the tomato and pimiento. Heat thoroughly
and serve.

NUT SAUCE

1 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
2 Tb. peanut butter
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1 c. meat stock

Melt the butter and add the flour and peanut butter. When they are well
mixed, allow them to brown slightly. Add the salt and pepper to this
mixture and pour into it the meat stock. Bring to the boiling point
and serve.

HORSERADISH SAUCE

1/2 c. cream
1/4 c. boiled salad dressing
2 Tb. grated horseradish
1/2 tsp. salt
1/4  tsp. paprika
1/4 tsp. mustard

Whip the cream until stiff; then add the salad dressing, horseradish,
salt, paprika, and mustard. When well blended, the sauce is ready
to serve.

EGG SAUCE

2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
3/4 c. milk
/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
2 Tb. vinegar
1 egg
1 Tb. chopped parsley

Melt the butter, add the flour, and stir until well blended. Add the
milk, salt, and pepper, and cook until the mixture thickens. To this add
the vinegar, the egg chopped fine, and the chopped parsley. Heat
thoroughly and serve.

TOMATO SAUCE

2 c. tomato purée
1 small onion, sliced
1 bay leaf
6 cloves
2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper

Strain stewed tomato to make the purée. Put this over the fire in a
saucepan with the sliced onion, the bay leaf, and the cloves. Cook
slowly for about 10 minutes. Strain to remove the onion, bay leaf, and
cloves. Melt the butter, add the flour, salt, and pepper, and into this
pour the hot tomato. Cook until it thickens and serve.

MUSHROOM SAUCE

2 Tb. butter
1 slice of carrot
1 slice of onion
Sprig of parsley
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
2 Tb. flour
1 c. meat stock
1/2 c. mushrooms
2 tsp. lemon juice

Put the butter in a frying pan with the carrot, onion, parsley, salt,
and pepper, and cook together until brown. Remove the onion, carrot, and
parsley. Stir in the flour, brown it slightly, and then add the meat
stock. Cook together until thickened. Just before removing from the
fire, add the mushrooms, chopped into fine pieces, and the lemon juice.
Allow it to heat thoroughly and then serve.

DRAWN-BUTTER SAUCE

1/4 c. butter
2 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1-1/2 c. hot water
2 hard-cooked eggs

Melt the butter, and add the flour, salt, and pepper. Pour into this the
hot water, and cook until the mixture thickens. Slice the eggs into
1/4-inch slices and add these to the sauce just before removing from
the stove.

33. STUFFING FOR FISH.--As has been mentioned, fish that is to be baked
is often stuffed before it is put into the oven. The stuffing not only
helps to preserve the shape of the fish, but also provides a means of
extending the flavor of the fish to a starchy food, for bread or cracker
crumbs are used in the preparation of most stuffings. Three recipes for
fish stuffing are here given, the first being made of bread crumbs and
having hot water for the liquid, the second of cracker crumbs and having
milk for the liquid, and the third of bread crumbs and having stewed
tomato for the liquid.

FISH STUFFING No. 1

1/4 c. butter
1/2 c. hot water
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1 tsp. onion juice
1 Tb. chopped parsley
2 c. fine bread crumbs

Melt the butter in the hot water, add the salt, pepper, onion juice, and
parsley, and pour over the crumbs. Mix thoroughly and use to stuff
the fish.

FISH STUFFING No. 2

1/2 c. milk
2 c. cracker crumbs
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1/4 c. melted butter
1 Tb. chopped parsley
1 egg

Warm the milk and add it to the crumbs, together with the salt, pepper,
melted butter, and parsley. To this mixture, add the beaten egg. When
well mixed, use as stuffing for fish.

FISH STUFFING No. 3

2 Tb. butter
1 Tb. finely chopped onion
1 Tb. chopped parsley
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1 Tb. chopped sour pickles
1/2 c. stewed tomato
2 c. stale bread crumbs

Melt the butter and add the onion, parsley, salt, pepper, pickles, and
tomato. Pour this mixture over the crumbs, mix all thoroughly, and use
to stuff the fish. If the dressing seems to require more liquid than the
stewed tomato, add a little water.


RECIPES FOR FRESH FISH

34. BOILED FISH.--Boiling extracts flavor and, to some extent, nutriment
from the food to which this cookery method is applied. Therefore, unless
the fish to be cooked is one that has a very strong flavor and that will
be improved by the loss of flavor, it should not be boiled. Much care
should be exercised in boiling fish, because the meat is usually so
tender that it is likely to boil to pieces or to fall apart.

[Illustration: FIG. 16]

35. A utensil in which fish can be boiled or steamed very satisfactorily
is shown in Fig. 16. This _fish boiler_, as it is called, is a long,
narrow, deep pan with a cover and a rack on which the fish is placed.
Attached to each end of the rack is an upright strip, or handle, that
permits the rack containing the fish to be lifted out of the pan and the
fish thus removed without breaking. To assist further in holding the
fish together while it is cooking, a piece of gauze or cheesecloth may
be wrapped around the fish before it is put into the pan.

36. When a fish is to be boiled, clean it and, if desired, remove the
head. Pour sufficient boiling water to cover the fish well into the
vessel in which it is to be cooked, and add salt in the proportion of 1
teaspoonful to each quart of water. Tie the fish in a strip of
cheesecloth or gauze if necessary, and lower it into the vessel of
slowly boiling water. Allow the fish to boil until it may be easily
pierced with a fork; then take it out of the water and remove the cloth,
provided one is used. Serve with a well-seasoned sauce, such as lemon
cream, horseradish, etc.

37. BOILED COD.--A fish that lends itself well to boiling is fresh cod.
In fact, codfish prepared according to this method and served with a
sauce makes a very appetizing dish.

Scale, clean, and skin a fresh cod and wrap it in a single layer of
gauze or cheesecloth. Place it in a kettle or a pan of freshly boiling
water to which has been added 1 teaspoonful of salt to each quart of
water. Boil until the fish may be easily pierced with a fork, take from
the water, and remove the gauze or cheesecloth carefully so as to keep
the fish intact. Serve with sauce and slices of lemon.

38. STEAMED FISH.--The preparation of fish by steaming is practically
the same as that by boiling, and produces a dish similar to boiled fish.
The only difference is that steamed fish is suspended over the water and
is cooked by the steam that rises instead of being cooked directly in
the water. Because the fish is not surrounded by water, it does not lose
its nutriment and flavor so readily as does boiled fish.

If fish is to be cooked by steaming, first clean it thoroughly. Wrap in
a strip of gauze or cheesecloth and place in a steamer. Steam until
tender, and then remove the cloth and place the fish on a platter. As
steaming does not add flavor, it is usually necessary to supply flavor
to fish cooked in this way by adding a sauce of some kind.

39. BROILED FISH.--The best way in which to cook small fish, thin strips
of fish, or even good-sized fish that are comparatively thin when they
are split open is to broil them. Since in this method of cooking the
flavor is entirely retained, it is especially desirable for any fish of
delicate flavor.

To broil fish, sear them quickly over a very hot fire and then cook them
more slowly until they are done, turning frequently to prevent burning.
As most fish, and particularly the small ones used for broiling, contain
almost no fat, it is necessary to supply fat for successful broiling and
improvement of flavor. It is difficult to add fat to the fish while it
is broiling, so, as a rule, the fat is spread over the surface of the
fish after it has been removed from the broiler. The fat may consist of
broiled strips of bacon or salt pork, or it may be merely melted butter
or other fat.

40. BROILED SCROD WITH POTATO BORDER.--Young cod that is split down the
back and that has had the backbone removed with the exception of a small
portion near the tail is known as _scrod_. Such fish is nearly always
broiled, it may be served plain, but it is much more attractive when
potatoes are combined with it in the form of an artistic border.

To prepare this dish, broil the scrod according to the directions given
in Art. 39. Then place it on a hot platter and spread butter over it.
Boil the desired number of potatoes until they are tender, and then
force them through a ricer or mash them until they are perfectly fine.
Season with salt, pepper, and butter, and add sufficient milk to make a
paste that is a trifle stiffer than for mashed potatoes. If desired, raw
eggs may also be beaten into the potatoes to serve as a part of the
moisture. Fill a pastry bag with the potatoes thus prepared and press
them through a rosette tube in any desired design on the platter around
the fish. Bake in a hot oven until the potatoes are thoroughly heated
and are browned slightly on the top.

41. BROILED FRESH MACKEREL.--Probably no fish lends itself better to
broiling than fresh mackerel, as the flesh of this fish is tender and
contains sufficient fat to have a good flavor. To improve the flavor,
however, strips of bacon are usually placed over the fish and allowed to
broil with it.

Clean and skin a fresh mackerel. Place the fish thus prepared in a
broiler, and broil first on one side and then on the other. When seared
all over, place strips of bacon over the fish and continue to broil
until it is done. Remove from the broiler, season with salt and pepper,
and serve.

42. BROILED SHAD ROE.--The mass of eggs found in shad, as shown in Fig.
17, is known as the _roe_ of shad. Roe may be purchased separately, when
it is found in the markets from January 1 to June 1, or it may be
procured from the fish itself. It makes a delicious dish when broiled,
especially when it is rolled in fat and bread crumbs.

[Illustration: FIG. 17]

Wash the roe that is to be used and dry it carefully between towels.
Roll it in bacon fat or melted butter and then in fine crumbs. Place in
a broiler, broil until completely done on one side, turn and then broil
until entirely cooked on the other side. Remove from the broiler and
pour melted butter over each piece. Sprinkle with salt and pepper, and
serve hot.

[Illustration: FIG. 18]

43. BAKED FISH.--Good-sized fish, that is, fish weighing 4 or 5 pounds,
are usually baked. When prepared by this method, fish are very
satisfactory if they are spread out on a pan, flesh side up, and baked
in a very hot oven with sufficient fat to flavor them well. A fish of
large size, however, is especially delicious if its cavity is filled
with a stuffing before it is baked.

When a fish is to be stuffed, any desired stuffing is prepared and then
filled into the fish in the manner shown in Fig. 18. With the cavity
well filled, the edges of the fish are drawn together over the stuffing
and sewed with a coarse needle and thread, as Fig. 19 shows.

Whether the fish is stuffed or not, the same principles apply in its
baking as apply in the roasting of meat; that is, the heat of a quick,
hot oven sears the flesh, keeps in the juices, and prevents the loss of
flavor, while that of a slow oven causes the loss of much of the flavor
and moisture and produces a less tender dish.

[Illustration: FIG. 19]

44. Often, in the baking of fish, it is necessary to add fat. This may
be done by putting fat of some kind into the pan with the fish, by
spreading strips of bacon over the fish, or by larding it. In the dry
varieties of fish, larding, which is illustrated in Fig. 20, proves very
satisfactory, for it supplies the substance in which the fish is most
lacking. As will be observed, larding is done by inserting strips of
bacon or salt pork that are about 3 inches long and 1/4 inch thick into
gashes cut into the sides of the fish.

[Illustration: FIG. 20]

45. BAKED HADDOCK.--As haddock is a good-sized fish, it is an especially
suitable one for baking. However, it is a dry fish, so fat should be
added to it to improve its flavor. Any of the methods suggested in Art.
44 may be used to supply the fat that this fish needs.

When haddock is to be baked, select a 4 or 5-pound fish, clean it
thoroughly, boning it if desired, and sprinkle it inside and out with
salt. Fill the cavity with any desired stuffing and sew up. Place in a
dripping pan, and add some bacon fat or a piece of salt pork, or place
several slices of bacon around it. Bake in a hot oven for about 1 hour.
After it has been in the oven for about 15 minutes, baste with the fat
that will be found in the bottom of the pan and continue to baste every
10 minutes until the fish is done. Remove from the pan to a platter,
garnish with parsley and slices of broiled bacon, and serve with any
desired sauce.

46. BAKED HALIBUT.--Because of its size, halibut is cut into slices and
sold in the form of steaks. It is probably one of the most economical
varieties of fish to buy, for very little bone is contained in a slice
and the money that the housewife expends goes for almost solid meat.
Halibut slices are often sautéd, but they make a delicious dish when
baked with tomatoes and flavored with onion, lemon, and bay leaf, as
described in the accompanying recipe.

BAKED HALIBUT
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 c. tomatoes
Few slices onion
1 bay leaf
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
2 thin slices bacon
1 Tb. flour
2 lb. halibut steak

Heat the tomatoes, onion, and bay leaf in water. Add the salt and pepper
and cook for a few minutes. Cut the bacon into small squares, try it out
in a pan, and into this fat stir the flour. Pour this into the hot
mixture, remove the bay leaf, and cook until the mixture thickens. Put
the steaks into a baking dish, pour the sauce over them, and bake in a
slow oven for about 45 minutes. Remove with the sauce to a hot platter
and serve.

47. BAKED FILLETS OF WHITEFISH.--When whitefish of medium size can be
secured, it is very often stuffed and baked whole, but variety can be
had by cutting it into fillets before baking it. Besides producing a
delicious dish, this method of preparation eliminates carving at the
table, for the pieces can be cut the desired size for serving.

Prepare fillets of whitefish according to the directions for filleting
fish in Art. 28. Sprinkle each one with salt and pepper, and dip it
first into beaten egg and then into bread crumbs. Brown some butter in a
pan, place the fish into it, and set the pan in a hot oven. Bake until
the fillets are a light brown, or about 30 minutes. Remove to a hot
dish, garnish with parsley and serve with any desired sauce.

[Illustration: FIG. 21]

48. FILLET OF FLOUNDER.--In appearance, flounder is not so attractive as
many other fish, but it is a source of excellent flesh and is therefore
much used. A very appetizing way in which to prepare flounder is to
fillet it and prepare it according to the accompanying recipe, when it
will appear as in Fig. 21.

Secure a flounder and fillet it in the manner explained in Art. 28. Cut
each fillet into halves, making eight pieces from one flounder. Cut
small strips of salt pork or bacon, roll the pieces of flounder around
these, and fasten with a toothpick. Place in a baking dish with a small
quantity of water, and bake in a hot oven until a good brown. Serve hot.

[Illustration: FIG. 22]

49. PLANKED FISH.--Like planked steak, planked fish, which is
illustrated in Fig. 22, is a dish that appeals to the eye and pleases
the taste. The fish is baked on the plank and then surrounded with a
border of potatoes, the fish and potatoes making an excellent food.

To prepare planked fish, thoroughly clean and bone a medium-size
whitefish, shad, haddock, or any desired fish. Grease a plank and place
the fish on it. Lay some strips of bacon across the top of the fish,
place in a hot oven, and bake for about 30 minutes or a little longer if
necessary. Boil potatoes and prepare them for piping by mashing them,
using 4 tablespoonfuls of milk, 1 tablespoonful of butter, and one egg
to each 2 cupfuls of potato. Then, with a rosette pastry tube, pipe a
border of potatoes around the edge of the plank, so that it will appear
as in Fig. 22. Likewise, pipe rosettes of potatoes on the strips of
bacon placed on top of the fish. Then replace the plank with the fish
and potatoes in the oven, and bake until the potatoes are brown. Garnish
with parsley and serve.

50. FRIED FISH.--Very small fish or slices of larger fish are often
fried in deep fat. When they are prepared in this way, they are first
dipped into beaten egg and then into crumbs or corn meal to form a
coating that will cling to their surface. Coated with such a material,
they are fried in deep fat until the surface is nicely browned. After
being removed from the fat, they should be drained well before serving.

51. FRIED PERCH.--When fried in deep fat, perch is found to be very
appetizing. To prepare it in this way, secure a perch and scale and
clean it. Cut it crosswise into 2-inch strips, roll each piece in flour,
and fry in deep fat until nicely browned. Serve hot with lemon or with a
sauce of some kind.

52. FRIED EEL.--If an appetizing way to cook eel is desired, it will be
found advisable to fry it in deep fat. When it is to be cooked in this
way, skin and clean the eel and cut it into thick slices. Pour some
vinegar over the slices, sprinkle them with salt and pepper, and allow
them to stand for several hours. Remove the pieces from the vinegar, dip
each one into slightly beaten egg and then into flour, and fry in deep
fat until well browned. Serve plain or with a sauce.

53. SAUTÉD FISH.--Without doubt, the most popular way to prepare fish is
to sauté them. This method may be applied to practically the same kinds
of fish that are fried or broiled, and it is especially desirable for
the more tasteless varieties. It consists in browning the fish well in a
small quantity of fat, first on one side and then on the other. If fat
of good flavor is used, such as bacon or ham fat, the flavor of the
fish will be very much improved. Before sautéing, the fish or pieces of
fish are often dipped into slightly beaten egg and then rolled in flour,
very fine cracker crumbs, or corn meal, or the egg is omitted and they
are merely covered with the dry, starchy material. The effect of this
method of cooking is very similar to that of deep-fat frying, except
that the outside tissues are apt to become, very hard from the
application of the hot fat because of the coating that is generally
used. Since most fish breaks very easily, it is necessary that it be
handled carefully in this method in order that the pieces may be
kept whole.

[Illustration: FIG. 23]

54. SAUTÉD SMELTS.--To be most satisfactory, smelts are generally
sautéd, as shown in Fig. 23. Fish of this kind are prepared for cooking
by cutting off the heads and removing the entrails through the opening
thus made; or, if it is desired to leave the heads on, the entrails may
be removed through the gill or a small slit cut below the mouth. At any
rate, these fish are not cut open as are most other fish.

With the fish thus prepared, roll them in fine cracker crumbs and sauté
them in melted butter until they are nicely browned. Serve with
slices of lemon.

55. SAUTÉD HALIBUT STEAK.--Slices of halibut, when firm in texture and
cut about 3/4 inch thick, lend themselves very well to sautéing. Secure
the required number of such slices and sprinkle each with salt and
pepper. Then spread melted butter over each steak, and roll it in fine
crumbs. Place fat in a frying pan, allow it to become hot, and sauté the
halibut in this until well browned.

56. SAUTÉD PICKEREL.--A variety of fresh-water fish that finds favor
with most persons is pickerel. When this fish is to be sautéd, scale
and clean it and cut it crosswise into 2-inch strips. Then roll each
piece in flour, sprinkle it with salt and pepper, and sauté the slices
in hot fat. When one side is sufficiently brown, turn and brown on the
other side.

57. STEWED FISH.--Like boiling, stewing extracts flavor and nutriment
from fish. The process differs, however, in that the fish is cooked
gently by simmering. This cookery method is employed for fish that is
inclined to be tough. Usually, vegetables, such as carrots and onions,
are cooked with the fish in order to impart flavor. To prevent the fish
from falling apart, it may be wrapped in cheesecloth or gauze.

58. STEWED FRESH HERRING.--When fresh herring can be obtained, it can be
made into a delicious dish by stewing it with onions, parsley, and
carrots. In this method of preparation, the herring should not be
permitted to stew rapidly; it will become more tender if it simmers
gently. As herring are rather small fish, weighing only about 1/2 pound,
it will usually be necessary to obtain more than one for a meal.

Clean the required number of fresh herring, place them in a saucepan,
and sprinkle them with salt and pepper. Brown some slices of onion in
butter, and add the same number of slices of carrots and a generous
quantity of parsley. Add enough boiling water to these vegetables to
cover them and the fish, and pour both over the fish. Place all on the
fire and simmer gently until the fish is tender. Remove the fish from
the water and serve. The vegetables are used merely to add flavor, and
they will have practically boiled away by the time the fish is cooked.

59. STEWED EEL.--Eel is delicious when stewed. When allowed to simmer
slowly with several slices of onion and a little parsley, it becomes
both tasty and tender.

Skin and clean the eel that is to be stewed, remove all the fat, and cut
into pieces about 2 inches long. Season well with salt and pepper and
place in a saucepan with several slices of onion, 1 tablespoonful of
chopped parsley, and 2 tablespoonfuls of butter. Add enough cold water
to cover well, and allow the eel to simmer gently until it is tender
enough to be pierced with a fork. Remove from the water and serve hot.


RECIPES FOR SALT AND SMOKED FISH

60. PLACE OF SALT AND SMOKED FISH IN THE DIET.--In regions where fresh
fish cannot be obtained or in seasons when they are scarce everywhere,
the housewife will do well to use salt and smoked fish. These varieties
of fish not only will give her a chance to vary the diet, but will
enable her to provide at a more economical price, food that, pound for
pound, contains more nutriment than the same fish when fresh. While some
of the varieties of smoked and salt fish may not be obtainable in all
communities, the housewife will do much toward bringing the supply to
her community by requesting them from the dealer. When a dealer knows
that there is a demand for certain kinds, he will make an effort to
secure the varieties wanted.

61. FRESHENING SALT AND SMOKED FISH.--The cooking of salt and smoked
fish is not a difficult matter, but it always involves the freshening of
the fish before any cooking method can be applied. This consists in
placing the fish in a large quantity of water and allowing it to stand
until enough of the salt has been extracted to suit the taste. Some
kinds of fish are so salty that they require considerable soaking,
whereas others require only a little freshening. However, it is usually
advisable to change the water several times. If it is desired to hasten
the extraction of the salt, the fish should be raised above the bottom
of the vessel by means of a wire rack or several clean sticks. In the
case of very thick fish, several gashes may be cut into the flesh to
permit the salt to pass out more readily.

62. CREAMED CODFISH.--Since codfish is a rather dry fish, containing
little fat, it is usually combined with some other food to make it more
appetizing. In the case of creamed codfish, the cream sauce supplies the
food substances in which the fish is lacking and at the same time
provides a very palatable dish. When codfish is prepared in this way,
boiled potatoes are usually served with it.

To make creamed codfish, freshen the required amount of codfish by
pouring lukewarm water over it. Shred the fish by breaking it into small
pieces with the fingers. Pour off the water, add fresh warm water, and
allow the fish to stand until it is not too salty. When it is
sufficiently freshened, drain off all the water. Melt a little butter in
a frying pan, add the fish, and sauté until slightly browned. Make a
medium white sauce and pour it over the codfish. Serve hot with
boiled potatoes.

63. CODFISH BALLS.--Another excellent way in which to serve codfish is
to combine it with mashed potatoes, make these into balls, and fry them
in deep fat. These give variety to meals and also afford an opportunity
to serve a nutritious food.

Freshen the codfish as explained in Art. 61, and then mince it very
fine. Add an equal amount of freshly cooked hot potato that has been put
through a potato ricer or mashed fine. Mix thoroughly and, if necessary,
season with salt and pepper. Shape into balls and fry in deep fat. Drain
well and serve hot.

64. SAUTÉD SALT MACKEREL.--When an extremely tasty dish that will afford
a change from the usual daily routine of meals is desired, sautéd salt
mackerel will be found very satisfactory.

Freshen salt mackerel that is to be sautéd by putting it into a saucepan
and covering it with cold water. Place this over the fire, and allow the
water to heat to almost the boiling point. Pour off the water, and sauté
the fish in butter or other fat until nicely browned. If desired, pour a
small amount of thin cream over the mackerel just before removing it
from the pan, allow this to heat, and serve it as a sauce with
the mackerel.

65. BAKED FINNAN HADDIE.--When haddock is cured by smoking, it is known
as _finnan haddie_. As fish of this kind has considerable thick flesh,
it is very good for baking. Other methods of cookery may, of course, be
applied to it, but none is more satisfactory than baking.

To bake a finnan haddie, wash it in warm water and put it to soak in
fresh warm water. After it has soaked for 1/2 hour, allow it to come
gradually to nearly the boiling point and then pour off the water. Place
the fish in a baking pan, add a piece of butter, sprinkle with pepper,
and pour a little water over it. Bake in a hot oven until it is nicely
browned. Serve hot.

66. CREAMED FINNAN HADDIE.--The flavor of finnan haddie is such that
this fish becomes very appetizing when prepared with a cream sauce. If,
after combining the sauce with the fish, the fish is baked in the oven,
an especially palatable dish is the result.

To prepare creamed finnan haddie, freshen the fish and shred it into
small pieces. Then measure the fish, put it into a baking dish, and
pour an equal amount of white sauce over it. Sprinkle generously with
crumbs and bake in a hot oven until the crumbs are browned. Serve hot.

67. BOILED SALMON.--When smoked salmon can be secured, it makes a
splendid fish for boiling. If it is cooked until tender and then served
with a well-seasoned sauce, it will find favor with most persons.

Freshen smoked salmon in warm water as much as seems necessary,
remembering that the cooking to which it will be subjected will remove a
large amount of the superfluous salt. Cover the salmon with hot water,
and simmer slowly until it becomes tender. Remove from the water, pour a
little melted butter over it, and serve with any desired sauce.


RECIPES FOR CANNED FISH

68. CANNED FISH IN THE DIET.--As a rule, canned fish is a comparatively
cheap food and there is no reason why the economical housewife should
not make frequent use of the various kinds. It should be bought,
however, from a reputable firm, in order that the greatest value may be
obtained for the money spent. In addition, it should be used as soon as
possible after the can has been opened; if all of it cannot be utilized
at one time, it should be placed in a covered receptacle--not a metal
one--and kept cold to prevent it from spoiling. Often canned fish can be
served without any further preparation than removing it from the can.
However, as some varieties, particularly salmon and tuna fish, are much
used in the preparation of both cold and cooked dishes, several recipes
are here given for these varieties.

69. CREAMED TUNA FISH.--Combining tuna fish with a cream sauce and
serving it over toast makes a dish that is both delicate and
palatable--one that will prove very satisfactory when something to take
the place of meat in a light meal is desired.

CREAMED TUNA FISH
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

3 Tb. butter
3 Tb. flour
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1/8 tsp. paprika
1-1/2 c. hot milk
1-1/2 c. tuna fish
1 egg

Melt the butter in a saucepan and add the flour, salt, pepper, and
paprika. Stir well, pour in the milk, and when this has thickened add
the tuna fish. Allow this to heat thoroughly in the sauce. Just before
serving, add the slightly beaten egg and cook until this has thickened.
Pour over toast and serve.

70. SALMON MOLD.--A change from the usual way of serving salmon can be
had by making a salmon mold such as is illustrated in Fig. 24. Besides
being a delicious dish and providing variety in the diet, salmon mold is
very attractive.

SALMON MOLD
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 c. salmon
2 Tb. vinegar
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
1 Tb. gelatine
1-1/2 c. boiling water

[Illustration: FIG. 24]

Remove all skin and bones from the salmon when it is taken from the can,
and mince it thoroughly with a fork. Add the vinegar, salt, and pepper.
Prepare the gelatine by dissolving it in the boiling water. Add the
seasoned salmon to the prepared gelatine. With cold water, wet a
ring-shaped mold having an open space in the center. Pour the
salmon-and-gelatine mixture into this mold, and allow it to stand until
it solidifies. Arrange a bed of lettuce leaves on a chop plate, turn the
mold out on this, and fill the center with dressing. Serve at once. A
very desirable dressing for this purpose is made as follows:

DRESSING FOR SALMON MOLD

1 c. cream
2 Tb. vinegar
1/2 tsp. salt
2 Tb. sugar
1 c. finely chopped cucumber

Whip the cream until it is stiff, and add the vinegar, salt, and sugar.
Fold into this the finely chopped cucumber.

71. SALMON PATTIES.--Delicious patties can be made from salmon by
combining it with bread crumbs and using a thick white sauce to hold the
ingredients together. These may be either sautéd in shallow fat or fried
in deep fat.

SALMON PATTIES
(Sufficient to Serve Eight)

2 c. finely minced salmon
1 c. fresh bread crumbs
1 c. thick white sauce
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
Dry bread crumbs

With the salmon, mix the fresh bread crumbs and the white sauce. Season
with salt and pepper. Shape into round patties, roll in the dry bread
crumbs, and fry in deep fat or sauté in shallow fat. Serve hot with or
without sauce.

72. CREAMED SALMON WITH RICE.--A creamed protein dish is always more
satisfactory if it is served on some other food, particularly one high
in carbohydrate. When this is done, a better balanced dish is the
result. Creamed salmon and rice make a very nutritious and appetizing
combination.

CREAMED SALMON WITH RICE
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 c. salmon
1 c. medium white sauce
Steamed rice

Break the salmon into moderately small pieces and carefully fold these
into the hot white sauce. Serve this on a mound of hot steamed rice.


RECIPES FOR LEFT-OVER FISH

73. So as not to waste any food material, it is necessary that all
left-over fish be utilized in some way. This is not so simple a matter
as in the case of meat, because fish is one of the foods that are not
popular as a left-over dish. Still fish left-overs can be used if a
little thought is given to the matter. Of course, it is a wise plan to
prepare only the quantity of fish that can be consumed at the meal for
which it is cooked, but should any remain it should not be thrown away,
for some use can be made of it. A point to remember, however, is that
fish is not satisfactory in soup of any kind except a fish soup;
therefore, bits of left-over fish may be added to only such soups as
clam chowder or other fish chowder.

Whether the fish has been boiled, steamed, baked, fried, sautéd, or
prepared in any other way, it may always be made into croquettes. When
used for this purpose, all the bones should be carefully removed. These
may be easily taken out after the fish has become cold. If the fish has
been stuffed and part of the stuffing remains, it may be broken into
pieces and used with the flesh of the fish. A recipe for croquettes in
which fish is combined with rice follows.

74. FISH CROQUETTES.--If any quantity of left-over fish is on hand, it
may be combined with rice to make very tasty croquettes.

FISH CROQUETTES
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1-1/2 c. cold fish
1 c. cold steamed rice
1 c. thick white sauce
Salt and pepper
1 egg
Crumbs

Mince the fish into small pieces, mix with the rice, and add the white
sauce. Season with salt and pepper and shape into croquettes. Dip into
slightly beaten egg, roll in crumbs, and fry in deep fat. Drain and
serve with any desired sauce.

75. CREAMED FISH IN POTATO NEST.--Fish may also be combined with mashed
potato to produce a most appetizing dish. Line a baking dish with hot
mashed potato, leaving a good-sized hollow in the center. Into this pour
creamed fish made by mixing equal proportions of left-over cold fish and
white sauce. Season well with salt and pepper, sprinkle with crumbs, and
dot the top with butter. Bake until the crumbs are brown. Serve hot.

       *       *       *       *       *

SHELL FISH

NATURE, VARIETIES, AND USE OF SHELL FISH

76. Besides the varieties of fish that have already been considered, the
general term fish also includes SHELL FISH. Fish of this kind are
different in structure from bony fish, for they are acquatic animals
that are entirely or partly encased in shells. They include _mollusks_,
or _bivalves_, such as oysters, clams, and scallops, and _crustaceans_,
such as lobsters, crabs, and shrimp.

77. The popularity of the edible varieties of mollusks and crustaceans
mentioned depends largely on whether they can be easily obtained and
whether they are pleasing to the local or individual taste. As they are
found in salt rivers, bays, and other shallow salt-water sources, their
greatest use is among people living near the seashore, but they are much
favored where they can be procured in edible condition. They are not so
cheap as many other fish foods; that is, a certain amount of money will
not purchase so great a quantity of shell fish, lobster for instance, as
some of the well-known varieties of fish proper, such as halibut or
whitefish. Lobsters and crabs are usually more expensive than oysters
and clams; consequently, they are used more often to provide a delicacy
or to supply something more or less uncommon for a special meal.

78. Several precautions should be observed in purchasing shell fish. For
instance, crabs and lobsters should be purchased alive. They are usually
shipped on ice so that they will remain in this condition for some time,
and they are displayed on ice in the markets for the same reason. Such
shell fish should be kept alive until they are plunged into boiling
water to cook. Oysters and clams bought in the shell must also be alive
when purchased. A tightly closed shell indicates that they are alive,
whereas a slightly open shell proves that they are dead. If these two
varieties are bought out of the shells, the fish themselves should not
be accompanied by a great quantity of liquid. Considerable liquid is an
indication that the oysters or clams have been adulterated by the
addition of water. Formerly it was the custom to keep oysters in fresh
water, as the water they absorb bloats or fattens them. This practice,
however, has fallen into disfavor.

79. Shell fish lend themselves admirably to a large variety of dishes,
including soups, entrees, salads, and substitutes for meat dishes. They
possess a great deal of distinctive flavor, their food value is
comparatively high, and, provided they are in good condition and are
properly prepared, they are healthful and easily digested. It can
therefore be seen that shell fish have much to recommend their use.
There is considerable danger, however, in using any varieties that are
not perfectly fresh or freshly cooked. In the case of mollusks, or
bivalves, much harm has resulted from the use of those which have been
grown or bred in unsanitary surroundings. Because of these facts, it is
of the utmost importance that great care be exercised in selecting and
preparing shell fish.

80. COMPOSITION AND FOOD VALUE OF SHELL FISH.--In composition, the
varieties of fish included under shell fish do not differ greatly from
fish proper. Most of them, however, contain more waste and less of the
food substances than fish, so that their food value is somewhat lower.
Table IV will serve to give a good idea of the composition and food
value of the several varieties of shell fish, and in studying it, a good
plan will be to compare it with Table I, which gives the food value of
fish. As will be observed, protein forms a very large proportion of the
food substance of shell fish. Also, they contain more carbohydrates than
fish, the amount ranging from .4 to 5.2 per cent., which is in the form
of sugar. Although this amount is too small to warrant much
consideration as a supply of carbohydrates, it is mentioned because it
is an interesting fact.

TABLE IV

COMPOSITION AND FOOD VALUE OF SHELL FISH

Name of Fish      Water  Protein  Fat  Total    Ash  Food Value
                                       Carbo-       Per Pound
                                      hydrates        Calories
Clams, removed
  from shell       80.8   10.6    1.1   5.2     2.3     340
Crabs, whole       77.1   16.6    2.0   1.2     3.1     415
Lobsters, whole    79.2   16.4    1.8    .4     2.2     390
Oysters, in shell  86.9    6.2    1.2   3.7     2.0     235
Scallops           80.3   14.8     .1   3.4     1.4     345




TABLE V

SEASONS FOR SHELL FISH

NAME OF FISH                     SEASON

Clams, hard shelled..............All the year
Clams, soft shelled..............May 1 to October 15
Crabs, hard shelled..............All the year
Crabs, soft shelled..............March 1 to October 15
Lobsters.........................All the year
Oysters..........................September 1 to May 1
Scallops.........................September 15 to April 1
Shrimp...........................March 15 to June 1, and
                                   September 15 to October 15


81. SEASONS FOR SHELL FISH.--With the exception of clams and lobster,
which can be obtained all the year around, shell fish have particular
seasons; that is, there is a certain time of the year when they are not
suitable for food. It is very important that every housewife know just
what these seasons are, so that she will not include the foods in the
diet of her family when they should not be used. Table V, which will
furnish her with the information she needs, should therefore be
carefully studied.

       *       *       *       *       *

OYSTERS, CLAMS, AND SCALLOPS

OYSTERS AND THEIR PREPARATION

[Illustration: FIG. 25]

82. OYSTERS, CLAMS, and SCALLOPS are salt-water fish that belong to the
family of mollusks, or soft-bodied animals. They are entirely encased in
hard shells, which, though of the same general shape, differ somewhat
from each other in appearance. Fig. 25 shows a group of oysters and
clams, the three on the left being oysters and the three on the right,
clams. Oysters are larger than clams and have a rough, uneven shell,
whereas clams have a smooth, roundish shell. The three varieties of
mollusks are closely related in their composition and in their use as
food, but as oysters are probably used more commonly than the others
they are considered first.

83. COMPOSITION OF OYSTERS.--Oysters occupy a prominent place among
animal foods, because they are comparatively high in protein. In
addition, they contain a substance that most flesh foods lack in any
quantity, namely, carbohydrate in the form of glycogen, and for this
reason are said to resemble milk closely in composition. A comparison
of the following figures will show how these foods resemble each other:

              WATER PROTEIN  FAT  CARBOHYDRATE  MINERAL SALTS
Milk.........  87.0   3.3    4.0      5.0            .7
Oysters......  86.9   6.2    1.2      3.7            2.0

Oysters, as will be observed, contain only a small quantity of fat, and
for this reason their total food value is somewhat lower than that of
milk. A pint of milk has a value of 325 calories, while the same
quantity of oysters has an approximate value of only 250 calories.
Because of the difference in the cost of these two foods, oysters
costing several times as much as milk, the use of oysters is not so
cheap a way of supplying food material.

84. DIGESTIBILITY OF OYSTERS.--When merely the ability of the digestive
tract to handle oysters is taken into consideration, they are said to be
easily digested if they are served raw or are properly prepared. This is
due to the fact that when taken as a food they are disposed of in a
comparatively short time by the stomach. In addition, their absorption
from the alimentary tract is quite complete; that is, they contain
little or no waste material. But, just as cooking has much to do with
the digestibility of other protein foods, so it has with oysters. For
this reason, the housewife who wishes to feed her family this food in
its most digestible form must thoroughly understand all phases of
its cooking.

85. HEALTHFULNESS OF OYSTERS.--Much illness has been attributed to
oysters, and without doubt they have been the cause of some typhoid and
some ptomaine poisoning. A knowledge of the reason for these diseases
has done much to eliminate them. It is now definitely known that much of
the typhoid caused from eating oysters was due to the conditions under
which they were grown. In their growth, oysters fasten themselves to
stationary things, such as rocks or piles driven into the ground
underneath the water, and they obtain their food by simply opening the
shell and making use of minute particles of plant and animal life that
they are able to extract from the water. When the water was not clean or
when sewage was turned into it, typhoid germs were transmitted to
persons who took oysters as food. At present, there is scarcely any
danger from such causes, for more care is now given to the conditions
under which oysters grow. Ptomaine poisoning from oysters was caused by
eating them when they had been improperly cared for in storage or had
been taken from the shells after they were dead. Unless persons handling
oysters know how to take care of them, this danger is still likely
to exist.

86. PURCHASING OYSTERS.--To be able to purchase oysters intelligently,
the housewife should be familiar with the names of the various kinds.
These names are dependent on the locality from which the oysters come,
and include _Blue Points, Cape Cods, Cotuits, Lynn Havens_, and numerous
other varieties. It should be remembered that the varieties raised in
different localities are quite distinctive, differing to some extent in
both size and appearance. Unless the purchaser is familiar with the
different varieties, almost any of the small oysters are likely to be
sold to her for one of the small varieties and, likewise, any of the
large oysters for one of the large varieties. While this is of small
consequence, provided the quality is satisfactory and the price is
right, it is well for every housewife to familiarize herself with the
names of the various kinds, so that she may know just what variety she
is purchasing.

87. When oysters are bought in the shell, they should be alive, a fact
that can be determined by the tightly closed shell, as has already been
stated. If the shells are not closed or can be easily pried apart, it
may be known that the oysters are not good and that they should be
rejected. When it is possible to procure them, oysters that have been
removed from the shells immediately after being taken from the beds are
preferable to those which have not been removed from the shells before
shipping. When purchased out of the shells, oysters should be grayish in
color, should have no disagreeable odor, and should contain no excess
water or liquid. After being purchased, oysters should be kept on ice
unless they can be cooked at once.

The season for oysters is from September to April, inclusive. While in
some localities they can be purchased at other times during the year,
they are not likely to be so good. In fact, it is not safe to use
oysters during the warm months.

88. IMPORTANT POINTS IN COOKING OYSTERS.--The protein of oysters, like
that found in other foods, is coagulated by heat. Long heat, provided it
is sufficiently intense, makes oysters tough, and in this condition they
are neither agreeable to eat nor readily digested. When they are to be
cooked at a high temperature, therefore, the cooking should be done
quickly. If they are to be cooked at a temperature below the boiling
point, they may be subjected to heat for a longer time without becoming
so tough as when a high temperature is used. Cooking quickly at a high
temperature, however, is preferable in most cases to long, slow cooking.
For example, in the preparation of oyster stew, long cooking produces no
better flavor than short cooking at a high temperature and renders
oysters far less digestible.

[Illustration: FIG. 26]

[Illustration: FIG. 27]

89. OPENING OYSTERS.--Unless oysters are bought already opened, it
becomes necessary to open them in the home before they can be served raw
or cooked. To open oysters is not difficult, and with a little
experience the work can be done with ease. It will be well to note that
the two shells of an oyster, which are called _valves_, are held
together by a single muscle, known as the _adductor muscle_, that lies
near the center, and that this muscle must be cut before the shell will
open readily. Before attempting to open oysters, however, they should be
scrubbed with clean water, so as to remove any sand that may be on the
shells. When the oysters are cleaned, proceed to open them in the manner
shown in Figs. 26 and 27. First, as in Fig. 26, insert the point of a
knife into the hinged, or pointed, end and push the blade between the
valves until they appear to separate, when it will be known that the
muscle has been cut. Then, as in Fig. 27, lay the valves open and loosen
the oyster from the shell by slipping the knife under it.

If the oysters that are being opened are to be cooked before serving,
simply drop them with their liquid into a suitable vessel and discard
the shells. Before using the oysters, remove them from the liquid, look
them over carefully to see that no small particles of shells cling to
them, and wash them in clean, cold water to remove any sand that may be
present. Also, strain the liquid through a cloth, so that it will be
free from sand when used in the preparation of the dish for which the
oysters are to be used or for the making of soup or broth.

Oysters that are to be eaten raw are frequently served on the half
shell. Therefore, if they are to be used in this way, place each oyster,
as it is loosened in the process of opening, into the deeper shell, as
Fig. 27 shows, and discard the other one. Very often good-looking oyster
shells are saved in order that they may be used from time to time in
serving raw oysters that are bought already opened.

[Illustration: FIG. 27]

90. RAW OYSTERS.--When an appetizer is desired in a meal that is to
consist of several courses, raw oysters are often used for the first
course. Oysters that are to be eaten raw may be served in the shells or
removed from them. They are bland in flavor, however, and require some
sharp, highly seasoned sauce in order to give them sufficient snap. The
sauces commonly used for this purpose include cocktail sauce, chilli
sauce, catsup, horseradish, and tobasco sauce. Sometimes, though, lemon
juice or vinegar and pepper and salt are preferred to sauce. As a rule,
crisp crackers, small squares of toast, or wafers and butter accompany
raw oysters in any form, and sometimes celery and radishes are
served, too.

91. When a cocktail sauce is served with raw oysters, they are generally
referred to as OYSTER COCKTAILS. Two methods of serving these are in
practice. In one, as shown in Fig. 28, the cocktail sauce is put into a
small glass placed in the center of a soup plate filled with cracked
ice, and the oysters, usually six in half shells, are arranged around
the glass, on the ice. In the other, as shown in Fig. 29, the desired
number of oysters that have been removed from the shells are dropped
into a stemmed glass containing the cocktail sauce, and the glass is
placed in a bowl of cracked ice. An _oyster fork_, which is a small,
three-pronged fork, is always served with raw oysters, and usually a
piece of lemon is supplied in addition to the cocktail sauce.

[Illustration: FIG. 28]

[Illustration: FIG. 29]

92. OYSTER STEW.--If an extremely nutritious way of preparing oysters is
desired, oyster stew should be selected. This is perhaps the simplest
way in which to cook oysters, and yet care must be exercised in making
this dish, for the oysters should not be cooked too long and the milk,
which must be brought to the boiling point, should not be allowed to
burn. Oyster stew makes an excellent dish for lunch. It should not be
served as the first course of a heavy meal because of the large amount
of nutriment it contains.

OYSTER STEW
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 qt. oysters
1 qt. milk
2 Tb. butter
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper

Pour 1 cupful of water over the oysters, look them over carefully, and
remove any pieces of shell that may cling to the oysters, making sure
that any particles of sand are washed off. Heat this liquid to the
boiling point and then strain it through a cloth. Put the milk on the
fire to heat, and when hot, add the butter, salt, and pepper, and
strained liquid. After the whole mixture has come to the boiling point,
pour in the oysters and cook until they look plump and the edges begin
to curl. Remove from the heat and serve with crisp crackers.

93. CREAMED OYSTERS.--Another nutritious way in which to prepare oysters
and at the same time produce a dish that is pleasing to most persons is
to cream them. After being creamed, oysters may be served over toast or
in timbale cases.

CREAMED OYSTERS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 Tb. butter
24 oysters
1-1/2 c. medium white sauce
Salt and pepper
6 slices toast or 6 timbale cases

Melt the butter in a frying pan, add the oysters, and heat them in the
butter until the edges begin to curl slightly. Pour the hot oysters into
the hot white sauce, season to taste with salt and pepper, and serve
over toast or in timbale cases.

94. SCALLOPED OYSTERS.--No food makes a more palatable scalloped dish
than oysters. Oysters so prepared are liked by nearly every one, and the
ingredients with which they are combined help to give such a dish
balance so far as the food substances are concerned. Care should be
taken, however, in the baking of scalloped oysters, for they are likely
to become tough if they are cooked too long.

SCALLOPED OYSTERS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 c. bread crumbs
2 Tb. butter
1 c. cracker crumbs
1 pt. oysters
Salt and pepper
1 c. milk

Butter the bread crumbs with the butter, and then mix them with the
cracker crumbs. Sprinkle the bottom of a greased baking dish with
one-fourth of the crumbs, and over this put a layer of oysters that have
been previously cleaned. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and add
one-fourth more of the crumbs. Add another layer of oysters, sprinkle
with salt and pepper, and place the remainder of the crumbs on top.
Strain the liquid from the oysters through a piece of cloth, mix this
with the milk, and pour over the dish thus prepared. Place in a hot
oven, and bake until the mixture is thoroughly heated and the top
is brown.

95. FRIED OYSTERS.--Of all the dishes prepared from oysters, fried
oysters undoubtedly find favor with the greatest number of persons.
However, unless care is taken in frying the oysters, they are likely to
be somewhat indigestible. Deep fat should be used for this purpose, and
it should be hot enough to brown a 1-inch cube of bread a golden brown
in 40 seconds.

FRIED OYSTERS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

24 large oysters
1 egg
1/4 c. milk
Fine cracker crumbs
Salt
Pepper

Thoroughly dry the oysters by laying them on one end of a soft cloth and
patting them with the other. Beat the egg and add the milk to it. Dip
the oysters into the cracker crumbs, then into the egg-and-milk mixture,
and again into the crumbs. Fry in deep fat until brown. Remove from the
fat, drain well, and place on oiled paper. Sprinkle with salt and pepper
and serve hot.

96. OYSTER PIE.--Baking oysters into a pie is another means of combining
a protein food with foods that are high in other food substances. As
oyster pie is somewhat hearty, it may be used as the main dish of a
heavy meal.

OYSTER PIE
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 pt. oysters
1 c. medium white sauce
Salt and pepper
Baking-powder biscuit dough

Cut each of the oysters into three or four pieces, and place them in a
greased baking dish. Pour over them the hot white sauce and the juice
from the oysters. Season with salt and pepper. Over the top, place a
layer of the biscuit dough rolled about 1/4 inch thick. Set in a hot
oven and bake until the crust is brown.

97. PIGS IN BLANKETS.--When something entirely different in the way of
oysters is desired, pigs in blankets should be tried. This is a very
good name for the dish given in the accompanying recipe, for the oysters
are rolled up in a strip of bacon, which serves as a blanket. They are
especially suitable for a light meal, such as luncheon or a dainty lunch
that is to be served to company.

PIGS IN BLANKETS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

18 large oysters
18 thin strips of bacon

After the oysters have been cleaned, roll each one in a strip of bacon.
Fasten the bacon where the edges meet by running a toothpick through at
this point. Place in a broiler and broil on one side until brown; then
turn them and broil until the other side is brown. Serve hot.

98. OYSTER FRITTERS.--Variety may also be secured in the use of oysters
by making oyster fritters. When such fritters are nicely browned and
served with an appetizing sauce, an attractive as well as a tasty dish
is the result.

OYSTER FRITTERS
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 pt. oysters
1 egg muffin batter

Clean the oysters and cut each into four or five pieces. Make a one-egg
muffin batter and to it add the cut oysters. Drop the mixture by
spoonfuls into deep fat and fry until brown. Remove from the fat, drain,
and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Serve with a desired sauce.


CLAMS AND THEIR PREPARATION

99. NATURE AND DIGESTIBILITY OF CLAMS.--Clams are bivalves similar to
oysters in both form and composition. Because of the similarity in
composition, they are utilized in much the same ways as oysters, being
used extensively for food in parts of the country where the supply is
large. There are numerous varieties of clams, and some of them differ
slightly from each other in appearance, color, and flavor. Preference
for the different varieties is largely a matter of individual taste.

Clams may be purchased loose or in the shell and they may be served in
or out of the shell. However, when bought in the shell, they must be
purchased alive and must be subjected to the same tests as are oysters.
As in the case of oysters, they may be eaten raw or cooked. Their
preparation for cooking is similar to that of oysters. In the raw state,
they are easily digested, but upon the application of heat they become
tough, and the longer they are cooked, the tougher they become. It can
therefore be seen that the digestibility of clams is influenced very
much by cooking.

100. OPENING CLAMS.--If clams are to be opened in the home, the method
illustrated in Fig. 30 may be employed. First wash the clams to remove
the sand, and then place a clam on a hard surface so that the pointed
edge is up. Insert the thin edge of a knife into the very slight groove
between the shells, or valves, and with a heavy utensil of some kind
strike the top of the knife several times so as to separate the valves.
Then, as in opening oysters, spread the shells apart, as shown, and
loosen the clam from the shell it adheres to.

[Illustration: FIG. 30]

101. RAW CLAMS.--Like oysters, raw clams are generally served as a
cocktail, or an appetizer, at the beginning of a meal. If they are to be
served in the half shell, place them in a dish of cracked ice; if they
are to be served without the shells, place the required number in a
stemmed glass that is set in a dish of cracked ice. In either case,
lemon or a suitable sauce, or both, should be supplied.

102. STEAMED CLAMS.--Steaming is the method generally adopted when clams
in large numbers are cooked for a "clam bake," but there is no reason
why it cannot be used by the housewife when she wishes to cook only
enough for her family. When large quantities are to be steamed, use is
generally made of a steamer, but the housewife will find that she can
steam a few clams very satisfactorily in a saucepan or a similar vessel.

To prepare steamed clams, scrub the shells of the clams until they are
perfectly clean. Place the desired number thus cleaned in a saucepan and
add enough water to cover the bottom of the pan about 1 inch. Allow this
to cook until the shells of the clams open. Remove the clams from the
pan and serve them in the shells. Provide each person with a small dish
of melted butter into which to dip the clams as they are removed from
the shells to be eaten. The liquid found in the clams may be poured from
the shell before the clams are served, and after being well seasoned may
be served as clam broth.

103. BAKED CLAMS.--Another very appetizing way in which to prepare clams
is to combine them with bread crumbs, season them well, and then bake
them until they are well browned. Select several good-sized clams for
each person to be served. Scrub the shells well and open them. Remove
the clams and chop them into small pieces. To each cupful of chopped
clams, add 2 cupfuls of buttered bread crumbs, 1 tablespoonful of
chopped parsley, 1 tablespoonful of chopped pimiento, and 1
tablespoonful of onion juice. Season the mixture with salt and pepper
and fill the shells with it. Place these in a shallow pan and bake in a
very hot oven until the crumbs are well browned on top. Serve hot.

104. FRIED CLAMS.--As oysters make a very desirable dish when fried in
deep fat, so clams may be treated in this way, too. Remove the desired
number of clams from the shells, wash them thoroughly, and dry them on a
clean towel. Dip them into beaten egg, and finally into the crumbs. Fry
in deep fat until they are a golden brown. Serve with slices of lemon.


SCALLOPS AND THEIR PREPARATION

105. NATURE OF SCALLOPS.--Scallops, which are another form of bivalves,
are less commonly used for food than oysters and clams. Scalloped dishes
get their name from the fact that scallop shells were originally used
for their preparation. Not all of the scallop is used for food; merely
the heavy muscle that holds the two shells together is edible. Scallops
are slightly higher in protein than oysters and clams and they also have
a higher food value than these two mollusks. The most common method of
preparation for scallops is to fry them, but they may also be baked in
the shells.

106. FRIED SCALLOPS.--If scallops are properly fried, they make an
appetizing dish. As they are a rather bland food, a sauce of some kind,
preferably a sour one, is generally served with them.

Select the desired number of scallops and wash thoroughly. Dip first
into either fine bread crumbs or cracker crumbs, then into beaten egg,
and again into the crumbs. Fry in deep fat until a golden brown, remove,
and drain. Serve with lemon or a sour sauce, such as horseradish or
tomato sauce.

107. BAKED SCALLOPS.--If a tasty as well as a slightly unusual dish is
desired to give variety to the diet, baked scallops will undoubtedly
find favor. As shown in the accompanying recipe, mushrooms are one of
the ingredients in baked scallops and these not only provide additional
material, but improve the flavor.

To prepare baked scallops, clean the desired number, parboil for 15
minutes, drain, and cut into small pieces. For each cupful of scallops,
melt 2 tablespoonfuls of butter in a frying pan, sauté in it 1
tablespoonful of chopped onion, and add 1/2 cupful of chopped mushrooms.
When these have browned, add 2 tablespoonfuls of flour and 1 cupful of
milk. Cook until thick and then add the scallops. Fill the scallop
shells with the mixture, sprinkle with buttered bread crumbs, place in
the oven, and bake until the crumbs are brown.

       *       *       *       *       *

LOBSTERS, CRABS, AND SHRIMP

GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS

108. The shell fish, LOBSTERS, CRABS, and SHRIMP, come under the head of
crustaceans; that is, animals consisting of jointed sections, each of
which is covered with a hard shell. Their flesh is similar in
composition to that of other fish, but it is tougher and harder to
digest. However, it is popular because of its unique and delicate
flavor. In fact, whenever these varieties of fish can be obtained along
the seacoast or within a reasonable distance from the place where they
are caught, they are considered a delicacy. If they can be shipped alive
to any point, they are perfectly safe to use, although quite high in
price because of their perishable nature.

109. Unless such shell fish can be procured alive in the markets, the
use of a good brand of any of them canned is recommended. In fact,
canned lobster, crab, and shrimp are very satisfactory and may be
substituted for any of the fresh cooked varieties in the recipes that
follow. It is true that some persons object to canned food because
ptomaine poisoning sometimes results, but it has been found that
ptomaine poisoning is more liable to result from eating these foods when
they are bought in the market in poor condition than when they are
secured in canned form. Care must be exercised, however, whenever use is
made of canned food of any kind. Upon opening a can of any of these
varieties of fish, the entire contents should be removed from the can at
once and used as soon as possible. It must be remembered that the
ptomaine poisoning that is sometimes caused by eating canned foods is
not due to the fact that the foods come in tin cans, but that they are
allowed to stand in the cans after they are opened. Upon their being
exposed to the air, putrefaction sets in and causes the harmful effect.

110. Lobsters, crabs, and shrimp are very similar in composition, shrimp
being slightly higher in protein and total food value than the others.
If they are not prepared in an indigestible way, they are comparatively
easy to digest. It has been proved a fallacy that lobster and ice cream
are a dangerous combination, for if both are in good condition they may
be combined with no ill effects to the normal individual.


LOBSTERS AND THEIR PREPARATION

111. DISTINGUISHING FEATURES.--Of these three types of sea food,
lobsters are perhaps the most popular. They are found along the North
Atlantic and North Pacific seacoasts. Alive, they are mottled
bluish-green in color, but upon being cooked they change to bright red.
As soon as they are caught, many of them are packed in ice and shipped
alive to various points, while others are plunged immediately into
boiling water and sold cooked. A live lobster ready for cooking is shown
in Fig. 31. Lobsters vary greatly in size. Only those 9 inches or more
in length can be sold, the smaller ones being thrown back into the
water. When they are purchased either raw or cooked, they should be
heavy for their size; that is, they should be heavy because of their
plumpness and good condition.

[Illustration: FIG. 31]

112. PRELIMINARY PREPARATION.--To prepare a lobster, which should be
alive, grasp it firmly by the back, as shown in Fig. 32, plunge it
quickly, head first, into a kettle of rapidly boiling water, and then
submerge the rest of the body. Be sure to have a sufficient amount of
water to cover the lobster completely. Boil rapidly for 5 minutes; then
lower the flame or remove to a cooler part of the stove and cook slowly
for 1/2 hour. Remove from the water and allow to cool.

After being prepared in this way, a lobster may be served cold or it may
be used in the preparation of various made dishes. If it is to be used
without further preparation, it is often served from the shell, which is
usually split open. Mayonnaise or some other sauce is generally served
with lobster. The flesh is removed from the shell with a small fork as
it is eaten.

[Illustration: FIG. 32]

113. REMOVING LOBSTER FROM THE SHELL.--The majority of the dishes made
from lobster require that the flesh be removed from the shell. To do
this, first pull off the two large claws and the four pairs of small
claws, as shown in Fig. 33, and break the tail from the body.
Then with scissors, as in Fig. 34, cut a single slit the entire
length of the shell covering the under part of the tail and
remove the flesh inside the tail in a whole, large piece, as shown in
Fig. 35. The intestinal tract, which can be readily observed, will be
found embedded in this piece and running the entire length. Slash the
flesh and remove it. Next remove the flesh of the body from the shell,
retaining only that part which appears to be fibrous, like the flesh of
the tail. The stomach, which is called "the lady" because its inside
appearance closely resembles a lady sitting in a chair, should not be
removed from the shell. However, care should be taken to obtain all the
flesh surrounding the bones in the bony part of the lobster. The coral
substance, that is, the roe of the lobster, should also be removed, as
it can be used for a garnish.

[Illustration FIG. 33]

[Illustration: FIG. 34]

With the flesh removed from the shell, proceed to take out that
contained in the claws. Break open the large claws, using a nut cracker
or a small hammer for this purpose, and, as in Fig. 36, remove the flesh
that they contain. If the small claws are to be used for a garnish, as
is often done, remove the flesh without breaking them; otherwise break
them as in the case of the large ones.

[Illustration: FIG. 35]

114. LOBSTER COCKTAIL.--Practically all varieties of shell fish make
most satisfactory cocktails, and lobster is no exception. To make a
lobster cocktail, shred or cut into small pieces the flesh of a lobster
that has been prepared according to the directions just given. Chill the
shreds or pieces and then serve them in stemmed cocktail glasses with
any desirable cocktail sauce.

[Illustration: FIG. 36]

115. SCALLOPED LOBSTER.--Persons who care for the flavor of lobster will
find scalloped lobster a very attractive dish. When prepared in this
way, it is suitable either for luncheon or for dinner.

SCALLOPED LOBSTER
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 c. lobster meat
1 c. medium white sauce
2/3 c. buttered bread crumbs
1 hard-cooked egg
Salt
Pepper

Mix the lobster with the medium white sauce. Butter a baking dish, place
half of the crumbs in the bottom, and pour over them the lobster and
white sauce. Slice the hard-cooked egg over the top of the lobster,
season the whole well with salt and pepper, and sprinkle the remainder
of the crumbs over the top. Place in a hot oven and bake until the
crumbs are brown. Garnish with sprays of parsley and serve at once.

116. DEVILED LOBSTER.--A dish that is delicious and at the same time
very attractive is deviled lobster. After removing the flesh from the
shell, the shell should be cleaned thoroughly, as it is to be used as a
receptacle in which to put the lobster mixture for baking. When removed
from the oven, this dish can be made more attractive by garnishing it
with the lobster claws and tail.

DEVILED LOBSTER
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 Tb. chopped onion
2 Tb. butter
2 Tb. flour
1 tsp. salt
Dash of Cayenne pepper
1/8 tsp. paprika
1/8 tsp. pepper
1 Tb. lemon juice
1 Tb. chopped parsley
1 c. milk
2 c. lobster meat
1/4 c. buttered cracker crumbs

Sauté the onion in the butter, and to this add the flour, salt, Cayenne
pepper, paprika, pepper, lemon juice, and parsley. Mix well and add the
milk. When the whole has cooked until it is thick, add the lobster. Pour
the mixture into the clean shell of the lobster, sprinkle with cracker
crumbs, and place in the oven long enough to brown the crumbs. Remove
from the oven, place on a serving dish, garnish with the claws and tail
of the lobster, if desired, and serve at once.

117. LOBSTER À LA NEWBURG.--When lobster à la Newburg is mentioned, one
naturally thinks of a chafing dish, for this is one of the dishes that
is very often made in a chafing dish and served at small social
gatherings. However, it can be made just as satisfactorily on the
kitchen stove and is a dish suitable for a home luncheon or
small dinner.

LOBSTER À LA NEWBURG
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 Tb. butter
1 Tb. flour
2 c. lobster
1/2 tsp. salt
Few grains of Cayenne pepper
1/2 c. milk
1/2 c. thin cream
1 tsp. vinegar
1 Tb. lemon juice
2 egg yolks

Melt the butter in a saucepan, add the flour, and into this pour the
lobster meat cut into rather large pieces. Add the salt, pepper, milk,
and cream; cook together until thick, and then pour in the vinegar and
lemon juice. Beat the egg yolks and stir them into the cooked mixture,
using care to prevent them from curdling. When the mixture has
thickened, remove from the stove and serve over toast.

118. LOBSTER CROQUETTES.--Probably the most attractive dish that can be
made out of lobster is the one explained in the accompanying recipe. As
this is artistically garnished, and at the same time extremely
appetizing, it is suitable for a meal that is intended to be very nice,
such as a dainty luncheon. If the elaborate garnishing here suggested is
not desired, the croquettes may be served with merely a suitable sauce.

LOBSTER CROQUETTES
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 c. thick white sauce
2 eggs
2 c. diced lobster meat
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper
Fine bread crumbs

Prepare the white sauce and allow it to cool. Add one beaten egg and the
lobster meat. Season with the salt and pepper. Shape into croquettes,
roll in beaten egg, then in crumbs, and fry in deep fat until an even
brown. Drain, stick a lobster claw into the end of each, and arrange on
a platter with the claws around the outside. Pour a medium white sauce
over the opposite ends and the centers of the croquettes and over this
sprinkle the lobster coral and hard-cooked egg yolks, which have been
forced through a sieve. In the center of the platter, arrange a small
mound of parsley and one of the large claws of the lobster.


CRABS AND THEIR PREPARATION

119. NATURE OF CRABS.--Numerous varieties of crabs are obtained along
the seashores of the United States, and most of them measure not more
than 5 or 6 inches across. Shell fish in this form are used for food
both before the shells have hardened, when they are known as
_soft-shelled crabs_, and after the shells have grown hard, when they
are called _hard-shelled crabs_. To be at their best, crabs should be as
heavy as lobsters in proportion to their size. Their flesh should be
firm and stiff and their eyes should be bright. The male crab has a
smaller body and longer claws than the female. In food value, crabs are
quite similar to lobsters.

Tiny _oyster crabs_ are found in the shells of crabs as well as in
oysters. These are considered a great delicacy and are used chiefly for
garnishing, because they are very small and, as a rule, are not found in
large numbers.

120. PRELIMINARY PREPARATION.--Before either soft-shelled or
hard-shelled crabs can be used as food, a certain amount of preparation
is necessary. In the case of hard-shelled crabs, plunge them alive into
hot water, allow them to come to the boiling point, and cook slowly for
1/2 hour. It is a good plan to add 1 tablespoonful of salt for each crab
that is being boiled. While the crabs are cooking, remove the scum that
rises to the top. When they are sufficiently cooked, open the shells and
take out the meat, being careful to remove all the meat from the claws.

Soft-shelled crabs require a somewhat different kind of preparation.
With this variety, lift up the points on each side of the back shell and
remove the spongy substance that is found under them. In addition, take
off the apron, which is the small piece that occurs at the lower part of
the shell and that terminates in points. The crabs are then ready for
frying, which is the method of cooking that is usually applied to
this variety.

121. CRAB-FLAKE COCKTAIL.--Crab meat is used for cocktails in the same
way as oysters, clams, and lobster. In fact, no better appetizer to
serve at the beginning of a meal can be found. To make crab-flake
cocktail, remove the meat from the shells of cooked hard-shelled crabs
in the way just explained, and chill it. Then place it in stemmed
glasses and serve with cocktail sauce.

122. DEVILED CRABS.--Variety in the cooking of hard-shelled crabs can be
secured by deviling them according to the accompanying directions. As
will be observed, this is done in practically the same way that lobster
is deviled.

DEVILED CRABS
(Sufficient to Serve Four)

2 Tb. butter
4 crabs
1 c. cream sauce
1 Tb. onion juice
1/2 tsp. salt
Dash Cayenne pepper
1/8 tsp. pepper
1 egg
Cracker crumbs

Put the butter in a frying pan, add the meat from the four crabs, and
pour into this the cream sauce. Season with the onion juice, salt,
Cayenne pepper, and pepper. Add the well-beaten egg and allow the
mixture to cook until the egg has thickened, being careful not to let it
curd. Fill the back shells of the crabs with this mixture, sprinkle with
cracker crumbs, place in a hot oven, and bake until brown. Serve hot
or cold.

123. FRIED SOFT-SHELLED CRABS.--After soft-shelled crabs are prepared in
the manner explained in Art. 120, they are usually fried in deep fat.
Egg and cracker dust or flour are used to make a coating for the crabs.

FRIED SOFT-SHELLED CRABS
(Sufficient to Serve Four)

4 soft-shelled crabs
1 egg
Cracker dust or flour
Salt and pepper

Prepare the crabs by removing the apron and the spongy substance under
the shell of each crab. Beat the egg slightly. Roll the crabs first in
the egg and then in the cracker dust or the flour. Fry in hot, deep fat
until a golden brown. Remove from the fat, drain, and sprinkle well with
salt and pepper to season. Serve hot or cold.

124. CREAMED CRAB MEAT.--When the meat of hard-shelled crabs is creamed,
it makes a very dainty dish, especially if it is served over toast or in
timbale cases. To give a touch of color and at the same time add a
little flavor, chopped pimiento is generally added.

Boil the desired number of hard-shelled crabs and remove the meat from
the shells. For each cupful of crab meat, prepare 1 cupful of medium
white sauce. Add the crab meat, season well, and, if desired, add some
chopped pimiento. Serve hot over toast or in timbale cases.


SHRIMP AND THEIR PREPARATION

125. NATURE OF SHRIMP.--Shrimp are similar to crabs and lobsters in
composition and in the methods of preparation. They differ considerably
in appearance, however, and are smaller in size. When alive, shrimp are
a mottled greenish color, but upon being dropped into boiling-hot water
they turn red. When they have cooked sufficiently, the meat, which is
very delicious, may be easily removed from the shells. After the meat of
shrimp is thus prepared, it may be used cold in a salad or a cocktail or
it may be utilized in a number of ways for hot dishes. Very often a
chafing dish is used in the preparation of such dishes, but this utensil
is not necessary, as they may be cooked in an ordinary utensil on a
stove of any kind.

[Illustration: FIG. 37]

126. CREAMED SHRIMP.--The usual way of preparing shrimp is to cook it
with mushrooms and then serve it over toast, or, as shown in Fig. 37, in
timbale cases. Creamed shrimp is dainty in appearance, pleasing to the
taste, and highly nutritious.

CREAMED SHRIMP
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

1 c. medium white sauce
1 c. diced shrimp
1 c. chopped mushrooms
1/2 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper

Heat the white sauce, and to it add the shrimp, mushrooms, salt, and
pepper. Beat a little butter into the mixture to improve the flavor,
heat, and serve in timbale cases, as shown, or over toast.

127. SHRIMP À LA SALLE.--Shrimp also makes an appetizing and attractive
dish when combined with tomato and green pepper. The accompanying recipe
gives directions for the preparation of such a dish, which is called
shrimp à La Salle.

SHRIMP À LA SALLE
(Sufficient to Serve Six)

2 Tb. butter
1 c. shredded shrimp
1 c. stewed tomato
1 small green pepper, chopped
1 Tb. chopped onion
1 tsp. celery salt
1 tsp. salt
1/8 tsp. pepper

Brown the butter in a saucepan and add the shrimp, tomato, green pepper,
onion, celery salt, salt, and pepper. Heat all together thoroughly, and
serve over toast.

COCKTAIL SAUCES

128. The various kinds of shell fish are served so frequently as
cocktails that cocktail sauces are much in demand. The foundation of
these sauces is always tomato catsup, but the ingredients used for
seasoning usually vary according to individual taste. The following
recipes make amounts sufficient for one serving:

COCKTAIL SAUCE I

1/4 tsp. grated horseradish
Juice of 1/4 lemon
12 drops tobasco sauce
10 drops Worcestershire sauce
1 Tb. tomato catsup

COCKTAIL SAUCE II

1 Tb. tomato catsup
1 Tb. grapefruit juice
1 tsp. spiced vinegar
Dash of tobasco sauce
Sprinkling of salt
Dusting of chopped parsley

Mix the ingredients thoroughly and serve with oysters, clams, lobster,
shrimp, or crab meat thoroughly chilled.


FISH AND SHELL FISH

EXAMINATION QUESTIONS

(1) (_a_) For what food may fish be substituted in the diet? (_b_) How
does fish compare with meat as to its usefulness as food?

(2) (_a_) What food substances are present in fish? (_b_) How does the
food value of fish compare with that of meat?

(3) (_a_) Discuss the digestibility of fish. (_b_) How does the salting
of fish for preservation affect its digestibility?

(4) How does the housewife's purchase of fish affect the market price?

(5) What methods of cookery should be used in preparing: (_a_) large
fish? (_b_) small fish?

(6) Mention the tests for determining the freshness of fish.

(7) Discuss the care of fish in the home.

(8) Give the steps in the preparation of a fish for cooking.

(9) Give the steps in the boning of a fish.

(10) (_a_) What are fillets? (_b_) Tell briefly how fillets are
obtained.

(11) Why are sauces frequently served with fish?

(12) (_a_) What is larding? (_b_) How may fish be larded? (_c_) For what
purpose is larding done?

(13) How may salt fish be freshened?

(14) (_a_) Mention the shell fish. (_b_) Discuss their usefulness in the
diet.

(15) What precautions should be taken in the purchase of shell fish?

(16) Discuss the composition and food value of shell fish.

(17) Compare the composition of milk with that of oysters.

(18) (_a_) What is the season for oysters? (_b_) How are oysters opened?

(19) (_a_) How are clams opened? (_b_) What is the effect of long
cooking on clams?

(20) (_a_) How are lobsters prepared? (_b_) Mention the two kinds of
crabs. (_c_) How do these differ?


ADDITIONAL WORK

Mention the varieties of fish most common in your local market.

Compare the cost of a sufficient amount of fish to serve your family
with the cost of beef and either veal or lamb served to the same number
of persons at other times. Submit your results.

       *       *       *       *       *




INDEX

A

Adductor muscle of an oyster,
American forcemeat balls,
Apples, Bacon with sliced,
  Cold pork with fried,
Asparagus soup, Cream of,

B

Bacon,
  and eggs,
  Calves' liver and,
  combined with cereals,
  combined with other foods,
  with sliced apples,
  with tomatoes,
Baked clams,
  fillet of whitefish,
  finnan haddie,
  fish,
  haddock,
  halibut,
  ham,
  poultry with rice,
  scallops,
Balls, American forcemeat,
  Codfish,
  Egg,
  Forcemeat,
Bass, Food value and composition of black,
Basting of meat,
Batter, Timbale-case,
Béchamel, Chicken,
Beef,
  Boiled corned,
  Braized,
  Composition and food value of,
  Cooking of,
  Corned,
  Cuts of,
  Fillet of,
  for stewing and coming, Cuts of,
  Frizzled,
  General characteristics of,
  hash,
  loaf, Recipe for,
  loin, Steaks obtained from,
  Mexican,
  organs and their preparation,
  pie,
  Pot-roasted,
  Preparation of stews and corned,
  Roast,
  stew,
  Tenderloin of,
Beefsteak, Broiled,
Beefsteaks and their preparation,
Birds, Preparation of small,
  Roast small,
Biscuits, Creamed veal on,
Bisques,
Bivalves,
Blue points,
Bluefish, Composition and food value of,
Bob veal,
Boiled cod,
  corned beef,
  dinner,
  fish,
  ham,
  salmon,
  tongue,
Boiler, Fish,
Boiling, Cooking meat by,
Bologna,
Bone stock,
Boned chicken,
Boning a chicken,
  a fish,
Borsch,
Bouillon,
  Tomato,
Braized beef,
  beef, Recipe for,
  tongue,
Braizing,
Bread sticks,
  stuffing,
Broiled beefsteak,
  fillet,
  fish,
  fresh mackerel,
  ham,
  pork, Sautéd or,
  poultry,
  scrod with potato border,
  shad roe,
  squirrel,
  sweetbreads,
  venison,
  venison, Sauce for,
Broiler,
Broilers, Composition and food value of,
Broiling, cooking meat by,
Broth,
Brown sauce, Veal cutlets in,
Buying meats, Points to consider in,

C

Cabbage, Scalloped pork and,
Calves' liver and bacon,
Canned fish in the diet,
Cape Cods,
Capons,
Carbohydrate in fish,
  in meat,
Care, nature, and use of stock pot,
  of fish in the home,
  of meat,
  of meat in the home,
  of meat in the market,
Carp, Composition and food value of,
Carving meat, Serving and,
  poultry, Serving and,
Casserole, Chicken en,
Catfish, Composition and food value of,
Caul,
Celery and radishes,
Cereals, Bacon combined with,
Chestnut purée,
  stuffing,
Chicken à la king,
  Béchamel,
  Boned,
  broilers, Composition and food value of,
  Crop of a,
  croquettes,
  curry,
  Cutting up a,
  Definition of,
  Determining the age of,
  Determining the freshness of,
  Drawing a,
  Dressing a,
  en casserole,
  feet, Preparing,
  Fricassee of,
  Fried,
  Frying,
  General marks of good quality in,
  giblets,
  Gravy for fried,
  Jellied,
  Maryland fried,
  pie,
  Plucking a,
  Poultry other than,
  Preparation of,
  Roast,
  Roasting,
  salad,
  salad, Mock,
  Selection of,
  Singeing a,
  stew with dumplings or noodles,
  with paprika sauce, Fried,
  with rice,
Chickens, Live,
Chops in tomato sauce, pork,
  Lamb and mutton,
  Veal,
Chowder, Clam,
  Corn,
  Fish,
  Potato,
Chowders,
Chuck roasts,
Clam chowder,
Clams, and scallops, Oysters,
  Baked,
  Composition and food value of,
  Fried,
  Nature and digestibility of,
  Opening of,
  Preparation of,
  Raw,
  Steamed,
Classes of soup, General,
  of soups denoting consistency,
Classification of poultry,
  of soups,
Cleaning fish,
Clear soup or bouillon, Stock for,
  soups,
  soups and stocks,
Clearing soup,
Cocktail, Crab-flake,
  Lobster,
  Oyster,
Cod, Boiled,
Codfish balls,
Creamed,
Cold pork with fried apples,
  -storage poultry,
Comparison of fish and meat, Table showing the,
  of fish with meat,
  of mutton and lamb,
Composition and food value of beef,
  and food value of black bass,
  and food value of bluefish,
  and food value of canned salmon,
  and food value of carp,
  and food value of catfish,
  and food value of chicken broilers,
  and food value of clams,
  and food value of crabs,
  and food value of fowl,
  and food value of halibut steak,
  and food value of lake trout,
  and food value of lamb,
  and food value of leg of lamb,
  and food value of lobsters,
  and food value of mutton,
  and food value of oysters,
  and food value of pork,
  and food value of pork chops,
  and food value of red snapper,
  and food value of scallops,
  and food value of shell fish,
  and food value of shell fish, Tables showing,
  and food value of veal,
  and food value of whitefish,
  and structure of meat,
  of fish,
  of oysters,
  of poultry,
Connective tissue,
Consommé,
Cooking meat for soup,
 meat, Methods of,
 meat, Purposes of,
  meat, Time required for,
  meats, Time table for,
  of beef,
  of fish,
  of giblets,
  of mutton and lamb,
  of pork,
  of poultry,
Cooking of veal,
  oysters, Important points in,
  Preparing rabbit for,
Corn chowder,
  soup, Cream of,
Corned beef,
  beef, Boiled,
  beef, Preparation of stews and,
Cottage pie,
Cotuits,
Crab, Deviled,
  flake cocktail,
  meat, Creamed,
Crabs, and shrimp, General characteristics of lobsters,
  Composition and food value of,
  Fried soft-shelled,
  Hard-shelled,
  Nature of,
  Oyster,
  Preliminary preparation of,
  Preparation of,
  Soft-shelled,
Cracker stuffing,
Crackers,
Cream-of-asparagus soup,
  of-corn soup,
  of-onion soup,
  of-pea soup,
  of-potato soup,
  of-spinach soup,
  of-tomato soup,
sauce, Lemon,
soups,
Creamed codfish,
  crab meat,
  finnan haddie,
  fish in potato nest,
  oysters,
  salmon with rice,
  shrimp,
  sweetbreads,
  tuna fish,
  veal on biscuits,
Crop of a chicken,
Croquettes,
  Chicken,
  Fish,
  Frying of,
  Lobster,
  Sweetbread,
  Veal,
Croutons,
Crown roast of lamb,
  roast of pork,
Crustaceans,
Cured pork, Preparation of,
Curry, Chicken,
Cutlets in brown sauce, Veal,
  Pan-broiled veal steak or,
Cutlets, Veal steaks or,
Cuts, Names and uses of beef,
  Names of pork,
  obtained from a side of beef and their uses, Table of,
  of beef,
  of beef for stewing and corning,
  of beef, Method of obtaining,
  of beef, Table of,
  of beef, Uses of,
  of mutton and lamb, Distinguishing features of,
  of mutton and lamb, Method of obtaining,
  of mutton and lamb, Names and uses of,
  of mutton and lamb, Table of,
  of pork,
  of pork, Uses of,
  of veal and their uses,
  Preparation of veal,
  Table of pork,
  Table of veal,
Cutting up a chicken,

D

Daikan,
Deep-fat frying, Principles of,
Delmonico steak,
Deviled crab,
  lobster,
Diet, Canned fish in the,
  Fish in the,
  Meat in the,
  Salt and smoked fish in the,
Digestibility of clams, Nature and,
  of fish,
  of oysters,
Drawing a chicken,
Drawn-butter sauce,
Dressing a chicken,
  for salmon mold,
Dry plucking,
Duck, Liver stuffing for,
  Peanut stuffing for roast,
  Preparation of,
  Roast,
  Spring,
  Young,
Ducks, Selection of,
Dumplings,
  or noodles, Chicken stew with,

E

Economic value of soup,
Economy in the purchase of poultry,
Eel, Fried,
  Stewed,
Egg balls,
Egg sauce,
Eggs and bacon,
Extractives,
  in meat,
Extracts, Meat,
  Soup,
  Vegetable,

F

Fat in fish,
  in meat,
  Trying out suet and other,
Feathers, Pin,
Feeding and care on quality of poultry, Influence of,
Fillet, Broiled,
  mignon,
  of beef,
  of flounder,
  of venison, Roast,
  of whitefish, Baked,
Filleting fish,
Finnan haddie, Baked,
  haddie, Creamed,
First soup stock,
Fish,
  and meat, Relative nutritive value of,
  and meat, Table showing the comparison of,
  Baked,
  Boiled,
  boiler,
  Boning a,
  Broiled,
  Carbohydrate in,
  chowder,
  Cleaning,
  Composition and food value of shell,
  Composition of,
  Cooking of,
  Creamed tuna,
  croquettes,
  Digestibility of,
  Fat in,
  Filleting,
  Food value of,
  Freshness of,
  Fried,
  in potato nest, Creamed,
  in the diet,
  in the diet, Canned,
  in the diet, Salt and smoked,
  in the home, Care of,
  Left-over,
  Mineral matter in,
  Planked,
  Protein in,
  Purchase of,
  Sauces for,
  Scaling a,
  Seasons for shell,
  Shell,
  Skinning,
  Steamed,
  Stewed,
  stock,
  Stuffing for,
  Table showing composition and food value of shell,
  Table showing the names, seasons, and uses of fresh,
  Table showing names, seasons, and uses of salt and smoked,
  Table showing seasons for shell,
  with meat, Comparison of,
Flat-bone steak,
Flavoring stock,
Flounder, Fillet of,
Food, Poultry as a,
  Sea,
  suitable for the stock pot,
  value and composition of beef,
  value and composition of black bass,
  value and composition of bluefish,
  value and composition of canned salmon,
  value and composition of carp,
  value and composition of catfish,
  value and composition of chicken broilers,
  value and composition of clams,
  value and composition of crabs,
  value and composition of fowl,
  value and composition of halibut steak,
  value and composition of lake trout,
  value and composition of lamb,
  value and composition of leg of lamb,
  value and composition of lobsters,
  value and composition of mutton,
  value and composition of oysters,
  value and composition of pork,
  value and composition of pork chops,
  value and composition of red snapper,
  value and composition of scallops,
  value and composition of veal,
  value and composition of whitefish,
  value of fish,
  value of fish, Factors determining,
  Value of meat as,
  value of shell fish, Composition and,
  value of shell fish, Tables showing composition and,
Forcemeat balls,
Fore quarter of veal,
Fork, Oyster,
Fowl, Composition and food value of,
  Definition of,
Fowls, Selection of guinea,
Frankfurters,
Fresh fish, Table showing the names, seasons, and uses of,
  herring, Stewed,
  mackerel, Broiled,
  pork, Preparation of,
Freshening salt and smoked fish,
Freshness of fish,
Fricassee of chicken,
Fricasseeing applied to meat and fowl,
Fried apples, Cold pork with,
  chicken,
  chicken, Gravy for,
  chicken, Maryland,
  chicken with paprika sauce,
  clams,
  eel,
  fish,
  oysters,
  perch,
  scallops,
  soft-shelled crabs,
Fritters, Oyster,
  Soup,
Frizzled beef,
Frying and sautéing applied to meat,
  chicken,
  of croquettes,
  Principles of deep-fat,

G

Gall bladder,
Game, Definition of,
  General description of,
  stock,
Garnishes, Soup accompaniments and,
Geese, Selection of,
Gelatine in meat,
Giblets, Cooking of,
  of a chicken,
Glycogen, or muscle sugar,
Goose, Preparation of,
  Roast,
Gravy for fried chicken,
  Making,
Green-pepper stuffing,
Guinea fowls, Selection of,
H

Haddock, Baked,
Halibut, Baked,
  steak, Composition and food value of,
  steak, Sautéd,
Ham,
  Baked,
  baked in milk,
  Boiled,
  Broiled,
Hamburger steak,
Hard-shelled crabs,
Hash, Beef,
  Turkey,
Headcheese,
Healthfulness of oysters,
Heart, Stuffed,
  sweetbread,
Heavy thick soups,
Herring, Stewed fresh,
Hind quarter of veal,
Hip-bone steak,
Home, Care of fish in the,
Horseradish sauce,
Household stock,

I

Individual lamb pies,
Influence of feeding and care on quality of poultry,
Iron, Timbale,

J

Jellied chicken,
  veal,
  veal, Left-over,
Julienne soup,

K

Keeping stock,
Kidneys,
Kouskous,
Krishara,

L

Lake trout, Composition and food value of,
Lamb,
  and mutton chops,
  and mutton cuts, Distinguishing features of,
  and mutton cuts, Names and uses of,
  and mutton, Left-over,
  and mutton stews,
  Comparison of mutton and,
  Composition and food value of,
  Cooking of mutton and,
  Crown roast of,
  cuts, Method of obtaining mutton and,
  cuts, Table of mutton and,
  Food value and composition of leg of,
  on toast, Minced,
  or mutton, Scalloped,
  pies, Individual,
  Rack of,
  Roast leg of,
  Saddle of,
  Spring,
  Turkish,
Lard, Leaf,
Larding,
Leaf lard,
Lebaba,
Left-over beef,
  -over fish,
  -over Jellied veal,
  -over lamb and mutton,
  -over Pork,
  -over Poultry,
  -over veal,
Leg of venison, Roast,
Lemon cream sauce,
Live chickens,
Liver and bacon,
  stuffing for roast duck,
Liverwurst,
Loaf, beef,
Lobster à la Newburg,
  cocktail,
  croquettes,
  Deviled,
  from the shell, Removing,
  Scalloped,
Lobsters, Composition and food value of,
  crabs and shrimp,
  Distinguishing features of,
  Preparation of,
Loin, Steaks obtained from beef,
Lynn Havens,

M

Mackerel, Broiled fresh,
  Sautéd salt,
Making gravy,
  soup,
Market, Preparation of poultry for,
Maryland fried chicken,
Meaning and use of soup stock,
Meat as food, Value of,
  Basting of,
  Carbohydrate in,
  Care of,
  Comparison of fish with,
  Cooking of,
Meat, Creamed crab,
  cuts, Names and uses of,
  Definition of,
  extracts,
  Extractives in,
  Fat in,
  Gelatine in,
  in the diet,
  in the home, Care of,
  in the market, Care of,
  Methods of cooking,
  Minerals in,
  preparations, Sausages and,
  Protein in,
  Purchase of,
  Purposes of cooking,
  Relative nutritive value of fish and,
  Serving and carving of,
  Structure and composition of,
  Time required for cooking,
  used for soup making,
  Water in,

Meats, Points to consider in buying,
  Time table for cooking,

Method of obtaining beef cuts,
  of obtaining mutton and lamb cuts,
Methods of cooking meat,
Mexican beef,
Mignon, Fillet,
Milk, Ham baked in,
Minced lamb on toast,
Mineral matter in fish,
Minerals in meat,
Minestra,
Mint sauce,
Mock chicken salad,
Mock duck, or rolled steak,
Mold, Salmon,
Mollusks,
Mulligatawny soup,
Muscle sugar, Glycogen or,
Mushroom sauce,
Mutton,
  and lamb chops,
  and lamb, Comparison of,
  and lamb, Cooking of,
  and lamb cuts, Distinguishing features of,
  and lamb cuts, Method of obtaining,
  and lamb cuts, Names and uses of,
  and lamb cuts, Table of,
  Composition and food value of,
  Left-over lamb and,
  Rack of,
  Roast leg of,
  Roast saddle of,
  Saddle of,
  Scalloped lamb or,
  stews, Lamb and,

N

Noodle soup,
Noodles, Chicken stew with dumplings or,
  Vegetable soup with,
Nut sauce,
Nutritive value of fish, Relative,

O

Onion soup, Cream of,
Opening clams,
  oysters,
Organs, Veal,
Ox-tail soup,
Oyster, Adductor muscle of an,
  cocktails,
  crabs,
  fork,
  fritters,
  pie,
  stew,
  stuffing,
  Valves of an,
Oysters, clams, and scallops,
  Composition of,
  Creamed,
  Digestibility of,
  Food value of,
  Fried,
  Healthfulness of,
  Important points in cooking,
  Opening,
  Preparation of,
  Purchasing,
  Raw,
  Scalloped,

P

Pan-broiled steak,
  -broiled veal steaks or cutlets,
  broiling, Cooking meat by,
Paprika sauce, Fried chicken with,
Partridge, Selection of,
Pastry strips,
Pâté de fois gras,
Patties, Rice and meat,
  Salmon,
Pea soup, Cream of,
Peanut stuffing for roast duck,
Perch, Fried,
Pheasant, partridge, and quail,
  Selection of,
Pickerel, Sautéd,
Pickled pig's feet,
  tongue,
Pie, Beef,
Pie, Chicken,
  Cottage,
  Oyster,
  Rabbit,
Pies, Individual lamb,
Pig, Roast,
Pigeons, Selection of,
Pig's feet, Pickled,
Pigs in blankets,
Pin feathers,
Planked fish,
  steak,
Plucking a chicken,
  Dry,
Poisoning, Ptomaine,
Ponhasse,
Pork,
  and cabbage, Scalloped,
  chops and tomato sauce,
  chops, Composition and food value of,
  Composition and food value of,
  Cooking of,
  Crown roast, of,
  Cuts of,
  Cuts, Table of,
  cuts, Uses of,
  General characteristics of,
  Left-over,
  Preparation of cured,
  Preparation of fresh,
  Roast,
  Salt,
  sausage,
  Sautéd or broiled,
  Sautéd tenderloin of,
  Tenderloin of,
  with fried apples, Cold,
Porterhouse roast,
  steak,
Pot-au-feu,
  -roasted beef,
  Stock,
Potato border, Broiled scrod with,
  chowder,
  nest, Creamed fish in,
  soup, Cream-of-,
Potpie, Veal,
Potroka,
Poulards,
Poultry as a food,
  Broiled,
  Classification of,
  Cold-storage,
  Composition of,
  Definition of,
  Effect of sex on quality of,
  for cooking, Preparation of,
  for the market, Preparation of,
  Indication of cold-storage,
  Left-over,
  other than chicken,
  Selection of,
  Serving and carving,
  Stuffing for roast,
  Table for the selection of,
  with rice, Baked,
Preparation of beef organs,
  of beefsteak,
  of chicken,
  of clams,
  of crabs,
  of cured pork,
  of duck,
  of fresh pork,
  of goose,
  of lobsters,
  of oysters,
  of poultry for cooking,
  of poultry for the market,
  of roasts,
  of scallops,
  of shrimp,
  of small birds,
  of stews and corned beef,
  of sweetbreads,
  of turkey,
  of veal cuts,
Preparing chicken feet,
  rabbit for cooking,
Principles of deep-fat frying,
Processes involved in making stock,
Protein in fish,
  in meat,
Ptomaine poisoning,
Purchase of fish,
  of meat,
  of poultry, Economy in the,
Purchasing oysters,
Purée, Chestnut,
  Split-pea,
Purées,
Purpose of soup in the meal,
Purposes of cooking meat,

Q

Quail, Selection of,
Quality in chicken, General marks of good,
  of poultry, Effect of sex on,
  of poultry, Influence of feeding and care on,

R

Rabbit for cooking, Preparing,
  pie,
  Roast,
  Sautéd,
Rack of lamb,
  of mutton,
Radishes and celery,
Raw clams,
  oysters,
Red snapper, Food value and composition of,
Relative nutritive value of fish,
Removing grease from soup,
  lobster from the shell,
Rib roast, Standing,
  roasts,
Rice and meat patties,
  Baked poultry with,
  Chicken with,
  Creamed salmon with,
  Scalloped veal with,
  stuffing,
Rigor mortis,
Roast beef,
  chicken,
  duck,
  duck, Liver stuffing for,
  duck, Peanut stuffing for,
  fillet of venison,
  goose,
  leg of lamb,
  leg of mutton,
  leg of venison,
  of lamb, Crown,
  of pork, Crown,
  pig,
  pork,
  Porterhouse,
  poultry, Stuffing for,
  rabbit,
  saddle of mutton,
  small birds,
  Standing rib,
  turkey,
Roasting,
  chicken,
Roasts, Chuck,
  Preparation of,
  Rib,
  Rump,
  Veal,
Roe, Broiled shad,
Rolled steak, or mock duck,
  steak, Stuffing for,
Rolls, Veal,
Rump roasts,

S

Saddle of lamb,
  of mutton,
  of mutton, Roast,
Salad, Chicken,
  Mock chicken,
  Veal,
Salmon, Boiled,
  Composition and food value of canned,
Salmon mold,
  mold, Dressing for,
  patties,
  with rice, Creamed,
Salt and smoked fish, Freshening,
  and smoked fish in the diet,
  and smoked fish, Table showing names, seasons, and uses of,
  mackerel, Sautéd,
  pork,
Sauce, Drawn-butter,
  Egg,
  for broiled venison,
  Fried chicken with paprika,
  Horseradish,
  Lemon cream,
  Mint,
  Mushroom,
  Nut,
  Spanish,
  Thin white,
  Tomato,
Sauces for fish,
Sausage, Pork,
Sausages and meat preparations,
Sautéd fish,
  halibut steak,
  or broiled pork,
  pickerel,
  rabbit,
  salt mackerel,
  smelts,
  tenderloin of pork,
Sautéing and frying,
Scaling a fish,
Scalloped lamb or mutton,
  lobster,
  oysters,
  pork with cabbage,
  veal with rice,
Scallops, Baked,
  Composition and food value of,
  Fried,
  Oysters, clams, and,
  Preparation of,
Scrapple,
Scrod with potato border, Broiled,
Sea food,
Seasons, and uses of fresh fish, Table showing the names,
  and uses of smoked fish, Table showing the names,
  for shell fish,
  for shell fish, Table showing,
Second soup stock,
Selection of chicken,
  of ducks,
  of poultry,
  of turkeys,
Serving and carving meat,
Serving and carving poultry,
  soup,
Shad roe, Broiled,
Shell fish,
  fish, Composition and food value of,
  fish, Seasons for,
  fish, Tables showing composition and food value of,
  fish, Table showing seasons for,
Shrimp à La Salle,
  Creamed,
  General characteristics of lobsters, crabs, and,
  Lobsters, crabs, and,
  Nature of,
  Preparation of,
Simmering, or stewing,
Singeing a chicken,
Sirloin steak,
Skinning fish,
Skirt steak,
Small birds, Preparation of,
  birds, Roast,
Smelts, Sautéd,
Smoked fish, Freshening salt and,
  fish in the diet, Salt and,
  fish, Table showing the names, seasons, and uses of,
Soft-shelled crabs,
  -shelled crabs, Fried,
Soljinka,
Soup,
  accompaniments and garnishes,
  accompaniments, Recipes for,
  and its place in the meal,
  and soup accompaniments,
  Clearing of,
  Cooking meat for,
  Cream-of-asparagus,
  Cream-of-corn,
  Cream-of-onion,
  Cream-of-pea,
  Cream-of-potato,
  Cream-of-spinach,
  Cream-of-tomato,
  Definition of,
  Economic value of,
  extracts,
  fritters,
  General classes of,
  in the meal, Purpose of,
  in the meal, Value of,
  Julienne,
  making, Meat used for,
  Making of,
  making, Vegetables used for,
  Mulligatawny,
  Noodle,
  Ox-tail,
  Principal ingredients of,
  Recipes for,
  Removing grease from,
  Serving,
  stock, Meaning and use of,
  stock, Uses of,
  stock, Varieties of,
  Thickening,
  Value of,
Soups, Classification of,
  Clear,
  Cream,
  denoting consistency, Classes of,
  Heavy thick,
  Thick,
  typical of particular countries,
Spanish sauce,
  stew,
Spinach soup, Cream-of-,
Split-pea purée,
Spring duck,
  lamb,
Squabs,
Squirrel, Broiled,
Standing rib roast,
Steak, Club,
  Delmonico,
  Flat-bone,
  Hamburger,
  Hip-bone,
  or cutlets, Veal,
  Pan-broiled,
  Planked,
  Porterhouse,
  Sautéd halibut,
  Sirloin,
  Skirt,
  Stuffing for rolled,
  Swiss,
  Vegetables served with,
Steaks obtained from the beef loin,
  obtained from the round,
  Preparation of beef,
Steamed clams,
  fish,
Stew, Beef,
  Oyster,
  Spanish,
  Veal,
Stewed eel,
  fish,
  fresh herring,
Stewing and corning, Beef for,
 or simmering,
Stews and corned beef, Preparation of,
  Lamb and mutton,
Sticks, Bread,
Stock, Bone,
Stock,
  First,
  Fish,
  flavoring,
  for clear soup or bouillon,
  for soup,
  Game,
  Household,
  Keeping,
  Meaning and use of soup,
  pot,
  pot, Food suitable for the,
  pot, Nature, use, and care of,
  Second,
  Varieties of soup,
  Vegetable,
  White,
Stocks and clear soups,
Stomach sweetbread,
Strips, Pastry,
Structure and composition of meat,
Stuffed heart,
  veal breast,
Stuffing, Bread,
  Chestnut,
  Cracker,
  for fish,
  for roast duck, Liver,
  for roast poultry,
  for rolled steak,
  for veal,
  Green-pepper,
  Oyster,
  Rice,
Suet, Trying out,
Sweetbread croquettes,
  Heart,
  Stomach,
  Throat,
Sweetbreads,
  Broiled,
  Creamed,
  Preparation of,
Swiss steak,

T

Table for the selection of poultry,
  of cuts obtained from a side of beef and their uses,
  of mutton and lamb cuts,
  of pork cuts,
  of veal cuts,
  showing composition and food value of shell fish,
  showing seasons for shell fish,
  showing the comparison of fish and meat,
  showing the names, seasons, and uses of fresh fish,
  showing the names, seasons, and uses of smoked fish,
Tarhonya,
Tenderloin of beef,
  of pork,
  of pork, Sautéd,
Thick soups,
Thickening soup,
Thin white sauce,
Throat sweetbread,
Timbale-case batter,
  cases,
  iron,
Time required for cooking meat,
Tissue, Connective,
Toast, Minced lamb on,
Tomato bouillon,
  sauce,
  sauce, Pork chops and,
  soup, Cream-of-,
Tomatoes, Bacon with,
Tongue, Boiled,
  Braized,
  Pickled,
Trout, Food value of lake,
Trying out suet,
Tuna fish, Creamed,
Turkey hash,
  Preparation of,
  Roast,
Turkeys, Selection of,
Turkish lamb,

U

Use of soup stock,
  of stock pot,
Uses of beef cuts,
  of fresh fish, Table showing the names, seasons, and,
  of lamb and mutton cuts,
  of smoked fish, Table showing the names, seasons, and,
  of veal cuts,

V

Value of fish, Food,
  of fish, Relative nutritive,
  of meat as food,
  of shell fish, Tables showing composition and food,
  of soup in the meal,
Valves of an oyster,
Varieties and uses of soup stock,
  of soup stock,
Veal, Bob,
  breast, Stuffed,
  chops,
  Composition and food value of,
  Cooking of,
  croquettes,
  cuts and their preparation,
  cuts and their uses,
  cuts, Table of,
  cutlets in brown sauce,
  Fore quarter of,
  Hind quarter of,
  Jellied,
  kidneys,
  Left-over,
  Left-over jellied,
  Nature of,
  on biscuits, Creamed,
  organs,
  potpie,
  roasts,
  rolls,
  salad,
  steak or cutlets, Pan-broiled,
  stew,
  Stuffing for,
  sweetbreads, Broiled,
  sweetbreads, Creamed,
  with rice, Scalloped,
Vegetable extracts,
  soup with noodles,
  stock,
Vegetables served with steak,
  used for soup making,
Venison, Broiled,
  Cuts of,
  Roast fillet of,
  Roast leg of,
  Sauce for,

W

Water in meat,
White stock,
Whitefish, Baked fillet of,
  Composition and food value of,
Wing tips of chicken,

Y

Yearling, Meaning of,
Young, or spring, duck,
