PREFACE.


I ask every one who may become possessed of this book to read the
recipes herein contained carefully and thoughtfully before attempting
the making of any of them, and also to observe the following
instructions:

Weigh and measure all ingredients exactly, and have everything ready to
mix before you commence.

If you measure your ingredients by means of a cup be sure you use one
which holds half a pint.

Use neither more nor less of anything than the recipe instructs you, and
be sure to have your fire just right, as also instructed by the recipe.

If at first success does not come to you do not despair, but persist in
following the advice of the old adage: “Try, try again.”

You should always bear in mind that honest work is never lost and that
reward must come in the end.




Desserts and Salads.


SAUCES.

1. +Wine Chaudeau.+-- Into a lined saucepan put ½ bottle Rhine wine,
4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 teaspoonful cornstarch, the peel of ½
lemon and the yolks of 6 eggs; place the saucepan over a medium hot
fire and beat the contents with an egg beater until just at boiling
point; then instantly remove from the fire, beat a minute longer,
pour into a sauce bowl and serve with boiled or baked pudding.

2. +White Wine Sauce.+-- Over the fire place a saucepan containing 2
cups white wine, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 3 whole eggs, the yolks of
4 eggs and the peel and juice of 1 lemon; beat the contents of
saucepan with an egg beater until nearly boiling; then instantly
remove and serve.

3. +Wine Cream Sauce.+-- ½ bottle white wine, ½ teaspoonful
cornstarch, 3 eggs (yolks and whites beaten separately), 4
tablespoonfuls sugar and the peel and juice of ½ lemon; put all the
ingredients except the whites of eggs in saucepan; beat with an egg
beater until just about to boil; then remove from fire; have the
whites beaten to a stiff froth; add them to the sauce, beat for a
minute longer and then serve.

4. +Claret Sauce.+-- Over the fire place a lined saucepan containing
½ bottle claret, 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 lemon cut into
slices and freed of the pits, a piece of cinnamon and 1 small
tablespoonful cornstarch mixed with water or wine; stir constantly
until it comes to a boil; then strain and serve. Or boil 1
tablespoonful cornstarch in 1½ cups water, with piece of cinnamon
and a few slices of lemon, for a few minutes; then remove from the
fire; add ½ pint claret and sugar to taste.

5. +Bishop Sauce.+-- Boil 2 ounces of sago in 2 cups water, with 1
tablespoonful fine minced or ground bitter almonds, a piece of
cinnamon and the peel of 1 lemon; when sago is done strain it
through a sieve, add 1½ cups claret, ¼ pound sugar and 1 teaspoonful
of bishop essence.

6. +Madeira Sauce, No. 1.+-- Set a small saucepan on the stove with
the yolks of 3 eggs, 1 cup Madeira and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; stir
until it comes to a boil; then remove from fire and add by degrees 4
tablespoonfuls sweet cream, stirring constantly, and serve.

7. +Madeira Sauce, No. 2.+-- Mix 1 tablespoonful flour with 1½
spoonfuls butter; add 1½ cups boiling water; boil 3 minutes,
stirring constantly; remove from the fire, add ½ cup Madeira and 3
tablespoonfuls sugar.

8. +Butter Sauce.+-- In a small saucepan mix 1 tablespoonful flour
with a little cold water; add by degrees 1 cup of boiling water,
stirring constantly; set the saucepan over the fire, add 1 heaping
tablespoonful butter in small pieces; continue stirring and boil for
a few minutes.

9. +Sherry Wine Sauce, No. 1.+-- Add to the Butter Sauce ½ cup sugar
and ½ pint sherry wine.

10. +Sherry Wine Sauce, No. 2.+-- 1 cup sherry wine, ½ cup water,
the yolks of 3 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and the grated rind of ½
lemon; put all the ingredients in a small saucepan over the fire and
keep stirring until the sauce begins to thicken; then take it off;
if allowed to boil it will be spoiled, as it will immediately
curdle; beat the whites to a stiff froth, stir them into the sauce
and serve.

11. +Sherry Wine Sauce, No. 3.+-- Melt in a small saucepan 1
tablespoonful butter; add 1 teaspoonful flour; when well mixed add 1
cup sherry wine, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and the yolks of 4 eggs;
stir briskly until the sauce is on the point of boiling; then
instantly remove and serve with plum or bread pudding.

12. +Wine or Brandy Sauce.+-- Prepare 1 cup Butter Sauce, sweeten it
with sugar, add 1 glass brandy, port or sherry wine, a little lemon
juice and nutmeg.

13. +Arrack Sauce (Allemande).+-- Mix 2 tablespoonfuls flour with
some white wine; add in small pieces 2 tablespoonfuls butter, peel
and juice of ½ lemon and 2 cups white wine; place a saucepan
containing the ingredients over the fire and stir until it comes to
a boil; remove from the fire, add 1 cup arrack and 1 cup sugar.

14. +Arrack Sauce (English).+-- Put in a small saucepan 1
tablespoonful flour mixed with a little cold water, the yolks of 3
eggs, 1 tablespoonful butter, a piece of cinnamon, a little lemon
peel, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1½ cups water; set saucepan over
the fire, stir constantly until it commences to boil; then instantly
remove from the stove, add a little lemon juice and ½ cup arrack.
This sauce can be made with any kind of wine or brandy.

15. +Brandy Sauce (with Milk, “English Style”).+-- Put in a small
saucepan 1 cup milk, the yolks of 2 eggs, 1 tablespoonful sugar and
a little grated lemon peel; stir over the fire till the sauce is at
boiling point; instantly remove and add 3 tablespoonfuls brandy;
serve with plum pudding.

16. +Brandy Sauce (American), No. 1.+-- Stir 4 tablespoonfuls
powdered sugar with 1½ spoonfuls butter to a cream; add by degrees
the yolks of 2 eggs, ½ cup boiling water and ½ cup brandy; put all
the ingredients in a tin cup and set it in a saucepan of hot water;
stir until the sauce is boiling hot; flavor with nutmeg and vanilla.
This sauce may be made of wine in the same manner.

17. +Brandy Sauce, No. 2.+-- Beat 1 tablespoonful butter with 6
tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a cream; add by degrees 1
wine-glassful of brandy, 3 tablespoonfuls boiling water and a little
nutmeg; put the sauce into a tin cup, set in saucepan of boiling
water and stir until the sauce is hot; but do not allow it to boil.

18. +Punch Sauce.+-- Place a small vessel on the stove with 1 cup of
rum, 2 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar, the grated rind of ½ an orange
and 1 teaspoonful vanilla essence; let it remain over the fire until
the liquor catches a light flame; put on the lid for 1 minute; then
remove it from the fire, add the juice of 1 orange and serve hot.
This sauce is usually poured over the pudding.

19. +Rum Sauce.+-- Mix ½ tablespoonful flour with a piece of butter
the size of an egg; add 1 cup boiling water; when well mixed
together add ½ cup Rhine wine, the peel and juice of ½ lemon, 4
tablespoonfuls sugar, a piece of cinnamon and the yolks of 3 eggs;
place in a saucepan over the fire and beat with an egg beater till
the sauce comes to a boil; instantly remove and add ½ cup rum. In
place of rum, brandy may be used. NOTE.--The eggs may be omitted and
1 tablespoonful flour used instead of ½.

20. +Sauce à la Diaz.+-- Place a tin pan over the fire with 1 cup
rum, ½ cup Marella wine, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, the grated rind of
1 orange and 1 teaspoonful vanilla; leave the pan on the stove until
the liquor takes fire; then cover quickly; boil 1 minute; draw it
from the fire to the side of the stove; let it stand a few minutes;
then strain into a bowl; cover tightly and when cold pour it over
the pudding.

21. +Wine Chaudeau (with Rum).+-- Place a saucepan on the stove with
1 teaspoonful cornstarch mixed with a little cold water; add 2 whole
eggs, the yolks of 2 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, a little lemon
juice, some grated orange peel, ½ bottle Rhine wine and 2 glasses of
rum; stir with an egg beater until just about to boil; then
instantly remove from the fire, stir for a few minutes longer and
serve. Any other kind of liquor may be used instead of rum.

22. +Wine Sauce (with Almonds and Raisins).+-- Put a small vessel
over the fire with ½ bottle claret, 3 tablespoonfuls ground almonds,
3 tablespoonfuls raisins, a piece of cinnamon, 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar and the peel of 1 lemon; stir until it boils; then remove from
the fire, take out cinnamon and lemon peel and serve.

23. +Hard Sauce.+-- Stir ¼ pound butter with 8 tablespoonfuls
powdered sugar to a cream until it looks white; add by degrees 1
small glass of brandy (and, if liked, a little nutmeg); the yolks of
2 eggs may also be beaten through the sauce.

24. +Hard Sauce (with Cherries).+-- Make a hard sauce with the yolks
of 2 eggs and put some nice, ripe cherries (without the pits) into
it; stir the whole well together and serve with suet pudding or
dumplings. Blackberries, peaches or plums may be used instead of
cherries.

25. +Strawberry Sauce.+-- Boil in a saucepan 2 teaspoonfuls
cornstarch in 1½ cups water with the rind of 1 lemon; take it from
the fire, add 1 cup strawberry juice, a little Rhine wine or claret
and sweeten with sugar.

26. +Sauce of Apricots.+-- Boil 3 tablespoonfuls apricot marmalade
with 1 tablespoonful butter and ½ cup water 5 minutes; add 2
tablespoonfuls brandy and serve with boiled suet, batter pudding or
apple dumplings.

27. +Sauce of Cherries, No. 1.+-- Place in a saucepan 1 cup sugar,
1 cup water and ½ cup claret; when this boils add 1 pint of ripe
cherries (without the pits); boil them 10 minutes; then take out the
cherries and mix 1 teaspoonful cornstarch with a little water; add
it to the sauce, boil a minute, strain and put cherries back into
the sauce; serve cold.

28. +Sauce of Cherries, No. 2.+-- Remove the pits from ½ pound ripe
cherries; put the stones into a mortar and pound them fine; put
them, with the cherries, 1 pint water and a piece of cinnamon, in a
saucepan; add ¾ cup sugar and boil slowly ½ hour; strain and thicken
the sauce with 2 teaspoonfuls cornstarch; boil a minute, add ½ cup
claret and serve.

29. +Strawberry Hard Sauce.+-- Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter to a
cream with 1 cup powdered sugar; add the yolks of 2 eggs; beat until
very light and stir 1 cup nice, ripe strawberries through it; put
the sauce in a glass dish, cover with the beaten whites of 2 eggs
and put some nice strawberries on top of the sauce. Any other kind
of fruit may be used instead of strawberries. Or stir ½ cup butter
with 1 cup powdered sugar to a cream; add the beaten white of 1 egg
and 1 cup thoroughly mashed strawberries.

30. +Raspberry Sauce, No. 1.+-- Put in a small saucepan the peel of 1
lemon, a little piece of cinnamon, 1 cup water and 1 spoonful sugar;
boil 5 minutes; mix 2 teaspoonfuls cornstarch with some cold water;
add it to the contents of saucepan; boil a minute; add 1 cup
raspberry juice or syrup and serve either hot or cold.

31. +Raspberry Sauce, No. 2.+-- Set a saucepan on the stove with 1½
cups raspberry juice, ½ cup water, the juice and peel of 1 lemon,
sugar to taste, 1 teaspoonful cornstarch and the yolks of 3 eggs;
beat constantly with an egg beater until it comes to a boil; quickly
remove it from the fire; beat for a few minutes longer; beat the
whites of the 3 eggs to a stiff froth and stir them into the sauce.

32. +Huckleberry Sauce.+-- Put the huckleberries with a little water
in a saucepan over the fire; boil slowly for ½ hour; then strain
through a sieve, sweeten with sugar and thicken with a little
cornstarch; add a few tablespoonfuls port wine or a little lemon
juice and claret; serve cold.

33. +Sauce of Dried Cherries.+-- Wash 1 pound dried cherries; put
them into a mortar and pound fine; place them in a saucepan with 3
or 4 cups water over the fire; add a few zwiebacks, a piece of
cinnamon and boil 1 hour; strain through a sieve, add a little
claret and lemon juice and sweeten with sugar.

34. +Nut Sauce.+-- Stir 1 tablespoonful butter with 5 tablespoonfuls
powdered sugar to a cream; add the yolks of 2 eggs and a few
spoonfuls of water; put it in a tin pail; set in a vessel of hot
water; stir until hot; remove the sauce from the fire, add ½ cup
fine, minced almonds and flavor with vanilla. Fine, chopped, stoned
raisins may be used instead of almonds.

35. +Hard Sauce (with Nuts).+-- Prepare a hard sauce of 1
tablespoonful butter and 5 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar; beat this
until white; add by degrees the yolks of 2 eggs; beat the whites of
2 eggs to a stiff froth; add the sauce gradually to the whites; beat
constantly with an egg beater; and lastly add 1 cup pounded or
ground nuts, almonds, walnuts, hazel or hickory nuts. The nuts may
be finely chopped if more convenient. This sauce may be prepared in
the same manner with peaches, apricots (peeled and cut into pieces)
or preserved pineapple.

36. +Strawberry Custard Sauce.+-- Place a small saucepan on the stove
with 1 pint milk, the yolks of 2 eggs and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar;
stir constantly until it comes to a boil; instantly remove from the
fire, flavor with vanilla and set it away to cool; then stir 1 cup
strawberries into it; beat the whites of the 2 eggs to a stiff froth
and put it on top of the sauce. This sauce is excellent with
strawberry shortcake. NOTE.--Any kind of fruit may be substituted
for strawberries.

37. +Fruit Sauce (not boiled).+-- Stir 1 cup raspberry juice and 1 of
currants with 8 tablespoonfuls sugar for 20 minutes; serve with cold
puddings. Or boil 2 teaspoonfuls cornstarch in water for a few
minutes; sweeten with sugar; thin it with raspberry, currant or
cherry juice; add a little Rhine wine and serve with cold pudding.
This sauce is exceedingly nice when made of strawberries with the
addition of the juice of 1 orange and a little grated skin.

38. +Peach Sauce, No. 1.+-- To be served cold. Pare and cut in halves
½ dozen peaches; stew them in sugar syrup; press them through a
sieve; thicken them with a little arrowroot or cornstarch; boil a
minute, add a little white wine and serve. Or boil the peaches
(after they are peeled and free from the stones) in sugar syrup
until tender; then take them out, put in a dish, cut each half into
4 pieces and pour the liquor over them; then serve with tapioca
pudding.

39. +Peach Sauce, No. 2.+-- Beat 1 tablespoonful butter with 4
tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a cream; add the yolks of 2 eggs;
beat until very light and creamy; then beat the whites of the 2 eggs
to a stiff froth; add the sauce to them by degrees; keep on beating
with an egg beater until all is well mixed together and stir 1 cup
of fine, cut peaches through it; serve with boiled pudding.

40. +Sauce of Currants and Raspberries.+-- Wash ½ pound red currants
and raspberries; sprinkle with sugar and let them stand ½ hour;
prepare a sauce the same as for Peach Sauce and stir the fruit
through it.

41. +Cream Sauce (with Jelly), No. 1.+-- Stir 1 cup currant jelly
until smooth; add 1 cup rich, sweet cream and beat with an egg
beater to a froth; add a little arrack rum or Cognac and serve with
cold pudding.

42. +Cream Sauce (with Jelly), No. 2.+-- Beat ½ cup fruit jelly and
the whites of 2 eggs to a stiff froth and serve with cold pudding.

43. +Lemon Sauce, No. 1.+-- Stir 1 tablespoonful butter with 4
tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a cream; add by degrees 1 beaten
egg, the juice and grated rind of ½ lemon, a little nutmeg and 4
tablespoonfuls boiling water; beat the sauce thoroughly for 5
minutes; put in a tin pail and set in saucepan of hot water; stir
constantly until very hot, but do not allow it to boil.

44. +Lemon Custard Sauce.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 pint milk,
3 whole eggs and 3 tablespoonfuls sugar over the fire and stir until
it just comes to the boiling point; quickly remove, pour sauce into
a dish, flavor with lemon essence and serve cold with cold pudding.

45. +Lemon Sauce (with Liquor).+-- Melt in a saucepan 1 tablespoonful
butter; add ½ tablespoonful flour; when well mixed pour in 1 cup
boiling water; boil 2 minutes; remove from the fire, pour sauce into
a bowl; add the juice of ½ lemon, a little nutmeg and a glass of
brandy; sweeten with sugar and serve hot. Very nice with rolly-poly
pudding or apple dumplings. Sherry or Madeira wine may be used
instead of brandy.

46. +Sauce à l’Orange.+-- Stir the yolks of 4 eggs with 2
tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a cream; add by degrees 1 cup sweet
cream and stir constantly; add the grated rind of 1 orange; put the
whole in a tin cup or pail, set in a vessel of hot water and stir
all the time until it is on the point of boiling; then instantly
remove from the fire, strain through a sieve over the pudding and
serve hot.

47. +Sauce au Kirsch.+-- Boil 1 teaspoonful cornstarch in 1 cup
water; sweeten with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; add 2 tablespoonfuls
kirsch and serve.

48. +Lemon Sauce, No. 2.+-- Mix 2 teaspoonfuls flour with a little
cold water; put it in a saucepan; add 1 pint boiling water, 1
tablespoonful butter and ½ cup sugar; stir until the sauce boils;
then remove from the fire, add the juice of 1 lemon and a little of
the grated rind and nutmeg.

49. +Lemon Cream Sauce.+-- Put in a tin pail or cup 1½ cups milk, the
yolks of 2 eggs and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; set in a vessel of hot
water; beat with an egg beater until the sauce comes to a boil;
remove from the fire; add ½ teaspoonful lemon essence; beat the
whites to a stiff froth and stir them into the sauce.

50. +Almond Sauce.+-- Remove the brown skin of 2 ounces of almonds,
ground or chopped fine; put them in a saucepan with 2 cups milk,
2 tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 3 eggs and 1 teaspoonful of
arrowroot; put the saucepan in a vessel of hot water; keep stirring
until the sauce comes to a boil. Instead of almonds almond essence
may be used; a little brandy may also be added if liked.

51. +Chocolate Sauce.+-- Boil ¼ pound grated chocolate with 1 cup
water and 3 tablespoonfuls sugar for 5 minutes; beat up the yolks of
3 eggs with 1½ cups cold milk; add it to the chocolate; keep
stirring until the sauce comes to a boil; instantly take it from the
fire, beat for a few minutes longer and pour it into a sauce bowl;
serve cold with cold pudding.

52. +Chocolate Cream Sauce.+-- Boil ¼ pound grated chocolate with 1
cup water for 5 minutes; add sugar to taste; beat up the yolks of 3
eggs with 1½ cups sweet cream; add it to the chocolate; keep
stirring until nearly boiling; remove from fire, add some vanilla
essence and the beaten whites of the 3 eggs.

53. +Vanilla Cream Sauce.+-- Put in a saucepan 2 cups sweet cream, 2
or 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, 2 whole eggs and the yolks of 2 eggs; set
the saucepan in a vessel of hot water; beat with an egg beater till
the sauce just comes to the boiling point; then instantly remove
from the fire; do not allow the sauce to boil; flavor with vanilla
extract and serve cold.

54. +Vanilla Sauce.+-- Put in a tin cup or pail 2 cups milk and 1
teaspoonful cornstarch; add the yolks of 3 eggs and 2 tablespoonfuls
sugar; place the cup in a vessel of hot water; beat with an egg
beater until it comes to a boil; instantly remove; pour the sauce
into a saucière; flavor with 1 teaspoonful vanilla and serve cold.
Do not allow the sauce to boil or it will curdle.

55. +Sauce à la Cream (sweet).+-- Put in a tin pail 2 cups milk, the
yolks of 2 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1 teaspoonful
cornstarch; set in a vessel of hot water; stir constantly until it
comes to a boil; instantly remove; flavor with vanilla; beat the
whites of the eggs to a stiff froth; pour the sauce into a glass
dish, spread the beaten whites over it and dust some powdered sugar
over all.

56. +White Sauce.+-- Boil 2 teaspoonfuls arrowroot in 1 pint milk;
add 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1 teaspoonful lemon essence; beat the
white of 1 egg to a froth and stir it through the sauce when cold.

57. +Cream Sauce (plain).+-- Stir ½ tablespoonful butter with 4
tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a cream; boil 1 tablespoonful flour
in 1 cup of water; pour it slowly into the creamed butter; keep on
beating until the whole is well mixed; flavor with 1 teaspoonful
lemon essence and serve hot.

58. +Vanilla Sauce (plain).+-- Put in a saucepan 1 pint milk, 1½
teaspoonfuls cornstarch, sugar to taste and stir over the fire until
it boils; flavor with 1 teaspoonful vanilla essence and serve when
cold.

59. +Vanilla Sauce (with Cognac).+-- Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter
with 6 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a cream; add by degrees 3
tablespoonfuls Cognac, sherry or Madeira wine and ½ cup boiling
water; keep beating all the time; put this in a tin pail and set in
a vessel of hot water; keep stirring until hot, but do not allow it
to boil; remove from the fire and add 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla
essence.

60. +Caramel Sauce.+-- Put 2 tablespoonfuls sugar in a saucepan over
the fire; let it get light brown; add a little water; boil for a
minute or two; then pour it into a small saucepan; add 1½ cups of
milk or cream and the yolks of 2 eggs; set the saucepan in a vessel
of hot water; stir until it comes to a boil; remove from the fire
and flavor with 1 teaspoonful vanilla.

61. +Coffee Cream Sauce.+-- Pour 2 cups boiling hot cream over 2
tablespoonfuls freshly ground coffee; cover tightly and let it stand
10 minutes; then strain the cream through a fine sieve; put the
cream in a small saucepan; add the yolks of 2 eggs, 1 teaspoonful
cornstarch and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; put this over a moderate fire
and stir until it comes to a boil; remove from the stove, pour it
into a sauce bowl and stir the beaten whites of the eggs through it;
serve cold.

62. +Nutmeg Sauce.+-- Mix 1 tablespoonful butter with 1 tablespoonful
flour; add 2 cups boiling water and boil 5 minutes; sweeten with
sugar and flavor with grated nutmeg.

63. +Orange Cream Sauce.+-- Stir the yolks of 4 eggs with 1½
tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream; add 1 teaspoonful butter, a little
grated orange peel and ½ pint sweet cream or milk; put the
ingredients in a small saucepan over the fire and stir till boiling
hot; when cold mix it with a few spoonfuls whipped cream. Lemon
Sauce is made in the same manner. This sauce may also be flavored
with vanilla or lemon extract.

64. +Sabayon Sauce.+-- Put the yolks of 4 eggs and 1 whole egg in a
lined saucepan and beat them with an egg beater to a froth; add 4
tablespoonfuls sugar, a small piece of lemon peel, the juice of 1
lemon and ½ bottle of Rhine wine; 5 minutes before serving put the
saucepan over the fire and beat constantly till boiling hot; but do
not allow it to boil; serve at once. Sabayon of Madeira or Malaga
wine without lemon juice is made the same way. If rum is added in
place of wine it is then called Rum Sabayon Sauce.

65. +Strawberry Chaudeau Sauce.+-- Put 1 cup strawberry juice or
syrup in a saucepan; sweeten to taste; add ½ cup white wine and the
yolks of 2 eggs; beat this over the fire with an egg beater till it
foams and rises up; remove from the fire and mix it with the beaten
whites of 2 eggs; serve with vanilla koch or souflée.

66. +Pineapple Chaudeau Sauce.+-- Put 1 cup pineapple juice or syrup
in a saucepan; sweeten to taste; add ½ cup white wine and the yolks
of 2 eggs; beat this over the fire with an egg beater till it foams
and rises up; remove from the fire and mix it with the beaten whites
of 2 eggs; serve with vanilla koch or souflée.

67. +Raspberry Chaudeau Sauce+ is made the same as Strawberry
Chaudeau Sauce.

68. +Cocoanut Snow Sauce.+-- Beat the whites of 3 eggs to a stiff
froth and boil 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water till it forms a thread
between 2 fingers; then gradually pour it into the beaten whites,
stirring constantly; next add 1 cup freshly grated cocoanut.

69. +Cocoanut Sauce (another way).+-- Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter
with 1 cup powdered sugar to a cream; add by degrees the yolks of 2
eggs; then beat the whites to a stiff froth; mix them with the
sauce; add ¾ cup freshly grated cocoanut and serve with boiled
pudding.

70. +Snow Sauce (with orange flavor).+-- Beat the whites of 2 eggs to
a stiff froth; boil a small cup of sugar with ½ cup water till it
forms a thread between two fingers; remove it from the fire; add the
juice of 1 orange and gradually pour it while hot into the beaten
whites, stirring constantly; add last a little grated rind of orange
and serve. Snow Sauce with lemon flavor is made the same way.

71. +Pistachio Sauce.+-- Stir the yolks of 4 eggs with 1 pint sweet
cream and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar over the fire till nearly boiling;
remove from fire; add 2 ounces finely pounded pistachio nuts; serve
when ice cold with frozen pudding.

72. +Cold Pineapple Sauce.+-- Pare and grate a small, ripe pineapple;
press it through a sieve; add 1 cup sugar and a glass of Rhine wine;
let it stand on ice for 1 hour and serve with frozen pudding.


SYRUPS.

73. +Plain or Sugar Syrup.+-- Dissolve 4 pounds white sugar, 1 quart
cold water and the beaten white of 1 egg; stir until sugar is
dissolved; simmer for 3 minutes; skim well, strain through a fine
flannel bag and bottle in well corked bottles.

74. +Pineapple Syrup.+-- Pare and cut some large, ripe pineapples
into small pieces; put them in a stone jar or large bowl; sprinkle a
little sugar between and let the pineapples stand covered with a
cloth in cellar for 36 hours, or until they have bubbles on top;
then strain through a sieve or coarse bag, and if not clear enough
strain again through a flannel bag; add to each pint of juice 1
pound of sugar; stir until the sugar is melted; then put it over the
fire and simmer 3 minutes; skim and put the syrup in bottles; cork
well and keep them in cool place. This syrup may be thinned with 2
parts plain syrup.

75. +Strawberry Syrup.+-- Choose none but fine, ripe berries if you
wish your syrup to be good; mash the strawberries in a stone jar or
bowl; cover with a thin white cloth and let them stand 24 hours at a
temperature of 70° to 80° F.; then inclose in a flannel bag and
press them; add to each pint of juice 1 pound sugar; stir until the
sugar is dissolved; then put it over the fire, let it boil up, skim
well, remove from fire and bottle while hot.

75a. +Raspberry Syrup+ is made the same as strawberry.

76. +Raspberry and Currant Syrup.+-- Take equal quantities of
raspberries and currants; free the latter from stems; put the fruit
together into a stone jar or bowl, mash it up, cover with a cloth
and let stand for 24 hours; then inclose the fruit in a coarse bag,
press out the juice and to each pint add 1 pound sugar; let it boil
up and bottle.

77. +Raspberry Syrup (without fruit).+-- To make 8 gallons of syrup
prepare a plain syrup of 18 pounds sugar with 5 gallons of water and
put it in a clean mixing barrel; next dissolve 2 ounces tataric acid
in 1 pint cold water and add it to the syrup; then pour 1 quart
boiling water over 4 ounces powdered orrisroot; let it get cold;
then filter; add it also to the syrup and stir up well. Color it
with the following mixture: Take ½ pound mallow or malva flowers and
soak them in ½ gallon water for 6 hours; then mash in a mortar 2
ounces cochineal and 2 ounces alum and pour over these 2 quarts
boiling water, and when cold filter; next mix both colors together,
add them to the syrup and stir for 15-20 minutes. This is an
excellent recipe for imitation of raspberry syrup.

78. +Raspberry Syrup (without boiling).+-- Mash some ripe berries in
a stone jar or bowl and set the paste for 3 days (covered with a
linen cloth) in a cool cellar; then press out the juice through a
coarse bag; let it stand for 6 hours; drain off the clear juice and
leave the sediment; add to 1 pint juice 1 pound sugar, stir for 1
hour and bottle; cork bottles loosely and set them for 4 days in the
sun; then filter through a fine flannel bag; re-bottle the syrup in
small bottles, cork well and cover corks with beeswax. Syrup made in
this way is excellent for sauces. Strawberry and Currant Syrup
without boiling is made in the same manner.

79. +Blackberry Syrup.+-- Mash the blackberries in a stone jar, cover
and let them stand for 48 hours; then strain them through a bag; add
to each pint of juice 1 pound sugar; stir until dissolved; put it
over the fire to boil 3 minutes; skim well; add to each quart of
syrup ½ gill of French brandy and bottle. Or take nice, ripe
berries, mash and strain them; add to each pint of juice 1 pound
sugar, ½ teaspoonful ground cloves and the same of cinnamon and
mace; boil 5 minutes; add to 1 gallon of syrup ½ pint brandy and
bottle.

80. +Peach Syrup.+-- Pare and cut the peaches into small pieces; put
them in a preserving kettle with a little water; crack some of the
peach stones, add them to the peaches and let boil slowly for 15
minutes; then strain through a flannel bag; add to 1 pint juice 1
pound sugar and boil a few minutes; skim well and bottle.

81. +Apricot Syrup+ the same way. Or pare and cut the peaches into
pieces, crack a few of the stones, add them to the fruit and let it
stand 24 hours; then strain; allow for 1 pint juice 1 pound sugar;
let it come to a boil; skim well and bottle.

82. +Cherry Syrup.+-- Pound a sufficient quantity of ripe cherries
(with the pits) in a porcelain or stone mortar; let it stand for 3
days; inclose them in a bag, press out the juice, add to each pint 1
pound sugar; let it boil up once, skim and put the syrup in bottles;
cork and set away for use.

83. +Wild Cherry Syrup+ is made in the same manner as the above.

84. +Wild Cherry Bark Syrup.+-- Pour 1 pint cold water over 4 ounces
well bruised wild cherry bark; let it stand for 36 hours; press out
and let the liquid stand till clear; add 1½ pounds white sugar; stir
until dissolved and strain through fine flannel bag; set away in
well corked bottles.

85. +Vanilla Syrup.+-- Add ½ ounce fluid extract of vanilla to 1
gallon plain syrup. Another recipe: Rub ½ ounce citric acid with a
little plain syrup; add 1 fluid ounce extract of vanilla and 1
gallon plain syrup.

86. +Vanilla Cream Syrup.+-- Add to 3 pints plain syrup 1 ounce
extract of vanilla, 1 quart rich, sweet cream or condensed milk.

87. +Cream Syrup.+-- 1 cup sweet cream, 1 cup milk and 1 pound sugar
are well mixed together, and if it is to be kept for several days
add a little bicarbonate of sodium.

88. +Lemon Syrup.+-- Grate the rind of 16 large, fresh lemons over 8
pounds granulated sugar; add 2 quarts cold water and the juice of
the lemons; stir until the sugar is melted; then strain through a
fine flannel bag and put the syrup in well corked pint bottles. Be
careful to grate off only the yellow part of the rind of the lemons;
the white part will give the syrup a bitter taste. There is no
better lemon syrup made than this. 2 to 3 tablespoonfuls of this
syrup in a glass of cold water makes fine lemonade and is also
excellent for mineral waters and sauces.

89. +Lemon Syrup (with Oil of Lemon).+-- Add to 1 gallon plain syrup
25 drops oil of lemon and 10 drams citric acid; mix the oil and acid
together gradually; then add the syrup slowly, and when well mixed
bottle syrup and keep in a cool place for use.

90. +Another Recipe+:--Add to 1 gallon plain syrup 6 drams tartaric
acid dissolved in a little warm water, 1 ounce gumarabic dissolved
in 1 ounce warm water and ½ dram of the best lemon oil, or a
sufficient quantity of lemon extract to flavor the syrup.

91. +Lemon Syrup (plain).+-- Make of 8 pounds sugar and 2 quarts
water a plain syrup; when nearly cold add 1 quart pure lemon juice;
filter through a Canton flannel filter and bottle.

92. +Orange Syrup.+-- Grate the rind of 12 oranges over 7 pounds
granulated sugar; squeeze out the juice, strain and pour it over the
sugar; add ½ gallon cold water; stir until sugar is dissolved; then
strain through a fine flannel bag and bottle. Care should be taken
to grate only the yellow part of the rind of the oranges, as the
least particle of white will make the syrup bitter.

93. +Orange Flower Syrup.+-- Add to 1 pint orange flower water 1¾
pounds sugar; stir until the sugar is dissolved; then bottle.




EXTRACTS AND ESSENCES.


94. +Essence of Lemon.+-- Grate the rind of 12 lemons; put this in a
bottle with 1 pint alcohol and 1 teaspoonful lemon oil; cork bottle
tightly; set in a warm place; shake every day and after 2 weeks it
will be ready for use.

95. +Essence of Vanilla.+-- Take 1 ounce vanilla beans; split each
bean in two (lengthwise); then cut into small pieces; put these into
a large bottle with 1 pint alcohol and 1 pint water; cork the
bottle, not too tightly; set in a warm place for 3 weeks and shake
it once every day; it will them be ready for use.

96. +Bischof Essence.+-- Pare off the peel of 12 green oranges; put
them with 1 bottle of good rum in a glass jar that is used for
preserving fruit; let it stand 24 hours; then pour the essence
into small bottles and set in a cool place for further use; 2
tablespoonfuls to 1 bottle of claret are sufficient.

97. +Essence of Oranges.+-- Pare off the peel of 8 yellow and 4 green
oranges; put them in a large bottle or glass jar with 1 quart
arrack; set in a warm place for 2 weeks; then strain through
filtering paper, put into small bottles and set them in a cool place
for further use; 2 tablespoonfuls essence are sufficient for 1
bottle wine.

98. +Peach Essence.+-- Dissolve 1 fluid dram oil of bitter almonds in
7 pints rectified spirits of 90 per cent.; allow the solution to
stand for a few days and then filter it; put away in well corked
bottles.

99. +Bitter Almond Essence.+-- Dissolve 1 fluid dram oil of bitter
almonds in 3 quarts rectified spirits of 90 per cent. and store the
fluid for some time before using it.

100. +Coffee Essence.+-- Pour 3 pints rectified spirits of 90 per
cent. over 5¼ ounces finely roasted and ground coffee; let it stand
for several days, draw off the fluid and filter.

101. +Cherry Essence.+-- Press out the flesh of ripe cherries; let
the mass stand quietly in a moderately warm room until the pure
juice has separated from the pulp; then place the mass in a bag,
press the juice out, let it stand for a few hours longer and add an
equal quantity of rectified spirits of 90 per cent.

102. +Strawberry Essence.+-- Bruise 4½ pounds wild strawberries; pour
3 quarts spirits of 90 per cent, over the mass; let it stand for
some time and filter. The product will be about 1 gallon of
strawberry essence.

103. +Raspberry Essence.+-- Crush 2 pounds ripe raspberries; press
them out and add 2 quarts rectified spirits of 90 per cent.

104. +Rose Essence.+-- Dissolve 2 fluid drams rose oil in 1⅓ quarts
rectified spirits of 90 per cent. and filter the solution.

105. +Orange Blossom Extract.+-- Pour 1¼ pints boiling milk over 10½
ounces fresh orange blossoms; place same over the fire and let it
boil up; then add 3 quarts rectified spirits of 90 per cent.; mix it
thoroughly, add 2½ pints champagne and filter.

106. +Orange Peel Extract.+-- Crush in a stone mortar the rind of 12
oranges with some sugar; place the mass into a glass jar; add ⅓
gallon of rectified spirits of 90 per cent.; let it stand for 4
days; then decant the clear liquid and filter it; put away in well
corked bottles.

107. +Italian Meringue.+-- Whites of 5 eggs beaten to a stiff froth,
1 pound sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract, ¾ cup water; put sugar
and water over the fire in a saucepan (one of agateware is best);
stir until sugar is dissolved; next put saucepan over the fire and
boil till the sugar begins to foam; then take some of the boiling
sugar in a spoon and blow it; if it flows off the spoon in large
bubbles it is ready to use; wipe the rim of saucepan clean with a
damp cloth and remove the sugar from fire; let it cool for 2
minutes; then pour it slowly into the beaten whites, stirring
constantly.

108. +Meringue.+-- ½ pound powdered sugar and the whites of 5 eggs;
carefully separate the whites from the yolks; put the whites in a
deep kettle for 15 minutes on ice; then whip it with an egg beater
to a stiff froth; mix in slowly the sugar and use at once. This
meringue is used for ornamenting puddings and cakes.

109. +Spinach Green (for coloring).+-- Wash a few handfuls spinach,
press it out and pound in a mortar to a pulp; then press out the
juice in a cloth; put the spinach liquid in a small saucepan; put it
for a few minutes over the fire; as soon as the liquid curdles pour
it on a fine sieve; let the water run off and the green which
remains press through a fine sieve and put it in a well covered
glass till wanted. Spinach green is used for coloring creams or
puddings.

110. +Sugar Color.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 pound sugar and ½ pint
water over the fire and boil till the sugar is dark brown and nearly
black; then add 1 pint boiling water; stir until all the sugar is
well dissolved; boil it for a few minutes; then remove from fire and
put it into a well corked bottle. This color is used for coloring
soups, sauces and sometimes jellies.

111. +Lemon Sugar.+-- Grate the rind of 12 lemons; mix the grated
lemon peel with 1 pound powdered sugar; put into well closed jars
and set in a cool place; is used for cake sauces and puddings
instead of freshly grated lemon peel.

112. +Vanilla Sugar.+-- Split the vanilla bean, lengthwise, in two;
put some granulated sugar on a plate and scrape the seed out of the
vanilla bean; mix it with the sugar and put away in a well closed
jar.

113. +Red Sugar.+-- Sift out all the fine part of ½ pound granulated
sugar; put the sugar on a piece of thick brown paper, drop a few
drops of cochineal over the sugar and rub it with the hands till the
sugar becomes a red color.

114. +Green Sugar+ is prepared in the same manner as the foregoing,
but care must be taken to use only green vegetable coloring.




FRENCH CREAMS.


115. +Creme Française à la Vanille.+-- Put 1 quart sweet cream with
the yolks of 8 eggs into a saucepan; add ¾ cup sugar and stir the
whole over the fire with an egg beater till nearly boiling; remove
from fire, add 2 teaspoonfuls essence of vanilla and 1½ ounces
clarified gelatine (see Gelatine); continue stirring until the cream
has cooled off; then set a plain form with tube in center into
cracked ice, pour in the cream, cover and let it remain for 2 hours.
If the form is oiled with fine almond oil the cream will turn out
without dipping the form into hot water; the oiling is best done
with a fine brush; the form is then turned upside down, so that all
superfluous oil has a chance to run out.

116. +Creme Française au Chocolat.+-- Melt ¼ pound grated chocolate
in the oven; then put it with 1 quart cream, ¾ cup sugar and the
yolks of 8 eggs over the fire; stir until nearly boiling; remove it
from fire, add 1 teaspoonful essence of vanilla and 1 ounce
clarified gelatine and finish same as in foregoing recipe.

117. +Creme Française aux Amandes.+-- 1 quart cream, ¼ pound blanched
and finely pounded almonds, the yolks of 8 eggs, ½ cup sugar and ½
vanilla bean; boil the cream and pour it over the pounded almonds;
cover and let it stand till cold; then strain the cream through a
sieve; place a saucepan with the cream, yolks, vanilla and sugar
over the fire; stir with an egg beater till nearly boiling; remove
it from the fire and finish the same as Crême Française à la
Vanille.

118. +Creme Française au Café.+-- Pour 1 quart boiling cream over 4
tablespoonfuls fresh, ground coffee; cover and let it stand for 5
minutes; then strain through a fine sieve of cloth; place a saucepan
over the fire with the coffee cream, yolks of 8 eggs and 5
tablespoonfuls sugar and stir till nearly boiling; finish the same
as Crême Française à la Vanille.

119. +Creme Française au Thé.+-- Pour 1 quart boiling cream over 2
tablespoonfuls of the best black tea; let it stand, well covered,
for 5 minutes; then strain; put the tea cream with the yolks of 8
eggs and 5 tablespoonfuls sugar in saucepan over the fire and stir
till nearly boiling; finish the same as Crême Française à la
Vanille.

120. +Creme Française au Marasquin.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 quart
cream, the yolks of 8 eggs, ½ cup sugar and 1 teaspoonful vanilla
over the fire and stir till nearly boiling; remove it from the fire
and add 16 sheets of gelatine which has been soaked in cold water
for 10 minutes and pressed out; add lastly ½ pint maraschino and
finish the same as Crême Française à la Vanille.

121. +Creme Française au Rhum+ is made the same as the foregoing,
substituting rum for maraschino.

122. +Petits Pots Creme à la Vanille.+-- Mix well together 1 quart
cream, yolks of 8 eggs, 4 whole eggs and 5 tablespoonfuls sugar;
fill the cream into buttered custard cups, set them in a pan of hot
water on top of the stove, cover with a pan or paper and boil till
contents are firm; remove from fire and set aside to cool; in
serving turn the cream onto a dish and send whipped cream to table
with it.

123. +Creme au Bain-Marie au Caramel.+-- Boil ¾ cup sugar to a
caramel (see Boiling Sugar), add a little boiling water, remove from
fire and stir for a few minutes; then place a saucepan with 1 quart
cream or milk, 4 whole eggs and the yolks of 8 eggs over the fire;
add the caramel sugar and stir till nearly boiling; fill the cream
into a buttered form, cover it tightly and place the form into a
vessel of hot water; let it stand for 1½ hours on the hot stove; the
water should be boiling hot, but must not boil; when done take it
from the fire, set in cool place; when cold and ready to serve turn
the cream onto a round dish and send to table without sauce.

124. +Creme au Bain-Marie au Chocolat.+-- Melt 4 tablespoonfuls
Baker’s chocolate in the oven; mix it with 1 quart cream or milk, 5
tablespoonfuls sugar and boil 5 minutes, stirring constantly; remove
it from the fire and when cold add 4 whole eggs, the yolks of 8 and
1 teaspoonful vanilla; beat these well together with an egg beater;
butter a form with a tube in the center and sprinkle with fine
zwieback crumbs; pour in the cream, cover the form and set in a
vessel of hot water; let it boil slowly for an hour; remove it from
the fire and set aside to cool; when ready to serve turn the cream
onto a dish, garnish with fancy cake and send whipped cream à la
vanilla to table with it.

125. +Vienna Orange Cream.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in ½ cup cold
water 15 minutes, add ½ cup boiling water and stir over the fire
till dissolved; stir the yolks of 12 eggs with 12 tablespoonfuls
sugar to a cream; add by degrees the juice of 8 oranges and 3
lemons, and lastly the gelatine; continue stirring until it begins
to thicken; then add the whites, beaten to a stiff froth; rinse out
a mould with cold water and sprinkle with sugar, pour in the cream
and set it on ice for 2 hours.

126. +Vienna Lemon Cream.+-- Stir the yolks of 10 eggs with 1 cup
sugar to a cream; add the juice of 4 lemons and the grated rind of ½
a one; lay 12 sheets of gelatine in cold water for 10 minutes, press
out and dissolve it in ½ cup boiling water; add it by degrees to the
cream and continue stirring till it begins to thicken; then add the
whites, beaten to a stiff froth; rinse out a form with cold water
and sprinkle with sugar, turn in the cream and set on ice till firm.

127. +Milk Cream.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup of milk; place a
saucepan with 3 cups milk, ¾ cup sugar, 1½ teaspoonfuls vanilla and
the yolks of 6 eggs in a vessel of boiling water and stir with an
egg beater till nearly boiling; remove from the fire, add the
gelatine and stir till it becomes cold and begins to thicken; then
add the whites, beaten to a stiff froth, turn the cream into a form
and set on ice till firm; serve with cold pineapple or strawberry
sauce; the form should be rinsed with cold water and sprinkled with
sugar before the cream is put in.

128. +Russian Cream.+-- Stir the yolks of 9 eggs with 9
tablespoonfuls sugar for ½ hour; add the juice and grated rind of 1
lemon and ½ pint best rum; lay 5 sheets of gelatine for 5 minutes in
cold water, press out and put it in ½ cup boiling water; stir until
dissolved; then mix it by degrees, stirring constantly, with the
above mixture; when it begins to thicken add the whites, beaten to a
stiff froth, rinse out a mould with cold water, sprinkle with sugar,
fill in the cream and set in a cool place till firm.

129. +Sabayon of Oranges.+-- Soak 12 sheets of gelatine in cold water
for 10 minutes; in the meantime put the juice of 4 oranges, the thin
peel of 1, ¾ cup sugar, ½ bottle wine (white is best), 2 whole eggs
and the yolks of 6 in a saucepan over the fire; beat this with an
egg beater till nearly boiling; remove it from the fire and take out
the peel, press out the gelatine, add it to the cream and continue
the beating till cold; fill it into a cream form and place for 2
hours on ice.

130. +Sabayon of Lemon.+-- Soak 12 sheets of gelatine in cold water;
put in a saucepan 2 whole eggs and the yolks of 10; add 1 cup sugar,
the juice of 3 lemons, the thin peel of 1 and ½ bottle Rhine wine;
beat this with an egg beater till nearly boiling; remove at once,
press out the gelatine, add it to the cream and continue beating
till cold and beginning to thicken; fill it into a cream form and
set on ice till wanted.

131. +Whipped Cream.+-- Put 1 quart of rich, sweet cream into a deep
vessel or stone jar and let it stand on ice for an hour; then beat
it with an egg beater until stiff; then add sufficient powdered
sugar to sweeten and any kind of flavor that may be liked.

132. +Whipped Cream (with Strawberries).+-- Put 1 quart ripe
strawberries in a colander and rinse with cold water; when well
drained put the berries into a glass dish, sprinkle over them 1 cup
powdered sugar and set for ½ hour on ice; whip 1 pint sweet cream to
a froth, sweeten with powdered sugar and set on ice until wanted;
when ready for use pour the cream over berries and serve at once, or
send each in a separate dish to the table.

133. +Cream (with Pineapple).+-- Prepare the cream in the same manner
as the foregoing; pare a ripe sugar-loaf pineapple and break it from
the stalk into pieces with a silver fork; put the fruit into a glass
dish and sprinkle 1 cup sugar over it; set the dish on ice for 1
hour; when ready to serve pour the cream over pineapple and send to
table at once.

134. +Whipped Cream (with Chocolate).+-- Boil ¼ pound grated
chocolate in ½ cup water with ½ cup sugar and a little vanilla; when
cold mix it with 1 pint whipped cream and set on ice till wanted.

135. +Whipped Cream (with Oranges).+-- Pare 6 large oranges, cut them
into pieces, remove the pits, put the fruit into a glass dish and
sprinkle over it ½ cup powdered sugar; have 1 pint cream, beaten to
a stiff froth, mixed with 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar and
set fruit and cream on ice till wanted; when ready to serve pour
cream over the oranges and send to table at once, or serve each in a
separate dish.

136. +Creme Fouettée à la Cobby.+-- Mix with whipped cream some fruit
marmalade and put it in layers in a glass dish with some preserved
cherries and macaroons between each layer; arrange the cream high up
in the dish and garnish with lady fingers or fancy cake.

137. +Whipped Cream (with Peaches).+-- Pare and cut 6 large, ripe
peaches into quarters; put the fruit into a glass dish, sprinkle
over it ½ cup powdered sugar and set the dish on ice for 1 hour;
also have 1 pint of whipped and sweetened cream standing on ice; in
serving cover the peaches with cream; break some lady fingers apart,
stand them around the dish and serve at once. Or serve cream and
fruit in separate dishes. Instead of fresh fruit preserved fruit may
be used.

138. +Whipped Cream (with Cherries).+-- Remove the pits from 1 pound
of large cherries; put the fruit in a glass dish with ½ cup sugar;
set the dish for an hour or two on ice; also have 1 pint of whipped
cream on ice; when ready to serve spread the cream over the
cherries, or serve each in a separate dish, and send sponge or fancy
cake to the table with it. Canned cherries, apricots or peaches may
be substituted for fresh fruit.




BOILED CREAMS.


139. +Vanilla Cream.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 pint cream or milk
over the fire, add 2 tablespoonfuls flour, the yolks of 4 eggs, 1
tablespoonful butter, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla
extract and a sprinkle of salt; stir this until it comes to a boil;
when cold mix cream with the yolk of 1 egg and a little sweet cream.

140. +Chocolate Cream.+-- Mix 2 tablespoonfuls flour with 1 pint of
milk or cream; add ½ teaspoonful vanilla extract, ¼ pound grated
chocolate, 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, ½ tablespoonful butter,
a sprinkle of salt and the yolks of 4 eggs; place this in a saucepan
over the fire and stir till it boils; then remove and set aside to
cool.

141. +Orange Cream.+-- Mix 2 tablespoonfuls flour with 1 pint milk or
cream, add ½ tablespoonful butter, 3½ tablespoonfuls sugar, the
yolks of 3 or 4 eggs and the grated rind of ½ an orange and stir the
cream over the fire till it boils; then set aside to cool.

142. +Almond Cream.+-- Pound 6 ounces of blanched almonds with a
little cream to a paste; mix them with 1 pint of sweet cream or
milk, add 2 tablespoonfuls flour, 3½ tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks
of 4 eggs, a little salt, ½ teaspoonful vanilla extract and ½
tablespoonful butter; stir this over the fire till it boils; then
remove and set the cream aside to cool.

143. +Coffee Cream.+-- Put 3 ounces fresh roasted Mocha coffee into 1
pint boiling cream; let it stand 15 minutes; then strain, add to the
coffee cream 2 tablespoonfuls flour, ½ tablespoonful butter, 4
tablespoonfuls sugar, a sprinkle of salt and the yolks of 6 eggs;
stir this over the fire till it boils; remove it and set the cream
aside to cool.

144. +Creme Frangipane à la Vanille.+-- Mix ½ cup flour with 2 cups
cream, add 5 well beaten eggs, a sprinkle of salt, 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar, 1 tablespoonful butter and 1 teaspoonful vanilla; stir this
over the fire till it boils; remove it, add 8 well pounded macaroons
and set aside to cool. Instead of vanilla a little orange or lemon
peel may be substituted. Blanched almonds, raisins, currants, finely
cut citron or any kind of fruit such as pineapples, strawberries or
peaches may also be used.




JELLIES.


145. +Jellies+ should be as clear as crystal, not too sweet and just
firm enough to hold together. Jellies that have to stand any length
of time on the buffets must, of course, be firmer. A good plan is to
make a trial by putting a little in a tin cup and setting it on ice
before the jelly is put into a form.

146. +To Clarify Gelatine.+-- Put 2 ounces gelatine in a saucepan,
add ½ pint cold water and let it stand 10 minutes; then add ½ pint
boiling water, set the saucepan in a vessel of boiling water and
stir until gelatine is dissolved; beat the whites of 2 eggs to a
froth, add the juice of 1 large lemon and a little cold water; stir
this into the gelatine, continue stirring until it boils, remove to
side of stove and let it stand 5 minutes without boiling; then
strain through a jelly bag and use as directed in following recipes.

147. +To Clarify Sugar.+-- Put 1 pound sugar in 1 pint cold water
and stir till sugar is dissolved; then strain through a napkin.
A quicker way is to boil the sugar and water with the juice of 1
lemon for a few minutes and strain the same way.

148. +To Clarify Fruit Juice.+-- Lay a few sheets of filtering paper
in water and let them soak for 15 minutes, changing the water twice;
then press them out, pick into small pieces, wet a little again with
water and put the paper into a small sieve; pour the fruit juice
onto the paper and let it run through into a dish. If not clear the
first time pour back again and let it run through once more.

149. +Jelly Bag.+-- Take ¾ yard of white flannel and make a bias bag;
this is done by taking the flannel on the bias, sewing the bottom
and side together to a point; cut it even on top and hem; then sew a
string on each end of hem. In using the bag lay a broom with one end
on the back of a chair and the other end on a table; tie the bag
onto the broom, in the center, so that it hangs between the table
and chair; set a bowl underneath the bag; then pour in the jelly;
pour that which runs through first back again into the bag; repeat
this once or twice more until the jelly runs through clear. When all
the jelly has run through fill it into a mould and set either on ice
or in a cool place.

150. +Orange Jelly.+-- Clarify 2 ounces of gelatine as directed (see
Clarifying Gelatine), dissolve 1 pound sugar in 1 pint water, add
the thin peel of 2 oranges and let it stand 1 hour; then remove
orange peel and strain the sugar syrup through a napkin; remove the
peel from 4 oranges, divide them into small quarters and remove the
pits without breaking the fruit; next pour the juice of 8 oranges
and 2 lemons through filtering paper (see Clarifying Fruit Juice);
as soon as the gelatine, fruit juice and sugar are clarified mix the
three together, place a jelly form into cracked ice, pour in a few
spoonfuls jelly and when firm lay in one-third of the orange
quarters, which should be wiped dry with a napkin; add sufficient
jelly to cover the fruit and when hard lay over another third; cover
again with jelly and continue until all is used up; cover the form,
lay some ice on top and let it stand till firm; when ready to serve
dip the form into hot water, wipe it dry, remove cover, turn the
jelly into a dish and serve with vanilla sauce or sweet cream.
NOTE.--If the inside of jelly mould is brushed with pure almond oil
the form need not be dipped in hot water, as the jelly will slip out
without any trouble. Fine olive oil may also be used, but care
should be taken to use only the very best, as otherwise the flavor
of the jelly will be spoiled.

151. +Plain Orange Jelly.+-- Dissolve and clarify 1 ounce gelatine in
½ pint water as directed, dissolve 1 cup sugar in ½ pint water, add
the thin peel of 1 orange and let it stand 1 hour; then strain
through a napkin; let the juice of 5 oranges and 1 lemon run through
filtering paper or a fine napkin; mix the gelatine, fruit juice and
sugar syrup together, pour it into a jelly mould and set in a cool
place to get firm; when ready to serve dip the form into hot water,
turn the jelly onto a dish and serve with the following sauce:--Beat
1 egg to a froth, add by degrees 1 cup milk, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar
and 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract.

152. +Lemon Jelly.+-- Clarify 2 ounces gelatine as directed, dissolve
1¼ pounds sugar in 1 pint water, add the grated rind of 2 lemons and
let it stand ½ hour; then strain through a napkin; let 1 pint of
lemon juice run through filtering paper (see Clarifying Fruit
Juice); when the three ingredients have been clarified mix them
together, fill the jelly into a jelly mould, set it on ice or in a
cold place to get firm and serve same as Orange Jelly.

153. +Strawberry Jelly.+-- Put 1 quart ripe strawberries in a
colander, rinse them off with cold water and when drained mash them
well in a bowl with a silver spoon; dissolve ¾ pound sugar in 1 pint
cold water, add the juice of 1 lemon and put it over the fire to
boil 5 minutes; strain through a napkin and when cold pour it over
the strawberries; let them stand 3 hours; then strain the berries,
first through a jelly bag and then through filtering paper; also let
the juice of 2 oranges run through filtering paper; clarify 2 ounces
gelatine as directed and when cold add it to the fruit juice; then
make a trial by filling a few spoonfuls in a tin cup and set it on
ice to form; if not firm enough add a little more dissolved
gelatine; fill the jelly alternately with large strawberries in a
jelly form and finish the same as Orange Jelly; serve with whipped
cream.

154. +Pineapple Jelly.+-- Pare and cut a large, ripe pineapple into
quarters, remove the hard core from the center and cut the quarters
of pineapple into fine slices; dissolve 1 pound sugar in 1 pint cold
water and juice of 1 lemon, pour it over the pineapple pieces, cover
and let it stand for 2 hours; chop the eyes and hard core of
pineapple very fine, put them with 1 pint water in a saucepan over
the fire and boil slowly ½ hour; when cold strain them and add the
liquid to the pineapple; in the meantime clarify 2 ounces gelatine
as directed; then drain the pineapple in a sieve, wipe the slices
dry with a napkin and lay them on a plate; let the pineapple syrup
run through filtering paper or napkin and mix it with the clarified
gelatine; also let the juice of 2 oranges and 1 lemon run through
filtering paper and add it to the jelly; then make a trial to see if
firm enough; place jelly form in cracked ice, pour a few spoonfuls
of jelly into the form and when hard put in a layer of pineapple;
cover them with jelly and when firm put in another layer of
pineapple; continue until all is used up; then cover the form, put
some ice on top of form and let it remain till jelly is firm; serve
with or without cream or vanilla sauce. This jelly may also be made
of preserved pineapple.

155. +Jelly of Peaches.+-- Pare 8 large, ripe peaches, cut them into
halves, remove the stones and cut each half into 3 or 4 pieces; put
the fruit into a bowl and pour over it 1 pint of sugar syrup; let
them stand well covered for 2 hours; scald the pits, remove the
brown skin and put them with the peaches; then let the syrup run
through filtering paper, mix it with 2 ounces clarified gelatine,
fill the jelly with the peaches and pits in alternate layers in a
form and finish the same as Orange Jelly.

156. +Raspberry Jelly.+-- Press the juice from 1 quart ripe
raspberries, add the juice of 1 lemon and filter it through
filtering paper (see Clarifying Fruit Juice); dissolve ¾ pound sugar
in 1 pint water, strain through a napkin and add it to the raspberry
juice; add 2 ounces clarified gelatine; set a jelly form into
cracked ice and fill the jelly alternately with large, ripe
raspberries into the form and finish the same as Orange Jelly.

157. +Wine Jelly.+-- Soak 2 ounces gelatine in ½ pint cold water for
10 minutes; then add ½ pint boiling water and stir the whole over
the fire till gelatine is dissolved; add the rind and juice of 1
lemon, 2 whole cloves, a small piece of cinnamon and the well beaten
whites of 2 eggs; stir this with an egg beater till it boils; then
remove the saucepan with its contents to side of stove and let it
remain for 5 minutes without boiling; then strain it through a
flannel jelly bag; dissolve ¾ pound sugar in 1 pint cold water,
strain it through a napkin and add it with 1 pint Madeira to the
gelatine; rinse out a jelly mould with cold water, pour in the jelly
and set it on ice or in a cool place till firm. Instead of Madeira
wine any other kind may be used.

158. +Rhine Wine Jelly.+-- Dissolve and clarify 2 ounces gelatine and
dissolve 1 pound sugar in 1 pint water; add the rind of 2 lemons and
the juice of 1; let it stand 1 hour; then strain through a napkin;
let the juice of 2 lemons run through filtering paper, add it with 1
pint Rhine wine and the sugar syrup to the clarified gelatine, fill
the jelly in a form and set it on ice or in a cool place.

159. +Champagne Jelly.+-- Dissolve and clarify 2 ounces gelatine (see
Gelatine), dissolve ¾ pound sugar in 1 pint cold water, strain it
through a napkin, add to the gelatine with ½ bottle champagne and
the filtered juice of 4 lemons, fill into a form and set it in a
cool place or on ice.

160. +Apple Jelly.+-- Grate 1 quart tart apples, put them in a bag
and press out the juice, add the juice of 1 orange and let both run
through a filtering paper; clarify 2 ounces gelatine, dissolve ¾
pound sugar in 1 pint cold water, strain through a napkin and add it
with the apple juice to the clarified gelatine; rinse a mould with
cold water, pour in the jelly and set it in a cool place or on ice
till firm. Another way is:--Pare, core and quarter some tart apples
and boil them in sugar syrup to which the juice of 1 lemon has been
added; when the apples are done remove carefully, so as not to break
them, lay on a sieve to drain and when cold lay into the mould
alternately with the jelly and finish like Orange Jelly.

161. +Cider Jelly.+-- Soak 2 ounces gelatine in ½ pint cold water for
15 minutes; then add ½ pint boiling water, put it over the fire and
stir till gelatine is dissolved; add the juice of 1 lemon and the
beaten whites of 2 eggs; stir with an egg beater until it boils;
then draw to side of stove and let it stand 5 minutes; then strain
through a flannel jelly bag; dissolve ¾ pound sugar in 1 quart sweet
cider, strain through a jelly bag and add it to the gelatine; pour
it into a jelly mould and set in a cool place until firm.

162. +Rose Jelly.+-- Put 1 quart of freshly gathered rose leaves in a
glass jar, squeeze the juice of 1 lemon over them, pour over the
whole 1 cup boiling water, close the jar tightly and set aside till
next day; then press out the juice (by putting the rose leaves in a
coarse bag), let the liquid run through filtering paper (see
Clarifying Fruit Juice), add 1 pint cold clarified sugar syrup, ½
pint white wine and 2 ounces clarified gelatine; next pour the jelly
into a mould and set aside to cool.

163. +Gelée Russe.+-- Clarify 1 ounce gelatine and dissolve ½ pound
sugar in ½ pint water; add the grated peel of 2 lemons; let it stand
15 minutes; then strain through a napkin; let ½ pint lemon juice run
through filtering paper; mix the clarified gelatine, sugar syrup and
lemon juice together; put it in a deep kettle, set into cracked ice
and whip the contents until it foams and begins to thicken; then
fill it into a form and cover and pack with cracked ice till firm,
which will take about 2 hours. Orange and Wine Jelly may be made in
the same manner.

164. +Macédoine de Fruit à la Russe.+-- Prepare a Rhine Wine Jelly,
set a form into cracked ice, pour in a few spoonfuls jelly and let
it get hard; lay over it a layer of fruit, such as strawberries,
slices of pineapple or peaches, and pour over sufficient jelly to
cover the fruit; put the remaining jelly into a deep kettle, set
into cracked ice and beat with an egg beater till it foams and
begins to thicken; then mix with 3 or 4 different kinds of fruit,
either fresh or preserved, fill into the jelly form, cover closely
and let it stand 2 hours; when ready to serve dip the form in hot
water, wipe it dry, remove the cover, turn the jelly onto a dish and
garnish with sugared fruit.

165. +Calvesfoot Jelly.+-- Choose 4 calves’ feet with the skin on (if
without the skin 6 must be taken), crack and wash them well, put
over the fire, cover with cold water and boil till they fall apart;
strain the liquor through a fine sieve and let it stand in a cool
place; next day skim off every particle of fat and remove the
sediment; put the jelly over the fire and reduce it down to 2 quarts
by boiling; beat up the whites of 4 eggs, add a little cold water,
the juice of 2 lemons and the thin peel of one, 6 cloves and a piece
of cinnamon; add this to the contents of saucepan, stirring
constantly; boil for a few minutes; then move the saucepan to side
of stove and let it stand for 5 minutes without boiling; then strain
it through a double flannel bag; dissolve 2 cups sugar in 1 pint
sherry or Madeira wine, strain through a napkin and add it to the
strained jelly; rinse out the moulds with cold water, put in the
jelly and set in a cool place. This jelly may be put into tightly
corked bottles, and will keep for a long time. When wanted for use
set the bottle in hot water until the jelly melts; then pour it into
moulds and set in a cool place till firm.

166. +Macédoine de Fruits au vin du Rhine.+-- Prepare a Rhine wine
jelly a little stiffer than the ordinary jellies; take large, ripe
raspberries, strawberries, currants, peaches (pared and cut into
eighths) and pineapples cut into small slices; put them in a dish
on ice; next set a form into cracked ice, pour in a few spoonfuls
jelly and when hard lay in some of the fruit, either each kind by
itself in small clusters or mixed one with the other; pour over this
sufficient jelly to cover the fruit; let it get hard and again lay
over some fruit; continue alternately with fruit and jelly till form
is full; cover and let it remain in ice till firm; in serving dip
the form into hot water, wipe it dry and turn the macédoine onto a
round dish. In winter preserved fruit and apples and pears may be
used. The apples and pears are to be cut into quarters and boiled
for a few minutes in sugar syrup. The latter should be colored with
a little cochineal.

167. +Gelée à la Moscovite.+-- Any kind of fruit jelly may be used
for this, using only half the quantity of gelatine as for jelly; put
into a form, cover it, paste a strip of buttered paper around the
edge of cover and pack the form in ice and rock salt for 2 hours;
only freeze about an inch all around, leaving it soft in the center;
preserved fruit may be mixed with the jelly before it is put into
the form; serve the moscovite in a glass dish and garnish with fruit
or fancy cake.

168. +Orange Baskets (with Jelly).+-- Choose 1 dozen large oranges
and cut them into the shape of small baskets with handles; this is
done by holding the orange in the left hand and cutting with a
penknife a small quarter from each side of the orange toward the
top, so as to leave the skin for the handle ½ inch wide; then cut
the skin evenly all around; next separate the inside from the
outside skin with the penknife and completely hollow the orange out,
so that only little more than half of the skin with the handle is
left; cut the edges into small scallops with a scizzors and lay the
baskets in cold water; press out the juice from the oranges and with
it make a jelly (see Orange Jelly); take the baskets from the water,
wipe dry and with a napkin under them set on a tray; have the jelly
on ice and when it begins to thicken fill up the baskets and place
them on ice; if there should be any small holes in the baskets paste
them up from the outside with butter, which must be removed before
serving; serve on a napkin and garnish with green leaves. These
baskets may also be filled with Gelée Russe.

169. +Orange Quarters Used for Garnishing Jellies and Other
Dishes.+-- Take 6 large oranges, cut out a round piece on the side of
stem and hollow out so that nothing is left but the outside skin;
care must be taken to leave none of the white coating on the inside
of skin; after preparing this way put them in a saucepan over the
fire with boiling water and boil 5 minutes; rinse with cold water,
wipe them dry and fill each one either with clear jelly of different
colors or blanc-mange; set them on ice until hard; cut them into
quarters and use for garnishing different dishes. Small patty forms
filled with jelly are also used for the same purpose.

170. +Almond Blanc-Mange.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup cold milk
for 15 minutes; then add 3 cups boiling milk, 6 tablespoonfuls
sugar, ¼ pound blanched almonds (among the latter there should be a
few bitter ones) and pound them in a mortar with a little water to a
paste; set the saucepan with its contents into a vessel of boiling
water and stir till it boils; remove from the fire and let it stand
for 5 minutes; then strain through a muslin bag, add 1 teaspoonful
extract of vanilla and set aside to cool; rinse out a quart mould
with cold water and sprinkle with sugar; pour in the cold
blanc-mange and set in a cool place till it becomes firm; when ready
to serve loosen the blanc-mange around the edge on top and turn it
over onto a dish; it may then be served either with or without fruit
or vanilla sauce. Instead of almonds any other kind of flavoring may
be used.

171. +Chocolate Blanc-Mange.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup cold
milk for 15 minutes; then add 2½ cups boiling milk; mix ¼ pound
grated Baker’s chocolate with ½ cup cold milk; add it to the
gelatine with 6 tablespoonfuls sugar; place this in a saucepan over
the fire and stir till it boils; remove from fire, add 1 teaspoonful
vanilla extract and when cold pour it into the moulds, which have
been rinsed out with cold water and sprinkled with sugar; set in a
cool place till firm; this may be served with or without vanilla
sauce.

172. +Blanc-Mange Marbre au Chocolat.+-- Make half the quantity of
both the Almond and Chocolate Blanc-Mange; rinse out a mould with
cold water, sprinkle with sugar and place into cracked ice; pour in
a few spoonfuls almond blanc-mange and let it get firm; then put in
a few spoonfuls chocolate blanc-mange; when the latter is firm again
put in some of the almond blanc-mange; continue in this way until
all is used; let the form remain for 2 hours on ice and then serve
with vanilla sauce.

173. +Cream Blanc-Mange.+-- Soak in a small tin ½ ounce gelatine in ½
cup cold water for 15 minutes; set the tin in a saucepan of boiling
water and stir until gelatine is dissolved; beat 1 pint rich, sweet
cream to a stiff froth; add 4 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar and 1
teaspoonful vanilla or lemon flavoring; when this is well mixed add
the gelatine by degrees, beating constantly; rinse out a mould with
cold water, sprinkle with sugar, fill in the blanc-mange and set on
ice an hour or two before serving.

174. +Plain Blanc-Mange.+-- Boil 1 quart milk with 6 tablespoonfuls
sugar; add 1 ounce gelatine which has been soaked in a little cold
water for 15 minutes; stir this over the fire until gelatine is
dissolved; remove it from fire and when cold add 2 teaspoonfuls
vanilla; rinse out a form with cold water, sprinkle with sugar, pour
in the blanc-mange and set it on ice; serve with vanilla sauce.

175. +Cocoanut Blanc-Mange.+-- Stir into the plain blanc-mange when
it begins to thicken 2 cups freshly grated cocoanut.

176. +Neapolitan Blanc-Mange.+-- Prepare an almond blanc-mange,
strain and divide it into 4 equal parts; add to first part 1
tablespoonful grated chocolate and let it boil for a few minutes;
mix second part with the yolks of 2 eggs and stir it over the fire
till just about to boil; add to third part a few drops of cochineal,
to color it pink; leave fourth part uncolored; rinse out a mould
with cold water, sprinkle with sugar and place it into cracked ice;
as soon as the blanc-mange becomes cold and begins to thicken put in
first the white; after 5 minutes put in the pink; again waiting 5
minutes, put in the yellow and after a few minutes put in the
chocolate; let it remain on ice till firm; when ready to serve work
top free from the edge with a few light touches of your finger and
turn the blanc-mange onto a dish.

177. +Nest with Eggs.+-- Prepare 1 quart almond blanc-mange; take
12 fresh eggs, make a small hole in one end of each and let the
contents flow out; rinse each shell well with cold water; then fill
them with blanc-mange and set in a pan of sugar or flour, the open
end up; place them in a cool place till hard; boil 1 pound sugar to
a crack and spin it into quite long threads (see Spinning Sugar);
with these threads form a nest a little smaller than the dish it is
to be served in; dip each egg into warm water, wipe dry, break
shells from about the blanc-mange and lay the artificial eggs in the
nest. Another way is to make 1½ quarts orange or wine jelly; cut the
rind of 3 oranges into long narrow strips and boil them for 20
minutes in water, changing the water 3 times; drain them on a sieve;
put 1½ cups sugar with 1 pint water over the fire and when it boils
add the orange peel; boil 15 minutes; remove and drain them on a
sieve; put half of the jelly into a glass dish and when firm lay the
artificial eggs upon it; arrange them the same way that natural eggs
are generally found in a nest; lay orange peel, which represents the
straw, over and around the eggs; when the remaining jelly is cold
and thick pour it over the eggs and set in a cool place to form.

178. +Fromage Bavarois à la Vanille.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1
cup cold water 20 minutes; place a saucepan with 1 pint cream, the
yolks of 6 eggs, ½ cup sugar and 1 teaspoonful vanilla over the fire
and stir till nearly boiling; remove it from the fire, add gelatine
and stir till dissolved; set saucepan with its contents in a vessel
of cold water and stir till it becomes cold and begins to thicken;
then mix it with 1 pint whipped cream; rinse a form with cold water,
sprinkle the inside with sugar, fill in the bavarois and set for 2
hours on ice; serve on a round dish garnished with fancy cakes.

179. +Fromage Bavarois à la Vanille, No. 2.+-- Boil 6 tablespoonfuls
sugar in 1 cup water 5 minutes and flavor with 1½ teaspoonfuls
vanilla; soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup cold water 15 minutes, add
it to the boiling sugar syrup and stir till melted; then set aside;
when cold and beginning to thicken mix it with 1 pint whipped cream
and finish the same as in foregoing recipe.

180. +Fromage Bavarois aux Pistache.+-- Chop or pound 6 ounces
pistachio nuts and ¼ pound almonds as finely as possible, mix with 1
pint cold sugar syrup and let them stand 2 hours; then strain
through a fine sieve, add a little spinach green (see Color) and 1
ounce dissolved gelatine; stir until it begins to thicken; then mix
with 1 pint whipped cream; put this into a form and place on ice for
2 hours. This cream should have a delicate green color; it is served
on a round dish.

181. +Fromage Bavarois aux Amandes.+-- Scald ½ pound sweet and 10
bitter almonds with boiling water, remove the brown skin and pound
or chop them fine; place a saucepan over the fire with 1 pint milk,
6 tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 6 eggs, 1½ teaspoonfuls vanilla
and the pounded almonds; stir until nearly boiling; soak 1¼ ounces
gelatine in 1 cup cold milk, add it to the hot milk and stir till
dissolved; then strain through a sieve; when cold and beginning to
thicken stir in 1 pint whipped cream, turn into a form and set for 2
hours in cracked ice.

182. +Fromage Bavarois au Café.+-- Pour 1 pint boiling milk over 4
tablespoonfuls freshly ground coffee, cover and let it stand 5
minutes; strain through a fine cloth; soak 1 ounce gelatine in a
little cold water 15 minutes and add it to the coffee milk with 6
tablespoonfuls sugar and the yolks of 6 eggs; stir this over the
fire till it nearly boils; remove from the fire and when cold and
beginning to thicken stir in 1 pint whipped cream, turn into a form
and pack in cracked ice 2 hours.

183. +Fromage Bavarois au Thé.+-- Pour 1 pint boiling milk over 2
tablespoonfuls of the best black or green tea, cover and let it
stand 5 minutes; then strain and finish the same as Fromage Bavarois
au Café.

184. +Fromage Bavarois au Chocolat.+-- Boil 4 tablespoonfuls grated
chocolate in ½ pint water, add ½ cup sugar and 1 teaspoonful
vanilla; soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup cold water 15 minutes, add
it to the chocolate and boil a few minutes; remove from the fire and
when cold mix it with 1 pint whipped cream, turn into a form and
pack in cracked ice for 2 hours; then serve on a round dish with
vanilla sauce.

185. +Lemon Fromage.+-- Dissolve 1 cup sugar in ½ pint water, add the
thin peel of 1 lemon, the juice of 3 and boil 5 minutes; add 1 ounce
gelatine which has been soaked in ½ pint cold water and stir it
until dissolved; then strain and when cold and beginning to thicken
add 1 pint whipped cream; fill this into a form and place it on ice
for 2 hours.

186. +Orange Fromage.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup cold water 15
minutes; dissolve 1 cup sugar in 1 cup water, add the thin peel of 1
orange and boil 5 minutes; add gelatine and stir till melted; mix it
with the juice of 6 oranges, strain and when cold and beginning to
thicken add 1 pint whipped cream; turn into a form and pack in ice
for 2 hours.

187. +Pineapple Fromage.+-- Soak 1½ ounces gelatine in 1 cup cold
water 15 minutes and stir it over the fire till dissolved; take 1
can preserved pineapple, drain off the liquor and add it to the
gelatine; when cold and beginning to thicken cut the pineapple into
small dice; stir the fruit with 1 pint whipped cream into the
gelatine, turn into a form and pack it in cracked ice for 2 hours.
Or peel a large, ripe pineapple, remove the eyes and hard core, cut
into small square pieces, put them in a dish, sprinkle over with 1
cup sugar and let them stand for 2 hours; chop the eyes and core
fine and put them in a dish; boil ½ cup sugar with 1 cup water, pour
it boiling hot over the chopped pineapple and let it stand till
cold; soak 1½ ounces gelatine in ½ pint cold water, put it over the
fire and stir till dissolved; strain the chopped pineapple through a
fine sieve, drain off liquid from the pieces and add them together
to the gelatine; set in ice and stir till it begins to thicken; then
stir in the pineapple pieces and 1 pint whipped cream; fill it into
a plain form with tube in center and pack in cracked ice and a
little rock salt for 2 hours.

188. +Peach Fromage.+-- Pare and cut into quarters 1½ dozen ripe
peaches, put with 1 cup powdered sugar into a dish and let them
stand 2 hours; also add the peach pits (after they have been scalded
and freed from their brown skin); soak 1½ ounces gelatine in ¾ cup
cold water for 15 minutes, add ¾ cup boiling water and stir over the
fire till melted; strain and set aside to cool; press the peaches
through a sieve, add gelatine and pits and stir till it begins to
thicken; then carefully stir in 1 pint whipped cream, turn into a
form and place for 2 hours on ice.

189. +Strawberry Fromage.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in ½ pint cold
water 15 minutes; then stir it over the fire till dissolved; wash
and press 1 quart fresh strawberries through a sieve, add 1 cup
powdered sugar, the gelatine and a few drops cochineal; stir until
it begins to thicken; then add 1 pint whipped cream, turn into a
form and pack for 2 hours in cracked ice and rock salt.

190. +Rum Bavarois.+-- Soak 1¼ ounces gelatine in ¾ cup cold water 15
minutes, add ¾ cup boiling water, stir over the fire till dissolved,
strain and set aside; place a saucepan with the yolks of 6 eggs, ¾
cup sugar and 1 pint milk over the fire and stir till nearly
boiling; remove from the fire, add ½ pint rum and the gelatine and
continue stirring until it begins to thicken; then stir in carefully
1 pint whipped cream, turn into a form and pack in cracked ice for 2
hours.

191. +Fromage Bavarois Cardinal.+-- Soak ¾ ounce gelatine in ½ cup
water 15 minutes; boil ¼ pound unsweetened grated chocolate in 1 cup
water with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; add the gelatine and stir till
dissolved; lay a plain form into cracked ice, pour the chocolate in
by degrees and keep turning so that chocolate may form a complete
lining inside of form; then set the form straight and pour in the
bottom the remaining chocolate; as soon as this is hard fill the
form with Bavarois of Vanilla, No. 2, and let it remain buried in
ice for 2 hours.

192. +Bavarois+ may be made of different colors--such as pistachio
cream outside and bavarois of almonds inside; or strawberries
outside and vanilla bavarois inside.

193. +Fromage Bavarois au Pain Noir.+-- Cut a small pumpernickel into
slices, lay on a tin in the oven to dry and roll them fine; take 1
cup of these crumbs and stir them into a bavarois of almond or
vanilla; after the cream has been added turn into a form and pack in
ice for 2 hours. For all bavarois the forms may be lined first with
jelly and decorated with fruits, nuts, currants, etc. In order to do
this place a form into cracked ice and pour in a few spoonfuls fruit
jelly; when firm take whatever is going to be used onto a larding
needle, dip each piece into jelly and lay them into the form in
fancy patterns; pour in a little more jelly and when firm lay the
form over on its side; pour in a little jelly at a time; keep
turning form, so that the whole inside may be covered with jelly;
then decorate the same as bottom and fill with Fromage Bavarois à la
Vanille or any other kind.

194. +Snow Pudding.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 pint cold water 20
minutes, add 1 pint boiling water, 1 cup sugar, the juice of 2
lemons and the thin peel of 1; set it over the fire, stir and boil a
few minutes, strain through a sieve and when it begins to thicken
add the beaten whites of 6 eggs; rinse out a form with cold water,
sprinkle with granulated sugar, fill in the mixture and set in a
cool place; when ready to serve turn the pudding onto a dish and
serve with vanilla sauce made of the yolks of 6 eggs (see Sauce).
Milk or cream may be substituted for water; then the lemon juice is
omitted and lemon extract used for flavoring.

195. +Wine Pudding.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine for 10 minutes in 1 pint
cold water, add ¼ pound sugar, ½ pint red wine and ½ pint raspberry
juice; stir over the fire till boiling hot, strain through a jelly
bag and put in a form to cool; when firm turn out on a flat dish and
serve with vanilla sauce or whipped cream.

196. +Apple Jelly Pudding.+-- Boil 1½ pounds peeled apples with 1
quart water, stir through a sieve, add ½ pound sugar and the juice
of 2 lemons; soak 15 sheets of white and 3 of red gelatine for 5
minutes in cold water, press out and mix with the apple sauce; stir
over the fire until the gelatine is all dissolved; then pour into a
form and set on ice to get firm; serve with vanilla sauce.

197. +Maraschino Pudding.+-- Take 10 eggs, 10 tablespoonfuls sugar,
14 sheets gelatine (soaked in cold water), ¼ pint rum (or
maraschino) and the peel and juice of 1 lemon; stir the yolks and
sugar to a cream and add by degrees rum and lemon; press out the
gelatine and dissolve in 1 cup boiling water; add it, stirring
constantly, to the other mixture; add lastly the whites of the eggs,
which have been beaten to a stiff froth; next pour into a mould and
set aside to cool; the mould should be rinsed with cold water and
sprinkled with granulated sugar before pouring the pudding into it.

198. +Manilla Pudding.+-- Place a saucepan over the fire with 1 pint
milk, the yolks of 5 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and the peel of 1
lemon; stir this over the fire until just about to boil; then
instantly remove; have 1 ounce gelatine soaked in 1 cup milk, which
stir into the hot mixture and set aside to cool; as soon as it
begins to thicken add the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff
froth, pour into a mould and set on ice to get firm; serve with
fruit or claret sauce; the mould should be rinsed with cold water
and sprinkled with coarse sugar previous to being used.

199. +Rum Pudding.+-- Take 10 eggs (yolks and whites beaten
separately), 1 pint sweet cream, ½ pound sugar, ½ pint rum and 1½
ounces gelatine; stir the yolks of the eggs and sugar to a cream,
add the cream and rum, put this in a tin pail and set in a vessel of
hot water; keep stirring with an egg beater until just about to
boil; then quickly remove from the fire; have gelatine soaked in a
little cold water, add it to the cream and mix well; when cold add
the beaten whites of the eggs, pour into a mould and set on ice; in
serving turn out and send fruit sauce to table with it.

200. +Fine Chocolate Pudding.+-- ¼ pound Baker’s grated chocolate, 3
cups milk, 1 cup water, 1½ ounces gelatine, 5 tablespoonfuls sugar
and 6 eggs; boil chocolate with the water until well dissolved; soak
gelatine in a little cold water about 5 minutes; place a saucepan
with the milk, sugar, 6 yolks of the eggs and the boiled chocolate
over the fire; beat the whole with an egg beater until just about to
boil; add the gelatine, remove from fire, continue beating for a
little while longer and set aside to cool; when it begins to thicken
add whites of the eggs, previously beaten to a stiff froth, and pour
it into a jelly mould which has been well rinsed with cold water and
sprinkled with sugar; set either on ice or in cold water to get
firm. In serving turn pudding onto a glass dish and serve with the
following sauce:--Place a saucepan over the fire with 2 eggs, 1 pint
milk, 1 teaspoonful cornstarch and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; stir with
an egg beater until nearly boiling; quickly remove from fire, flavor
with 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract and serve cold. This will make a
sufficient quantity for a family of 10 persons.

201. +Fine Claret Pudding.+-- 1 pint claret, ½ pint water, ½
tablespoonful cornstarch, the thin peel of ½ lemon, 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar, 4 eggs and 8 sheets of red gelatine; lay gelatine in cold
water and let it remain until the pudding is prepared; put the wine,
water, cornstarch, sugar, lemon peel and yolks of the 4 eggs in a
saucepan and beat it up well with an egg beater for 5 minutes; then
place saucepan with its contents over the fire and continue beating
till just before boiling; remove from the fire, squeeze the water
from gelatine, put it into the saucepan and mix with its contents;
then set aside to cool; as soon as it begins to thicken add the
whites of the 4 eggs, previously beaten to a very stiff froth; when
this is well blended together rinse a jelly mould with cold water,
sprinkle with sugar, pour in the mixture and set it either in cold
water or on ice to get firm; serve with vanilla or cream sauce or
turn the pudding onto a glass dish and lay a border of whipped cream
around it. This pudding if made according to above recipe is very
fine and sufficient for a family of 6 persons.

202. +White Wine Pudding.+-- ½ bottle white wine, 2 of red and 6
sheets of white gelatine, the grated rind and juice of 1 lemon,
a little vanilla, 5 eggs and 6 tablespoonfuls sugar; lay the gelatine
in cold water; place a saucepan with yolks of the 5 eggs, lemon,
sugar, vanilla and wine over the fire and stir constantly until just
about to boil; then remove from fire, press gelatine out, add to the
hot mixture and set aside to cool; as soon as it begins to set whip
whites of the 5 eggs to a stiff froth and stir them through it; fill
a jelly mould with the mixture and set it on ice to get firm; serve
with vanilla sauce. The mould should be rinsed with cold water and
dusted with coarse sugar previous to pouring the pudding into it.

203. +Cold Apple Pudding.+-- Put 1½ pounds peeled and sliced apples
in a saucepan with 1½ quarts water; stew till tender, strain through
a colander, return it to saucepan and add 1 pound sugar; soak 2
ounces gelatine in a little cold water, add to the apples, let the
whole boil for a few minutes and pour it into a form to cool; serve
with vanilla sauce.




FINE COLD PUDDINGS.


204. +Pudding à la Polonaise.+-- Beat the yolks of 10 eggs and 2
whole eggs with an egg beater with 1½ pints Rhine wine (or white
wine), 1 cup sugar and the grated rind of 1 lemon and the juice of
4; strain this into a large kettle and beat over a slow fire till
nearly boiling; remove the kettle, place it into cracked ice or cold
water and continue beating till cold; in the meantime soak 1½ ounces
gelatine in ½ cup cold water for 15 minutes, add ½ cup boiling water
and stir over the fire till dissolved; then stir it slowly into the
cream, beating constantly; add lastly ½ cup rum; next place a cream
form into cracked ice, put in a few spoonfuls cream and put over
this a layer of vanilla wafers which have been soaked in sugar syrup
with a little rum; after 5 minutes add more cream and wafers;
continue until the cream is used up; leave on ice for 2 hours; when
ready to serve dip the form into hot water, turn the pudding onto a
round dish and serve; sufficient for 12 persons. If this pudding is
too large half the quantities may be used.

205. +Peach Pudding (with Champagne).+-- Pare and cut into halves 1½
dozen large, ripe peaches; put them into a dish with the blanched
pits, add 1 cup sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla, or put ½ stick vanilla
between the fruit; cover and let them stand about 2 hours; then
divide the peaches into 2 parts: press one part through a hair sieve
and add the peach juice and 1½ ounces gelatine previously soaked in
cold water and dissolved in boiling water; when this is well mixed
set it aside; cut some small sponge cakes into slices, put on a
plate and pour a little champagne over them; set a plain tin form
into cracked ice and pour in some champagne jelly (see Jelly); let
it get firm and lay in the center one of the peach pits; lay around
this some of the peach halves, pour a few spoonfuls more jelly over
them and then a thin layer of whipped champagne jelly which has been
colored with cochineal to a delicate pink; add to the peaches which
have been pressed through a sieve 1 pint whipped cream and ½ bottle
champagne; fill the cream in alternate layers with peaches and
sponge cake into the form; let the last layer be cream; let the form
remain 2 hours longer in the ice; in serving dip the form in hot
water, turn the pudding onto a handsome dish and garnish the edge
with small croutons of champagne jelly which has been colored to a
delicate pink with cochineal. White wine may be substituted for
champagne.

206. +Pineapple Pudding à la Royale.+-- Pare and cut in half a nice,
ripe pineapple; remove the hard part from the center and cut the
pineapple into fine slices; put into a bowl and sprinkle 8
tablespoonfuls sugar over them, cover and let stand 2 hours; in the
meantime prepare 1 pint white wine jelly; set a plain tin form into
cracked ice, pour some jelly into it and let stand till firm; then
put a wreath or a star of pineapple over the jelly, sprinkle a few
blanched almonds between them and pour some more jelly over it; when
this is firm turn form on its side, pour a little jelly in and keep
turning in the cracked ice till jelly is firm; lay slices of
pineapple on the sides, sprinkle blanched almonds cut into strips
between, pour over a little more jelly and turn the form till all is
firm; in the meantime boil 1 pound sugar with 1 cup water 10 minutes
and add 1 ounce gelatine which has been previously soaked in ½ cup
cold water and dissolved in ½ cup boiling water; remove the slices
of pineapple, add the juice from pineapple to the boiled syrup, set
this into cracked ice and stir till it begins to thicken; then add 1
pint whipped cream and fill the cream into the form alternately with
layers of lady fingers and macaroons which have been previously
dipped into the syrup; cover the form and pack it in ice for 2
hours; cut the remaining slices of pineapple into dice, mix with
some of the cold jelly, put in small tin forms and garnish the
pudding, when turned out, with them.

207. +Orange Pudding à la Maltaise.+-- Boil 1½ cups sugar with 1 cup
water 5 minutes; add the juice of 6 oranges, the grated rind of 2
and 1½ ounces gelatine which has been soaked for ½ hour in cold
water; stir until gelatine is melted, strain through a fine sieve,
place on ice and stir till it begins to thicken; then add 1 pint
whipped cream; mix the juice of 6 oranges and 1 lemon with 1 cup
sugar syrup and strain through a sieve; cut the crust off a sponge
cake which has been baked in a deep pan the day before, cut the cake
into slices about ½ inch in thickness and dip each slice in the
orange liquor; set a plain tin form into cracked ice and pour in ½
pint plain orange jelly (see Jelly); let this get firm; decorate the
bottom with a wreath of green pistachio nuts or blanched almonds and
currants, or any kind of fruit, such as strawberries, cherries or
plums; pour over some jelly; as soon as firm add a few spoonfuls
jelly, then a layer of the orange cream and over this the sponge
cake; continue with layers of cream and sponge cake till all is
used; let the last layer be cream; let the form remain in ice for 2
hours; in serving turn the pudding onto a handsome round dish and
garnish with orange quarters glazed with sugar.

208. +Pudding de Savoie à l’Orange.+-- Remove the skin from 3
oranges, divide them into quarters and remove pits without
disfiguring the fruit; boil 1½ cups sugar with 1 cup water 5
minutes, remove it from the fire, add ½ pint Rhine wine, the juice
of 6 large oranges and the grated rind of one: when cold add 2
ounces dissolved gelatine (see Gelatine), set on ice and stir till
it begins to thicken; then add the orange quarters; place a tin form
in cracked ice and cover the bottom with some clear orange or lemon
jelly to the depth of about ½ inch; as soon as jelly is firm
decorate the bottom with orange quarters and blanched nuts; add to
the juice of 6 oranges ½ bottle Rhine wine and sweeten with sugar;
cut a medium sized sponge cake into slices, dip in the orange juice
and put them in alternate layers with orange and jelly into the
form; let it remain on ice 2 hours; when ready to serve dip the form
into hot water, turn onto a round dish and decorate the edge with
orange quarters and finely chopped orange jelly.

209. +Chestnut Pudding à la Dauphine.+-- Boil 1 pound chestnuts for a
few minutes, throw them into cold water and remove outside and
inside brown skin; then boil the chestnuts in milk till soft and
press them through a sieve; add to purée the yolks of 6 eggs, 1 pint
cream, 1 teaspoonful vanilla and 6 tablespoonfuls sugar; stir this
over the fire till nearly boiling, add 1½ ounces dissolved gelatine,
set the cream into cracked ice and stir till it begins to thicken;
cut some sponge cake into slices and pour a little rum over them;
then place a tin form in cracked ice (if a form is not handy use a
tin kettle), pour a few spoonfuls of the cream into it and let stand
till firm; lay over this some preserved apricots or pineapples with
¼ pound citron cut into dice and the sponge cake; continue this in
alternate layers till all is used; let the pudding remain for 2
hours in ice; when ready to serve dip the form into hot water, turn
pudding onto a dish and pour ½ pint vanilla syrup over it.

210. +Pudding à la Girot.+-- Place a saucepan on the stove with 1½
pints sweet cream, the yolks of 6 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1
teaspoonful vanilla essence; stir this over the fire till nearly
boiling, remove the cream and set aside to cool; then add 1½ ounces
dissolved gelatine; soak ¼ pound lady fingers and ¼ pound macaroons
in cherry wine; then place a tin pudding form with tube in the
center into cracked ice, put in a few spoonfuls cream and let it get
firm; put over this some of the soaked lady fingers and macaroons
and over them some preserved pineapple or cherries; over this put
cream, fruit and cake; continue in this way until all is used; let
the last layer be cream; close the form and pack it in cracked ice,
where it should remain 2 hours; when ready to serve turn the pudding
onto a round dish, fill the opening in center with whipped cream
flavored with vanilla and garnish the edge of dish with preserved
fruit.

211. +Chocolate Pudding à la Hollandaise.+-- Boil ¼ pound Baker’s
grated chocolate in ½ pint water, add ½ pint sugar and 1 teaspoonful
extract of vanilla; when cold add 1½ ounces gelatine which has been
soaked in ½ pint cold water and dissolved in ½ pint hot water; set
the chocolate mixture into cracked ice and stir till it begins to
thicken; then add 1 pint whipped cream; if not sweet enough add a
little more sugar; set a tin pudding form with a tube in the center
into cracked ice, pour in some clear fruit or wine jelly (see Jelly)
and let it get firm; decorate the bottom with blanched almonds; take
pieces of almonds up with a larding needle, dip them into jelly and
lay in a pointed border close to the edge; pour over a little more
jelly; in the meantime soak 20 vanilla wafers and macaroons in sweet
cream; when the jelly in form is firm put in a layer of wafers and
macaroons; put over this a layer of the chocolate cream; as soon as
the cream is firm put in the remaining wafers and macaroons and
lastly the remaining cream; let the pudding remain on ice for about
3 hours; when ready to serve dip the form into hot water, turn the
pudding onto a round dish and lay a border of whipped cream flavored
with extract of vanilla around it; fill the opening in center with
whipped cream.

212. +Pudding à la Reine.+-- Set a border form into cracked ice and
pour in to the depth of about ½ inch some white wine jelly; when the
jelly is firm put in some fruit, such as strawberries, cherries,
plums or peaches, and pour over a few spoonfuls jelly; after the
lapse of 5 minutes pour in more jelly; when firm put in another
layer of fruit and then fill the form with jelly; let it remain on
the ice till ready to serve; pare and cut into slices 12 large, ripe
peaches, sprinkle thickly with sugar and let them stand 1 hour;
press them with the juice through a sieve, add 1½ ounces gelatine
dissolved in water, set on ice and stir till it begins to thicken;
then add 1 pint whipped cream, 1 glass sherry wine and a few lady
fingers broken into pieces; fill the cream into a highly pointed
form and set it into cracked ice for 2 hours; when ready to serve
turn out the jelly from the border form onto a round dish; then turn
out the cream from the highly pointed form; place the latter in the
center of the jelly border and serve.

213. +Pudding à l’Allemande.+-- Boil 1½ pints milk with 4
tablespoonfuls sugar, ¼ teaspoonful salt and the thin peel of 1
lemon; mix 1 cup flour with 1 cup milk to a smooth paste and add it
to the boiling milk, stirring constantly; boil a few minutes, remove
from the fire, add the beaten yolks of 6 eggs and stir until nearly
cold; then add the whites of the 6 eggs, beaten to a stiff froth;
rinse a jelly form with cold water, sprinkle with sugar, pour in the
mixture and place on ice for 3 or 4 hours; in serving turn the
pudding onto a dish, garnish with strawberries and serve with the
following sauce:--Boil 2 teaspoonfuls cornstarch in 1½ cups water,
sweeten with sugar, remove from the fire, add the juice of 1 lemon,
½ pint strawberry juice, 1 glass Rhine wine and serve when cold with
the pudding.

214. +Strawberry Pudding.+-- Place a round tin form into cracked ice
and pour in some orange jelly; when firm lay the form over on its
side, pour in more jelly, turn the form around and pour in more
jelly; continue in this way until the whole inside of form is glazed
with the jelly; mix 1 pint bruised strawberries with 1 pint sugar
syrup flavored with vanilla and add 1½ ounces dissolved gelatine;
put this on ice and stir till it begins to thicken; pour some
Madeira wine over some lady fingers and let them soak about 10
minutes; put a layer of the strawberry pureé in the form, over this
some lady fingers and continue with cream and cake in alternate
layers till all is used; let the form remain on ice for 2 hours;
then turn the pudding onto a dish, garnish with chopped orange jelly
and nice, large strawberries which have been dipped into the jelly
and serve with strawberry syrup.

215. +Imperial Pudding.+-- Place a cream form into cracked ice and
pour in some white wine jelly colored to a delicate pink with
cochineal; when the jelly is firm decorate the bottom with preserved
pineapple cut into the shape of dice and blanched almonds cut into
strips; pour over a few spoonfuls jelly and let it remain till firm;
place a saucepan with 1 pint cream, the yolks of 6 eggs and 5
tablespoonfuls sugar over the fire and stir until nearly boiling;
when cold add 1½ ounces dissolved gelatine and ½ pint best arrac;
soak 1 dozen vanilla wafers and the same quantity of macaroons in
sugar syrup mixed with champagne and arrac for 10 minutes; stir the
cream on ice until it begins to thicken; then add 1 pint whipped
cream and lastly ½ pint champagne; fill the cream in alternate
layers with wafers and macaroons in the form; let the pudding remain
for 2 hours on ice; pour into tartlet forms some orange jelly with
small dice of pineapple; in serving dip the form into hot water and
turn the pudding onto a round dish; also turn out the jelly from the
small moulds and lay them around the dish.

216. +Suédoise of Apples.+-- Pare 1 dozen large apples, bore pegs
therefrom with an apple corer and lay them in water with lemon
juice; prepare 1 dozen large Bartlet pears the same way; boil the
apple pegs in sugar syrup with lemon juice, to keep them white, and
boil the pears in sugar syrup with cochineal; care must be taken not
to boil them too long, so that they will not fall apart; transfer
them to a dish and set aside to cool; wash the apple and pear peels,
also the cores; put them in a saucepan with sufficient water to
cover and boil till done; strain through a jelly bag; measure the
liquor and take for 1 quart 1½ ounces gelatine, the thin peel and
juice of 1 lemon, 1 cup sugar and the whites of 2 eggs; soak the
gelatine in a little cold water 15 minutes; put the liquor with
lemon, sugar and well beaten whites over the fire; when hot add the
gelatine, stir constantly and boil 5 minutes; remove to side of
stove, add ½ pint white wine and strain through a jelly bag; place a
plain form with tube in the center into cracked ice and pour a few
spoonfuls jelly in the bottom of it; when firm lay the form over on
its side, pour in more jelly, keep turning and add by degrees more
jelly; continue this process until the jelly has formed a complete
lining inside of form; lay the pegs of apples and pears in slanting
rows onto a napkin and cut them all the same length; then take each
one separately onto a larding or knitting needle and dip into cold
jelly; first lay a row of red on the side of form, then a row of
white in an opposite direction; continue until the form is covered,
pour over some thick jelly and when firm fill the inside with apple
bavarois made as follows:--Prepare 1 pint apple sauce, press it
through a sieve, add 1 teaspoonful vanilla and sweeten to taste;
soak 16 sheets gelatine in cold water for 10 minutes, press out, put
in a bowl and pour ½ cup boiling water over it; stir until
dissolved, add to the apples and stir until it begins to thicken;
then mix in 1 pint whipped cream or the beaten whites of 6 eggs;
fill this into the form, cover and let it remain on ice till firm;
in serving dip the form into hot water, dry it quickly, turn the
suédoise onto a round dish and garnish with fruit; the apple may be
bored out into rounds like marbles and boiled the same way--half red
and half white; they are then laid in rows on the side of form over
one another, alternately with white and red till the form is lined
with them; then place a small form inside, pour sufficient jelly
around to cover the fruit and fill up the space between the inside
form and fruit; let it remain on ice till firm; then pour in the
inside form some hot water, draw it out and fill the inside with any
kind of frozen cream; serve at once.

217. +Suédoise of Pears.+-- Pare and quarter 12 large Bartlet or
duchess pears and cut each quarter lengthwise into 4 slices; boil
half the slices in sugar syrup with lemon juice and the other half
in sugar syrup with cochineal; lay them on a napkin to dry; pour a
little wine jelly into a plain form and lay on the bottom some of
the slices in the shape of a star; when firm turn the form over on
its side and lay in first a row of white slices, then a row of red;
dip each piece into cold wine jelly before laying it in the form;
continue in this way until the sides of form are covered; then pour
in a few spoonfuls jelly and keep turning the form, in order that
the jelly may be evenly distributed over the fruit; pare and cut
into small pieces ½ dozen large pears, put them over the fire with a
little water and boil till soft; press them through a sieve and set
aside to cool; boil 1 cup sugar in 1 cup water with the juice of ½
lemon for a few minutes; soak 16 sheets gelatine in cold water 5
minutes, press out, add it to the sugar and boil a little longer;
remove from fire, mix with the pear pureé and stir till it begins to
thicken; whip 1 pint sweet cream to a froth, add 2 tablespoonfuls
powdered sugar and 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract; add it to the
above pear mixture and fill into the form; place it on ice for 2
hours; when ready to serve turn the suédoise onto a round dish and
garnish with croutons of wine jelly.

218. +Timbale de Pêche à la Condé.+-- Line a deep round form with
rich pie crust, lay buttered paper over it, fill the form with dry
peas and put in oven to bake; when baked take it from the oven,
remove the peas, return form to oven and let the crust dry for a few
minutes; place 1 cup rice with cold water over the fire and boil a
few minutes; drain in colander, rinse with water and boil in milk
till soft and thick; add ½ cup sugar, ½ tablespoonful butter and set
it in a warm place; pare and cut into halves 1 dozen large, ripe
peaches and boil a few minutes in sugar syrup; draw them to side of
stove to keep warm; also have the form with crust (or timbale)
setting in a warm place; mix ½ cup whipped cream with the rice and
fill it alternately with the peaches in the form inside of timbale;
let the last layer be rice; put a round dish over the form and turn
the timbale onto it; cut a round hole in the center, put in a few
peaches and pour the peach syrup all over the timbale. Timbale of
cherries, apricots, pineapples, pears and apples are made in the
same manner.

219. +Timbale de Riz à la Napolitaine.+-- Put ¾ pound parboiled rice
with 1 quart milk, ½ teaspoonful salt, 1½ tablespoonfuls butter and
a little vanilla over the fire and boil till rice is tender; when
done add some seedless raisins, currants and fine citron (1 cupful
in all) and set aside to cool; stir 4 tablespoonfuls sugar with 1
whole egg and the yolks of 4 to a cream; add 2 tablespoonfuls
Madeira wine and mix it with the rice; line a deep round form with
thin neapolitan paste, fill it with the rice, put on a cover of the
same dough and bake 1 hour; when baked turn the timbale onto a dish,
pour over it a fruit sauce mixed with Madeira wine and send some in
a saucere to table with it.

220. +Pear Timbale.+-- Pare, quarter and stew 1 dozen Bartlet pears
with 1 bottle claret, 1 cup sugar, a small piece of cinnamon and ½
cup seedless raisins; when done pour them on a sieve to drain and
cool; line a buttered, deep round form or tin pan with about 1 inch
of biroche dough (see Biroche), fill with the pears, put on a cover
of the same dough and let it stand in a warm place for ½ hour; then
bake in a medium hot oven; when baked turn the timbale onto a round
dish, pour some of the pear syrup over and serve the rest in a
saucere with it.

221. +Timbale à la Sicilienne.+-- Butter a deep round form, line it
with neapolitan paste, cover the latter with buttered paper, fill
the form with dry peas and bake in a hot oven; when done and cold
remove peas and paper, take the timbale from the form, brush over
the inside and outside with peach or apricot marmalade and decorate
it around and on top with blanched half almonds and currants; take a
form 1 inch wider than the one above, place it into cracked ice and
pour in, to the depth of about ¾ inch, some clear lemon jelly; as
soon as cold place timbale into the form and fill space between the
timbale and form with lukewarm lemon jelly; let it remain on ice
till needed; when ready to serve fill the timbale with peach,
pineapple or strawberry plombiere or any kind of frozen cream; dip
the form into warm water, dry quickly, turn it onto a round dish and
decorate with sugared orange quarters.

222. +Timbale of Mixed Fruit.+-- Take some preserved peaches,
pineapples, cherries and pears and put them on a sieve to drain;
then put them in a dish with ½ cup currants or apple jelly and 1
teaspoonful vanilla sugar; mix all together and fill it into a form
lined with biroche dough; cover with the same dough and finish same
as Pear Timbale.

223. +Chocolate Plombiere.+-- Dissolve ½ pound grated chocolate in ½
cup water, add the yolks of 8 eggs, 1 pint cream, 1 teaspoonful
vanilla extract, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar and stir this over the fire
till nearly boiling; strain through a hair sieve and when cold put
it in a freezer; finish the same as Orange Plombiere.

224. +Orange Plombiere.+-- Strain the juice of 6 oranges and rub the
skin from 2 with loaf sugar; dissolve ¾ pound sugar in 1 cup cold
water and mix it with the orange juice and orange sugar; put into a
freezer and turn and work it till it thickens; then add 1 pint
whipped cream and work it for 10 minutes longer; then fill the
mixture into a form, cover tightly and paste a strip of buttered
paper around the edge of cover; then pack the form into cracked ice
and salt; lay plenty of ice on top and let it remain from 1 to 2
hours.

225. +Rum Plombiere.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 pint cream, the yolks
of 10 eggs and 1 cup sugar over the fire and stir till nearly
boiling; remove from the fire and set aside to cool; cut 6 ounces
candied orange peel into small dice and boil them for a few minutes
in a little water; drain on a sieve, add them to the cream and put
the mixture into a freezer; let it freeze till it begins to thicken;
then add ½ cup best rum and 1 pint whipped cream; fill the mixture
into a form, paste a strip of buttered paper around the edge of
cover and pack in ice and salt for 2 hours.

226. +Plombiere of Maraschino Curaçoa+ is made the same way.

227. +Pistache Plombiere.+-- Pound ¼ pound blanched almonds and ¼
pound blanched pistachio nuts with a little cream to a paste; place
a saucepan with the paste, 1½ pints cream, 1 cup sugar, 1
teaspoonful vanilla and the yolks of 8 eggs over the fire and stir
until nearly boiling; remove cream from fire, set it in cold water
and stir till cold; add a little spinach color and strain through a
hair sieve; then finish the same as Strawberry Plombiere.

228. +Plombiere aux Café.+-- Pour 1½ pints boiling cream over 3
tablespoonfuls freshly ground coffee and let it stand well covered
for 10 minutes; strain through a napkin; put the coffee cream in a
saucepan over the fire with 1 cup sugar and the yolks of 8 eggs and
stir till nearly boiling; remove the cream from fire, set saucepan
in cold water and stir till cold; then finish the same as Strawberry
Plombiere.

229. +Tea Plombiere.+-- Pour 1½ pints boiling cream over 1 ounce tea
and let it stand 5 minutes; strain and finish the same as Coffee
Plombiere.

230. +Peach Plombiere.+-- Pare, quarter and press through a sieve 15
large, ripe peaches; dissolve ¾ pound sugar in 1 cup water and add
it to the peach pureé; put this mixture into the freezer and finish
the same as Strawberry Plombiere.

231. +Vanilla Plombiere.+-- Place a saucepan with 3 cups milk over
the fire, add the yolks of 8 eggs, 1 cup sugar and 2 teaspoonfuls
vanilla extract and stir till nearly boiling; remove from the fire,
set the saucepan into cold water and stir till cool; then put into a
freezer and let it freeze till it begins to thicken; then add 1 pint
whipped cream and finish the same as Strawberry Plombiere.

232. +Strawberry Plombiere.+-- Wash 1 quart strawberries and press
them through a sieve; dissolve ¾ pound sugar in ¾ cup water and add
this syrup to the strawberry pureé; 2 hours before serving pour it
into a freezer and turn it about 20 minutes, or till it begins to
thicken; then mix with 1 pint whipped cream and let it remain a
little while longer in the freezer; fill into a form, cover tightly,
paste a strip of buttered paper around the edge of cover and pack in
ice and salt for 2 hours; in serving dip form into hot water,
quickly wipe it dry, turn the plombiere onto a round dish and
garnish with fancy cake.

233. +Pineapple Plombiere.+-- Pare and cut into small dice 1 ripe
pineapple, put them into a dish and pour 1 pint cold sugar syrup
over it; let it stand 4 hours; 2 hours before serving put the fruit
into a freezer and freeze till it begins to thicken; then add 1 pint
whipped cream and finish the same as in foregoing recipe.
NOTE.--This plombiere may also be served in a glass dish directly
from the freezer; it must then, of course, be worked until firm. If
preserved fruit is used less sugar must be taken, and color and
taste should be freshened up with lemon juice and a few drops of
cochineal. Plombiere of raspberries, currants or cherries is made in
a similar manner.




FROZEN PUDDINGS.


234. +Frozen Strawberry Pudding.+-- Whip 1 quart rich, sweet cream
until thick, add 2 cups powdered sugar and lastly stir 1 quart
mashed strawberries through the cream; fill this into a pudding form
with a tube in the center, cover tightly and put a strip of buttered
paper around the edge of cover, so that no water can enter; have
ready a large pail or a butter tub, put some cracked ice on the
bottom, sprinkle over some rock salt, set onto this the form, fill
up the sides with cracked ice and sprinkle salt between; cover the
top of form with ice, the whole with a piece of carpet or a cloth
and set in a cool place for 4 hours; when ready to serve lift from
the ice, remove the paper, wipe off the form, dip it in hot water,
turn the pudding onto a dish and serve at once.

235. +Rich Ice Cream Pudding.+-- Beat the yolks of 9 eggs with ¾
pound sugar to a cream and add 1 quart whipped cream; fill this into
a tin pudding form with a tube in the center, paste over the edge of
cover a strip of buttered paper and bury in cracked ice and rock
salt for 4 hours, the same as Strawberry Pudding.

236. +Pudding à la Pückler Muskau.+-- Stir into 1 quart whipped cream
6 tablespoonfuls sugar and 6 ounces finely pounded macaroons; fill
the cream into a form and bury it in ice and rock salt for 4 hours,
the same as Strawberry Pudding.

237. +Ice Pudding à la Prince Pückler.+-- Whip 1 quart cream till
stiff and divide it into 3 parts; boil 6 ounces grated chocolate in
½ pint water with ½ cup sugar smooth and thick; remove the chocolate
from the fire and when cold mix with it ⅓ of the whipped cream; mix
1 pint bruised raspberries with another ⅓ of the whipped cream and
add sufficient sugar to sweeten (or take raspberry jelly); add to
the last ⅓ of whipped cream 5 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1 teaspoonful
vanilla extract; place a form into cracked ice, fill in the cream in
finger thick layers alternately--first the chocolate, then the
raspberry, then the white; continue until all is used; cover the
form tightly, paste around the edge of cover a strip of buttered
paper and bury the whole form in rock salt and ice for 4 hours; if
the ice melts more must be put around the form and some of the water
drawn off; when ready to serve dip the form into hot water, turn the
pudding onto a dish and serve at once.

238. +Frozen Chocolate Pudding.+-- Boil 6 ounces grated chocolate in
½ pint water with 4 tablespoonfuls sugar until thick and smooth;
when cold mix it with 1½ pints whipped cream; if not sweet enough
add more sugar; fill this into a tin pudding form, paste a strip of
buttered paper around the edge of cover and bury the form in cracked
ice and rock salt for 4 hours the same way as Strawberry Pudding.

239. +Bombe à la Altenberg.+-- Boil 1½ cups sugar with 1 cup water 10
minutes; remove and when cold add the yolks of 6 eggs: stir this
over the fire till nearly boiling; when cold mix it with 1 pint
whipped cream and 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract; fill this into a
form, cover tightly and place into cracked ice; boil 6 ounces
chocolate in 1 cup water with ½ cup sugar and 1 teaspoonful vanilla
until smooth; put this into another form, also standing in ice and
rock salt; when it begins to freeze spread the chocolate evenly
around the inside of form, so as to form a complete lining; then
cover the form and let it remain in ice until hard; next fill in the
above vanilla cream, cover tightly, paste a strip of buttered paper
around the edge of cover and bury the form in plenty of ice and rock
salt for 4 hours; in serving dip the form in hot water, quickly turn
the bombe out onto a round dish, decorate with kisses and serve at
once.

240. +Bombe à la Parisienne.+-- Press 1 quart ripe strawberries
through a sieve, add 1 pound sugar dissolved in ½ pint cold water
and a little Rhine wine; pack a plain ice cream form into cracked
ice and salt, pour in the strawberries and let freeze till it begins
to thicken; then spread the half frozen strawberry ice onto the
sides and bottom of form so that it forms a complete lining inside;
cover the form and let it remain in ice till hard; in the meantime
have a pineapple cream prepared as follows:--

241. +Pineapple Cream for Bombe à la Parisienne.+-- Place a saucepan
with the yolks of 6 eggs and 1 pint pineapple syrup over the fire
and stir until nearly boiling; remove from the fire and when cold
add 1 pint whipped cream; fill this inside of the strawberry ice,
cover the form tightly, paste a strip of buttered paper around the
edge of cover and bury in ice and salt for 3 hours; when ready to
serve take out the form, rinse off with cold water, remove the
paper, dip the form quickly into hot water and turn the bombe onto a
handsome dish; garnish with fruit, French candies or fancy cakes and
serve at once. NOTE.--The strawberry ice may be first frozen in a
freezer and then put into the form.

242. +Ice Pudding (with Pumpernickel).+-- Cut 6 ounces pumpernickel
into slices and dry them in the oven; roll them fine with a rolling
pin and sift the crumbs through a coarse sieve; mix them with 1
quart whipped cream, add 1 teaspoonful extract of vanilla and 1 cup
sugar; fill the cream into a tin form with a tube in the center,
cover tightly, paste a strip of buttered paper around the edge of
cover and bury in cracked ice and rock salt for 4 hours; when ready
to serve dip the form into hot water, turn the pudding onto a round
dish and serve at once.

243. +Ice Pudding (with Almonds).+-- Stir the yolks of 8 eggs with ¾
pound sugar to a cream, add 1 quart whipped cream, ½ pound ground
almonds and finish the same as Strawberry Pudding.

244. +Frozen Pudding à la Montmorency.+-- Mix 2 tablespoonfuls sugar
with 1 cup finely chopped sweet almonds and 10 bitter ones; put this
into a tin pan and roast in the oven to a light brown, stirring
often; place a saucepan with the yolks of 6 eggs, 1 cup sugar, 1
pint cream or milk and the roasted almonds over the fire and stir
constantly until nearly boiling; then strain through a sieve; when
cold add 2 tablespoonfuls caramel (see Boiling Sugar) and orange
blossom water; put this into an ice cream freezer and work till it
begins to thicken; then add ¾ pint whipped cream, ½ cup finely
chopped pistachio nuts and 3 ounces finely powdered macaroons;
continue working the freezer till the cream is frozen hard; place a
cream form in ice and salt, pour some cherry syrup around the sides
and bottom, sprinkle with pistachio fillets and some preserved red
cherries; then fill in the cream with some of the cherries laid
between, put on the cover, paste a strip of buttered paper around
its edge and completely bury the form in ice and rock salt for 1
hour; when ready to serve lift from the ice, rinse off with cold
water, remove the paper, wipe the form dry and quickly dip it into
hot water; have ready a handsome dish with a folded napkin; turn the
pudding onto the dish, garnish with small fancy cakes and serve with
whipped cream flavored with vanilla or maraschino.

245. +Pudding Glacé à la Metternich.+-- Pound 3 ounces blanched
almonds and 3 ounces blanched pistachio nuts to a paste; stir over
the fire the yolks of 6 eggs, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 pint cream
and a little vanilla till nearly boiling; add the almonds and
pistachio paste and set aside to cool; then strain through a sieve;
soak 6 ounces seedless raisins, 3 ounces finely cut preserved orange
peel and a little finely cut preserved apricots in maraschino and
cut a small sponge cake into slices; 4 hours before serving place a
high form into cracked ice and salt, put in a layer of cream and
over this some fruit and cake; continue with cream, fruit and cake
alternately till all is used; cover the form, paste a piece of
buttered paper around the edge of cover and completely bury in
plenty of cracked ice and salt; when ready to serve rinse the form
off with cold water, remove the paper, quickly dip the form into hot
water, turn the pudding onto a dish and garnish with fruit and fancy
cake; serve with pistachio sauce made as follows:--Stir the yolks of
4 eggs with 1 pint sweet cream and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar over the
fire till nearly boiling; remove from the fire, add 2 ounces finely
powdered pistachio nuts and serve when cold with the pudding.

246. +A la Duchesse de Berry.+-- Press 1 quart strawberries through a
sieve; dissolve ¾ pound sugar in 1 cup cold water and add it to the
strawberries; set a form into cracked ice and salt for 20 minutes,
put in the strawberries and freeze it until thick; then spread the
strawberry ice around the sides and bottom of a high ice form and
let it stand in ice till hard; in the meantime prepare a cream for
the inside; mix 1 pint cream with 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks
of 6 eggs and 1 cup preserved pineapple cut into small pieces; stir
this over the fire till nearly boiling; remove it and when cold put
into a freezer; freeze until it begins to thicken; then add 1 pint
whipped cream and freeze it for a few minutes longer; then fill it
into the strawberry form, cover tightly, paste a strip of buttered
paper around the edge of cover and bury in plenty of ice and rock
salt for 1 hour; in serving take out of ice, rinse off with cold
water, remove the paper, wipe the form dry, quickly dip it into hot
water, turn the pudding onto a handsome dish and serve at once.

247. +Pudding Glacé à la Allemande.+-- Put 2 dozen lady fingers on a
long plate and pour over them some Madeira wine or maraschino; set a
plain form without a tube in ice and rock salt; stir 1 pint cream
with the yolks of 6 eggs, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1 teaspoonful
vanilla extract over the fire till nearly boiling; when cold put in
a freezer and freeze till it begins to thicken; then add 1 pint
whipped cream and freeze for a few minutes longer; then put a layer
of this cream into the plain form, standing in ice, put over this a
layer of lady fingers and a few spoonfuls apricot marmalade or fruit
jelly, then a layer of cream again; continue this way until all is
used; let the last layer be cream; put on the cover, paste a piece
of buttered paper around the edge of it and bury the form completely
in ice and rock salt; let it remain 1 hour; then serve, garnished
with fancy cake. NOTE.--If a form is not handy a 3-quart tin kettle
will do.

248. +Frozen Pudding à la Richelieu.+-- Boil ¼ pound rice in water
till done and pour it onto a sieve to drain; pound ¼ pound blanched
almonds or pistachio nuts with a little cream to a paste; remove the
shells and brown skin from ¼ pound large chestnuts and boil them in
milk till soft; then strain them through a sieve and mix rice and
nuts together; boil ½ cup sugar with ½ cup water for 10 minutes, add
1 teaspoonful vanilla extract, mix (hot) with the above mixture and
let it stand for an hour; put in a porcelain-lined saucepan 1 pint
cream, the yolks of 6 eggs, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1 teaspoonful
vanilla extract; stir this over the fire till nearly boiling; remove
it and set aside to cool; spread 20 vanilla wafers on one side with
apricot marmalade and put 2 and 2 together; dip them into sherry
wine and set aside; also cut some stewed pineapple into dice; set a
form into cracked ice and salt and put in a few spoonfuls cream; lay
over the cream a layer of wafers, rice and pineapple; then cream
again; continue until all is used; put on the cover, paste a strip
of buttered paper around its edge and bury the form completely in
ice and rock salt from 3 to 4 hours; when ready to serve turn the
pudding onto a dish with a folded napkin underneath and send cold
pineapple or pistachio sauce to table with it.

249. +Frozen Chestnut Pudding.+-- Place a saucepan with ½ pound large
chestnuts over the fire, cover with water and boil a few minutes;
drain the nuts in colander, remove the outside shell and the inside
skin and boil in milk till soft; press them through a sieve and add
the yolks of 6 eggs to the pureé and 1 pint sweet cream, ½ pound
sugar and 1 teaspoonful extract of vanilla; stir this over the fire
till nearly boiling; strain through a fine sieve; boil for 15
minutes 2 ounces well washed currants, the same of seedless raisins
and finely cut citron and a little orange peel in water; drain on a
sieve and let them lay for 2 hours in Madeira wine; put a piece of
ice (large enough to cover the bottom) in a strong pail or butter
tub and sprinkle a handful of rock salt over it; put onto this an
ice cream freezer and fill up the sides with cracked ice and salt;
put in the chestnut cream and work till it begins to thicken; then
pour in not quite 1 pint whipped cream and work until it is frozen
quite hard; then add the fruit with the wine; let it freeze a little
longer; transfer the cream to a pudding form with a tube in the
center (or an ice form), put on the cover, paste a strip of buttered
paper around its edge and bury the form in ice and salt for 1 hour;
when ready to serve rinse off the form with cold water, remove the
paper and wipe dry; then dip it quickly into hot water and turn the
pudding onto a dish; garnish with fancy cake and serve with whipped
cream.

250. +Frozen Apple Pudding.+-- Pare and core 8 nice greening apples,
cut them into quarters and stew with ½ cup water till tender; boil 1
cup sugar with 1 cup water for 5 minutes and add it to the apples
with 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract and ½ cup apricot marmalade;
press the whole through a sieve; when cold put it into an ice cream
freezer and work till it begins to get thick; then add 1 pint
whipped cream, 3 ounces currants and the same of seedless raisins
and finely cut citron; the last 3 ingredients should be boiled for
20 minutes in a little water and laid for ½ hour in vanilla syrup;
let the whole freeze until hard; fill the cream into a form, put on
the cover, paste a strip of buttered paper around the edge of the
latter and bury in salt and ice for 1 hour; serve with whipped cream
and garnish with fancy cakes.

251. +Mousse of Pineapple.+-- Line a plain form with white paper; see
that there are no creases in the paper; lay it in even and smooth;
set the form into cracked ice until following mixture is
prepared:--Pare and cut into slices 1 ripe pineapple; dissolve 1
pound sugar in 1 pint water and put it over the fire to boil; add
the pineapple slices and boil 20 minutes; transfer them to a sieve
to drain; when cold cut some of the slices into halves and lay them
inside on the side of form; cut the remaining slices of pineapple
into dice and set them cold; place a saucepan with 1½ cups pineapple
syrup and the yolks of 9 eggs over the fire and stir till nearly
boiling; remove from fire, add 1 cup pineapple dice and stir till
cold; then mix it with 1 pint whipped cream; fill this into the
form, put on the cover and paste a strip of buttered paper around
its edge; then pack the form into cracked ice and salt so that it is
completely buried and let it remain 4 hours; when ready to serve dip
the form into hot water, dry quickly, turn the mousse onto a dish
and garnish with fancy cakes.

252. +Mousse à la Vanille.+-- Dissolve 1 cup sugar in 1½ cups water,
add the yolks of 6 eggs and stir over the fire till nearly boiling;
remove quickly and stir till cold; then add 1 pint whipped cream, 2
teaspoonfuls vanilla extract and finish the same as pineapple in
foregoing recipe.

253. +Mousse à l’Orange.+-- Dissolve 1 cup sugar in 1 cup water and
boil a few minutes with the juice of 1 lemon; remove the syrup from
the fire, put in the thin peel of 2 oranges and let them lay for a
few minutes; then remove; rub off the skin from 6 oranges with loaf
sugar and add the orange sugar to the sugar syrup with the juice of
6 oranges and the yolks of 9 eggs; beat this with an egg beater till
nearly boiling; remove quickly, set it in cold water and continue
beating till cold; then add 1 pint whipped cream and finish the same
as Pineapple Mousse.

254. +Mousse au Chocolat.+-- Dissolve 3 ounces grated chocolate in ½
cup water and boil for a few minutes; strain through a sieve and set
aside; put in a saucepan the yolks of 6 eggs and 1 cup sugar syrup
and stir over the fire till it begins to thicken; remove it quickly,
set saucepan in cold water, add the chocolate and stir till cold;
then mix it with 1 pint whipped cream and finish the same as
Pineapple Mousse.

255. +Mousse au Maraskino.+-- Stir the yolks of 6 eggs with ¾ cup
sugar and 1 cup water over the fire to a cream; remove it from the
fire and stir till cold; add ½ cup maraschino and 1 pint whipped
cream and finish the same as Pineapple Mousse. Rum may be
substituted for maraschino.




PAINS.


256. +Pain of Strawberries.+-- Put 1 quart ripe strawberries into a
colander, rinse off with cold water and press them through a sieve;
soak 2 ounces gelatine in ½ pint cold water for 15 minutes, add ½
pint boiling water and stir over the fire till gelatine is
dissolved; set aside to cool; then dissolve ¾ pound sugar in 1 pint
cold water, put it over the fire with the juice of 1 lemon and boil
5 minutes; when cold add it with the gelatine to the strawberries;
also add ½ cup white wine and a little cochineal; put the pain on
ice till it begins to thicken; then fill it into a form with a tube
in the center, cover and place for 2 or 3 hours on ice. Pains of
raspberries or currants are made the same way, using no lemon.

257. +Pain d’Ananas.+-- Take a jar of preserved pineapples, cut them
into small dice, add ½ pint white wine and a little more sugar if
necessary; add the juice of 1 lemon and 2 ounces gelatine dissolved
in 1 pint water; place this on ice and stir it now and then; as soon
as it begins to thicken put into a form, which set on ice for 2 or 3
hours; then serve.

258. +Pain d’Ananas à la Parisienne.+-- Chose a large, ripe pineapple
and pare and grate it; add 1½ cups sugar and stir until dissolved;
press the pineapple through a sieve and add the juice of 4 oranges
and 2 ounces gelatine dissolved in 1 pint water; place a plain form
into cracked ice and pour in a few spoonfuls orange jelly; when this
is hard lay the form over on its side, pour in more jelly and keep
turning slowly, so that the jelly may get all over the sides and
form a lining; next have some pistachio nuts or blanched almonds cut
into strips and sprinkle them over the sides and bottom of form; set
the pineapple mixture on ice and stir until it begins to thicken;
then fill into the form, cover and let it remain for 2 or 3 hours in
ice; it is then ready to serve; chop the trimmings of the pineapple
fine, pour over some cold sugar syrup and let it stand 2 hours;
strain, add a little dissolved gelatine and pour over the pain when
sent to table.

259. +Pain de Peches.+-- Take 20 large, ripe peaches and pare and
quarter them; then press them through a sieve; add to this 1 pound
sugar dissolved in 1 pint cold water and 2 ounces dissolved
gelatine; crack the stones, remove the pits, scald in boiling water
and free them from their brown skin; cut the pits in half and boil
them in a little sugar syrup; add to the peach mixture ½ cup white
wine and fill it into a tin form with a tube in the center; place
the form on ice and let it remain till its contents begin to
thicken; then stir in the peach pits and let it remain on ice 2
hours longer. Pains of apricots, cherries or plums are made the same
way.

260. +Pain à la Victoria.+-- Press 1 pint ripe raspberries through a
sieve and mix it with 1 ounce gelatine dissolved in ½ pint water;
put ¾ cup sugar into ½ pint cold water and stir until dissolved;
then add it to the raspberries with a glass of white wine; place
this on ice till it begins to thicken; prepare 1 quart almond
blanc-mange (see Blanc-Mange); set a plain form into cracked ice and
put in a layer of raspberries about an inch in thickness; let this
get hard; then put in a layer of blanc-mange; after this is firm
again put in raspberries, then blanc-mange; continue till all is
used; let it remain on ice for 2 hours; when ready to serve turn the
pain onto a round dish and garnish with fruit.

261. +Pain de Peches à la Richelieu.+-- Prepare a pain the same as
Pain de Peches and also 1 pint almond blanc-mange; set a plain form
with a tube in the center into cracked ice and put in by degrees the
blanc-mange; put it ½ inch in thickness all around on the sides and
bottom of form, so that it forms a complete lining inside; then fill
in the pain of peaches and let it remain on ice for 2 hours: in
serving dip the form into hot water, wipe dry and turn its contents
into a glass dish.

262. +Pain de Peches à la Condé.+-- Pare and cut into halves 1½ dozen
large, ripe peaches and boil them with their blanched pits in sugar
syrup for about 10 minutes; transfer the peaches to a dish or long
tin pan, wipe dry and lay them with the hollow side up; put half a
pit in the center of each and pour a spoonful of jelly over each
piece (the jelly should be previously stirred on ice till it begins
to thicken); next set a plain form into cracked ice, pour in some
plain fruit or wine jelly and keep turning the form until the inside
is lined with the jelly; cover the bottom with peaches; lay them so
that the pits are to the outside; then lay the remaining peaches in
rows on the side of form, pour over some jelly and when firm fill up
the form with bavarois aux apricots, which is prepared as
follows:--Pare and cut into pieces 1½ dozen ripe apricots, lay in a
dish, sprinkle over 1 cup sugar and let them stand for 2 hours; then
press them through a sieve; mix the pureé with 1 teaspoonful extract
of vanilla and 1½ ounces dissolved gelatine; put this on ice and
stir till it begins to thicken; then carefully stir 1 pint whipped
cream through it; fill the bavarois into form at once and let it
remain on ice for 2 or 3 hours.

263. +Pain de Pommes à la Condé.+-- Choose 15 large pippin or
greening apples and pare, quarter and stew them with a little water;
press them through a sieve, add 1 cup sugar and when cold mix it
with 2 ounces gelatine dissolved in 1 pint water and 1 pint almond
milk (prepared the same as for Blanc-Mange); place this on ice and
stir till it begins to thicken; fill it into a form which has
already been set into cracked ice and let it remain for 2 or 3
hours; boil the cores and peels of apples till soft; strain through
a bag, return the liquor to saucepan and boil 10 minutes; then add
to ½ pint of juice 1 cup sugar and boil for a few minutes; pour the
syrup into a dish and set aside to cool; in serving dip the form
into hot water, wipe it dry and turn the pain onto a round dish, or
into a large glass dish, and pour the apple syrup over it. This pain
may be made of Bartlet pears in the same manner.




ICE CREAMS.


264. +Directions for Making Ice Cream.+-- The implements needed are a
freezer, rock salt and finely cracked ice. Ice cream freezers can be
bought at any hardware store. They consist of a large wooden pail
with a faucet on the side near the bottom and a freezer with a
paddle inside. The cracking of the ice is best accomplished by
putting it into a coarse sack and pounding it fine with a hammer or
mallet. Place the freezer into the pail, put in the paddle and cover
the freezer tightly. Fill the space between the pail and freezer
with fine cracked ice to ⅓ its height, sprinkle over 2 handfuls salt
and pack down the ice with a piece of wood, so that it may be firm
all around the freezer; continue with layers of ice, salt and the
packing down till the ice reaches to the edge of cover; next pour
into the freezer the mixture that is to be frozen; but care should
be taken not to put in too much, for the cream needs plenty of room
in order to become light and smooth; cover the freezer and let it
stand for 5 minutes; then commence to turn; after 10 minutes’
turning remove the cover from freezer and cut the frozen cream with
a long bladed knife from the sides of can; repeat this every 10
minutes until the cream is frozen hard; then remove the paddle, even
off the cream in the freezer, cover and let it stand for 10 minutes;
do not draw off the water from pail until it stands above the ice
and the freezer has lost its firm hold; after drawing off the water
fill the space up again with cracked ice and salt; when the 10
minutes have elapsed fill the frozen cream into an ice form, cover
tightly and paste a strip of buttered paper around the edge of
cover; then pack the form into cracked ice and salt for 1 or 2
hours; when ready to serve take the form from the ice, rinse it off
with cold water, remove the paper and wipe the form dry; then dip it
quickly into hot water, take off the cover, turn the cream onto a
dish and serve at once.

265. +Ice Cream (large quantity).+-- 14 quarts sweet cream, 6 quarts
milk, 7 pounds sugar, 30 eggs and ¼ pound gelatine; soak gelatine
for 10 minutes in a little of the milk; put the remaining milk over
the fire and boil; then add the soaked gelatine and stir and boil
till it is dissolved; set aside to cool a little; beat eggs and
sugar to a cream and add by degrees the milk, stirring constantly;
return to fire and let it get boiling hot; but do not allow it to
boil, otherwise it will curdle; remove from fire, pass it through a
sieve and set aside to cool, stirring it occasionally; beat the
cream until quite thick, gradually add the cold custard and continue
beating for a little while longer; then put it in a freezer and
freeze as directed.

266. +Fine Vanilla Ice Cream.+-- Beat the yolks of 8 eggs to a cream
and add gradually 1 quart sweet cream which has previously been
boiled and cooled; add ¾ pound sugar, 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla extract
and stir the whole over the fire until nearly boiling; then remove
from fire and when cold strain it through a sieve and freeze as
directed.

267. +Custard Ice Cream.+-- Put 5 eggs in a saucepan and beat them to
a froth; add 1 cup sugar, 1 quart milk and set the saucepan in a
vessel of boiling water over the fire; stir constantly until the
custard nearly boils; then remove it from the fire and set the
saucepan in cold water; when cold strain it through a sieve, add 2
teaspoonfuls vanilla or lemon extract, put the custard in the
freezer and freeze as directed.

268. +Plain Ice Cream.+-- Put 2 teaspoonfuls cornstarch, 6 eggs, 2
cups sugar and 2 quarts milk in a saucepan over the fire and stir
till just about to boil; remove from the fire, flavor with lemon or
vanilla and finish as directed.

269. +Plain Ice Cream (another way).+-- Put 1 quart milk and 1 quart
rich, sweet cream with the yolks of 8 eggs and 2 cups sugar over the
fire and stir till just about to boil; remove from fire, beat the
whites of the 8 eggs to a stiff froth and add them to the custard;
add 3 teaspoonfuls vanilla and finish as directed.

270. +Pistachio Ice Cream.+-- ¼ pound blanched pistachio nuts, ¼
pound blanched almonds, 1 quart rich, sweet cream, 1½ cups sugar,
the yolks of 8 eggs and 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract; pound the
nuts with a little water very fine; place a saucepan over the fire
with the cream, the yolks of the 8 eggs, sugar and vanilla and stir
until nearly boiling; remove from the fire, stir in the nuts and
when cold press the whole through a sieve; finish as directed.
Almond ice cream is made the same way.

271. +Maraschino Ice Cream.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 quart cream, ¾
pound sugar and the yolks of 6 eggs over the fire and stir till it
nearly boils; remove from fire, strain through a sieve and when cold
add 1½ gills maraschino; finish as directed. Rum ice cream is made
in the same manner.

272. +Caramel Ice Cream.+-- 1½ cups sugar, the yolks of 7 eggs, 1
quart sweet cream and 1 tablespoonful orange blossom water; boil ½
cup sugar with ¼ cup water until it turns to a light brown color,
add ¼ cup boiling water and stir till the sugar is dissolved; put it
in a saucepan with the cream, 1 cup sugar, yolks and orange water
and stir the whole over the fire until nearly boiling; when cold
strain it through a sieve and finish as directed.

273. +Tea Ice Cream.+-- 1 ounce of the very best tea, 1 quart cream,
the yolks of 6 eggs and ¾ pound sugar; boil the cream, put in the
tea, cover and let it stand 5 minutes; strain through a sieve and
when nearly cold mix the cream, yolks and sugar together and stir
over the fire until nearly boiling; remove from fire and when cold
finish as directed.

274. +Coffee Ice Cream, No. 1.+-- 1 quart cream, 1 pint milk, 2 cups
sugar, the yolks of 6 eggs and 2 ounces freshly ground coffee; boil
the milk, put in the coffee, cover and set it aside to cool; next
put the cream, yolks and sugar in a saucepan and stir over the fire
till it nearly boils; remove from fire, add the coffee and when cold
strain through a fine sieve, finishing as directed.

275. +Coffee Ice Cream, No. 2.+-- ¾ pound sugar, 1 quart sweet cream,
the yolks of 6-8 eggs and 5 ounces unroasted Mocha coffee; roast the
coffee in a pan over the fire and put it into half of the boiling
cream; cover and let it stand till cold; put the remaining cream,
yolks and sugar in a saucepan over the fire and stir till nearly
boiling; remove from the fire, add the coffee cream with the beans
and let it stand till cold; then strain through a sieve and freeze
as directed. 2 ounces freshly ground coffee may be used instead of
the beans.

276. +Ice Cream (Simple).+-- 1 quart sweet cream, 1 cup sugar and 2
teaspoonfuls vanilla or lemon extract; mix this well together, pour
into a freezer and finish as directed. Or take equal parts of cream
and milk; to 1 quart of this add 1½ cups sugar and any flavoring
that may be desired; pour into the freezer and finish as directed.

277. +Plain Chocolate Ice Cream.+-- 2 pints cream, 1 pint milk, 2
cups sugar, ¼ pound Baker’s grated chocolate and 2 teaspoonfuls
vanilla extract; place a saucepan with the milk, chocolate and cream
over the fire, add the sugar, stir and boil for a few minutes;
remove from fire and when cold freeze as directed.

278. +Nut Ice Cream.+-- ½ pound blanched walnuts, the yolks of 6
eggs, 1½ cups sugar, 1 quart cream and 1 teaspoonful vanilla; pound
the walnuts fine; put the cream, yolks, sugar and vanilla in a
saucepan and stir over the fire till nearly boiling; remove from the
fire, add the nuts and when cold strain it through a sieve; freeze
as directed.

279. +Fine Chocolate Ice Cream.+-- ½ pound grated chocolate, ½ pound
sugar, 1 quart sweet cream, the yolks of 8 eggs and 1 teaspoonful
vanilla extract; place a saucepan with ½ pint cream and the
chocolate over the fire and stir and boil till chocolate is
dissolved; stir the yolks, sugar, the remaining cream and vanilla
together, add it slowly to the chocolate and continue stirring until
nearly boiling; remove from fire and finish as directed.

280. +Strawberry Ice Cream.+-- 1 pint ripe strawberries, 1 pint rich,
sweet cream, 1 pound sugar and 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract; wash
and drain the berries, mash them fine and mix with the sugar; cover
and let stand till sugar is melted; press them through a sieve, mix
the strawberry pulp with the cream and vanilla and put the whole
into a freezer and freeze as directed. Raspberry, peach and apricot
ice creams are made the same way.

281. +How to Make Ice Cream Without a Freezer.+-- The process is so
easy of manipulation and the expense incident thereto so small that
most anybody can prepare it without any great trouble. All that is
necessary for its preparation is a butter tub or a large pail, some
ice, rock salt, a tin form with tube in the center and a cover that
fits it closely. The ice is best broken to pieces by putting it into
a coarse bag and pounding with a hatchet. By this process no ice is
wasted and there is no muss.

282. +Vanilla Ice Cream, No. 1.+-- Set a plain tin form with tube in
the center into cracked ice and salt; place a saucepan with 1 quart
milk, the yolks of 6 eggs, 1 cup sugar and 1 tablespoonful
cornstarch over the fire and stir with an egg beater till nearly
boiling; remove from the fire, set saucepan in cold water and
continue stirring till cold; then add the whites of the 6 eggs,
beaten to a stiff froth, and 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla extract; pour
this into the form, put on the cover and paste a strip of buttered
paper around its edge, to prevent the salt water from entering; put
a thick layer of cracked ice in the bottom of a butter tub and
sprinkle over it a handful of rock salt; set the form onto the ice
and fill the space between it and tub with cracked ice and salt; lay
a thick layer of ice on top of form and sprinkle with salt; cover
the tub with a carpet or bag and let it stand in a cool place for 4
hours; when ready to serve take the form out of the ice, remove the
paper, dip the form into hot water, quickly wipe dry, turn the cream
onto a dish and serve.

283. +Vanilla Ice Cream. No. 2.+-- Place a deep kettle into cracked
ice and put into it 1 quart rich, sweet cream; beat this with an egg
beater until thick and add 1 cup powdered sugar and 2 teaspoonfuls
vanilla extract; put the cream into a tin form with a tube in the
center, cover tightly, paste a strip of buttered paper around the
edge of cover and finish the same as in foregoing recipe. NOTE.--For
chocolate cream dissolve ¼ pound grated chocolate in ½ cup water,
let it boil for a few minutes and when cold stir into the whipped
cream prepared as above. Preserved peaches cut into small pieces or
preserved pineapples cut into dice and mixed with the whipped cream
is very nice. 1 dozen macaroons pounded fine and mixed with the
whipped cream is also excellent. Pumpernickel cut in slices, dried
in an oven and rolled fine may also be used. Candied fruit cut into
pieces and fresh or preserved strawberries, as also cherries,
apricots and oranges, can be used in the same way. For a small
family 1 pint of cream will be sufficient.

284. +Fruit Ice Cream.+-- Stir 1 quart cream with the yolks of 6 eggs
and 1½ cups sugar over the fire till it nearly boils; remove from
fire and when cold put the cream into the freezer and work till half
frozen; then add any kind of fruit--either fresh strawberries or
preserved pineapple cut into dice, ripe peaches cut into quarters,
preserved pitted cherries or apricots; then finish as directed. The
fruit may also be stirred into Custard Ice Cream in the same manner.

285. +Fruit Ice.+-- The principal point in making fruit ice is to use
the exact quantity of sugar. If the mixture contains too much sugar
it will not freeze; if too little sugar the ice will be hard and
dry. The better way is to try a little of it before putting the
whole mixture into a freezer. If hard and dry add some thick sugar
syrup; if it does not freeze at all add some cold water or a very
thin syrup of sugar.

286. +Cold Sugar Syrup for Fruit Ice.+-- Dissolve 1 pound sugar in 1
pint cold water and use as directed in following recipe. This is the
ordinary syrup of 32 degrees used for fruit ice. If a thicker syrup
is wanted dissolve 1 pound sugar in ½ pint water.

287. +Strawberry Ice.+-- Wash and drain 1 quart ripe strawberries and
press them through a sieve; mix the pulp with 1 pint sugar syrup, as
in No. 286, and the juice of 2 lemons; press it through a fine hair
sieve, put it into a freezer and freeze as directed.

288. +Pineapple Ice.+-- Choose a large, ripe pineapple, pare and
grate it, or cut into pieces, and chop fine; put the pulp into a
porcelain dish and pour over it ½ pint sugar syrup; cover and let it
stand 1 hour; then add another ½ pint sugar syrup and the juice of 1
lemon; press it through a sieve and put in a freezer to freeze.

289. +Tutti Frutti Ice.+-- Pound ¾ pound blanched sweet almonds and
12 bitter ones with a little cold water very fine; pour over 1 pint
water and let them stand for ½ hour; then press them through a hair
sieve; mix this almond milk with 2 pints sugar syrup and 1
teaspoonful vanilla; put this into a freezer and freeze; when frozen
take the paddle of the freezer out and put in different kinds of
fruit cut into small dice--either fresh or preserved peaches,
pineapples, plums, cherries or apricots.

290. +Peach Ice.+-- Pare and cut 12 large, ripe peaches into pieces,
press them through a sieve, mix with a little over 1 pint sugar
syrup and freeze. Ices from egg plums and apricots are made in the
same way.

291. +Melon Ice.+-- Choose a nice, ripe musk melon, cut it in half,
remove the seeds and green portion and press the soft part through a
sieve; mix it with an equal quantity of sugar syrup, a little
vanilla extract, the juice of 1 lemon, a little orange blossom water
and freeze as directed.

292. +Orange Ice.+-- Mix 1 quart sugar syrup with the juice of 10
oranges, put in the thin peel of 2 oranges and let it stand for 6
minutes; remove the peel, pour the syrup through a sieve and freeze
as directed.

293. +Lemon Ice.+-- Mix the juice of 5 lemons with 1 quart sugar
syrup and freeze.

294. +Sorbet+ is served in Europe at balls and suppers.

295. +Champagne Sorbet.+-- Dissolve 1 pound sugar in 1½ pints cold
water, add the juice of 2 lemons and 6 oranges and a little of the
peel of each and let it stand 10 minutes; remove the peel, add ½
bottle champagne, put it into a freezer and work for ¼ hour; 10
minutes before serving add ½ bottle champagne, work it for a few
minutes longer and then serve in glasses. Sorbet should not freeze
hard; it should be a creamy liquid and ice cold.

296. +Pineapple Sorbet.+-- 1 quart pineapple syrup, the juice of 3
oranges and 1 lemon; mix all together, strain and put into a
freezer, work it for ½ hour and add by degrees during the freezing
process ½ bottle champagne; finish the same as Champagne Sorbet.
Sorbets of oranges, strawberries, peaches, cherries and apricot
syrup are made in a similar manner.

297. +Strawberry Sherbet.+-- Press 1 quart ripe strawberries through
a sieve, add ¾ pound sugar dissolved in 3 pints cold water, add the
juice of 1 lemon and 2 teaspoonfuls orange flower water, cover and
let stand for 2 hours; then strain through a fine sieve and set on
ice for 1 or 2 hours; serve ice cold in small glasses.

298. +Orange Granite.+-- Mix 1 pint orange juice with 3 pints sugar
syrup, as in No. 286, the juice of 2 lemons and the peel of 1; let
it stand a few minutes then strain through a sieve; pour the mixture
into a freezer, cover and turn for 5 minutes; then take off the
cover, cut the frozen part loose from the sides of freezer, turn for
a few minutes longer and serve. Granite must not be frozen hard; it
should have little lumps all through it. Granites of strawberries,
pineapples, raspberries, currants, peaches, apricots or cherries are
made in a similar way. In granite of currants omit the lemon juice.

299. +Spongada aux peches.+-- Pare and cut into pieces some ripe
peaches, press them through a sieve and take for 1 pint peach pulp 1
pint sugar syrup, as in No. 286, 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla extract, 1½
gills white of egg not beaten and 10 bitter almonds pounded to a
paste with a little water; mix all well together and strain twice
through a sieve; pour this into a freezer, cover and turn for 5
minutes; take off the cover, cut the frozen part loose from the
sides of freezer, cover and turn again; repeat the operation of
cutting from the sides every 5 minutes; as soon as the mixture
begins to thicken remove the paddle of freezer, work the mixture up
and down with a large spoon and press it towards the sides and
bottom of freezer; as soon as the contents of freezer have increased
to double their size add 2 tablespoonfuls maraschino and serve in
glasses.

300. +Spongada au chocolat.+-- 1 pint sweet cream, ½ pound finely
grated chocolate, ½ pound sugar, 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla extract, 1½
gills white of egg and 1 large cup water; boil the chocolate in the
water for 5 minutes; when cold mix all the ingredients together and
finish the same as in preceding recipe.

301. +Spongada au Café.+-- 1 pint cold sweet cream, ½ pint very
strong coffee, ½ pint whites of eggs (not whipped) and 1 pound
powdered sugar; mix all together and finish the same as Spongada aux
Pêches.

302. +Spongada au marasquin.+-- 1½ gills white of eggs, 2 pints rich,
sweet cream, 1½ cups sugar, 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla extract and 1½
gills maraschino; dissolve the sugar in the cream, add vanilla and
the white of egg without having been beaten and finish the same as
Spongada aux Pêches. The maraschino is to be added shortly before
serving.

303. +Orgeat of Almond Milk.+-- 1 pound sweet and 12 bitter almonds
are scalded in boiling water, freed from their brown skins and laid
for 1 hour in cold water; drain the almonds on a sieve and pound
them fine with 1 pound sugar and a few spoonfuls water; put the
pounded nuts into a porcelain dish, pour over them 4 quarts cold
water, add 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla extract and strain through a
napkin. The napkin should be well washed in cold water and wrung out
previous to being used. Put this almond milk into glass bottles and
place them on ice before serving.

304. +Thé Polonaise.+-- Place a porcelain-lined saucepan over the
fire with 1 bottle Rhine wine, 2 bottles weiss beer, the rind of 1
lemon, a piece of stick cinnamon, 2 whole eggs, the yolks of 6 and
sugar to taste; beat the whole with an egg beater over the fire till
nearly boiling; instantly remove, continue beating for a few minutes
longer and serve hot in cups. This is served at the end of a ball or
party shortly before the guests go home.

305. +Iced Tea.+-- Boil 1 quart milk with 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, add
1½ ounces tea, cover and set aside for 5 minutes; then strain and
when cold pour it into an ice form; finish with whipped cream the
same as Coffee Ice.

306. +Iced Coffee.+-- Boil 1 quart milk with 4 tablespoonfuls sugar,
add 1 cup coarsely ground coffee, cover and let it stand for 15
minutes; then strain and when cold put it into an ice form, cover
and set into cracked ice with a little rock salt sprinkled between;
let it stand for ½ hour; then thoroughly stir it with a long-handled
spoon and mix with 1 pint whipped cream; serve in small cups.

307. +Bread Crumbs.+-- Take stale bread or pieces which are left from
the table, put them in a long, shallow tin pan and place in a medium
hot oven; leave the door of oven open a little, so that the bread
may dry slowly; when it is dry and has become a delicate brown color
put the bread on a pastry board and roll it fine with a rolling pin;
sift the crumbs through a sieve, return those which remain in it
back on the board and roll and sift again; continue in this way
until all the crumbs have been rolled fine and sifted; put them into
a jar or box until wanted.

308. +How to Prepare a Pudding Form.+-- Rub the inside of a form well
with butter and thickly sprinkle it with fine bread crumbs; turn the
form upside down, in order that the loose crumbs may fall out; the
cover of the form must be treated the same way; fill form with the
pudding mixture, put on the cover and tie it firmly with a cord; set
the form in a vessel of boiling water so that ⅓ of it is immersed;
then cover the vessel and boil slowly till done; add more water
according as it diminishes through boiling. The form may be put in a
large saucepan of boiling water and the latter covered with a deep
dish or pan; but care must be taken not to have too much water in
the saucepan, otherwise it will get inside of the form.




BOILED AND BAKED PUDDINGS.


Half the quantity of any of the following recipes will be sufficient
for a small family, but care must be taken in measurement to use
only the _exact_ half.

309. +Plum Pudding.+-- Take ¾ pound finely minced suet, ½ pound
stoned raisins, ½ pound well cleansed currants, ¼ pound finely cut
citron, 5 well beaten eggs, the grated rind of 1 lemon, 1 grated
nutmeg, 2 teaspoonfuls ground cinnamon, 1 teaspoonful cloves, 1
teaspoonful salt, 2 cups bread crumbs, ½ cup sour cream or milk, 1
cup syrup, 1 cup brown sugar, 1¼ pounds sifted flour, 1 teaspoonful
baking soda dissolved in a little boiling water, 2 teaspoonfuls
cream of tartar mixed with the flour and 1 glass brandy; mix all
well together; have ready a large pudding form, rub the inside well
with butter and sprinkle with bread crumbs; fill the mixture into
the form and boil 4 hours; when done turn the pudding out onto a
dish, pour brandy or rum over it, light and bring the pudding to
table while burning; serve with hard sauce made as follows:--Stir 2
tablespoonfuls butter with 8 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a
cream, add the yolks of 2 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls brandy, a little
nutmeg and the beaten whites of 2 eggs; sufficient for 20 persons.
If any of the pudding be left put in a stone jar and it will keep
for a long time. When wanted cut off a piece sufficient for dinner,
put it in a colander over a vessel of boiling water, cover with a
plate, steam for ½ hour and serve. The quantities cited in this
recipe will make 1 large pudding or 2 medium sized ones.

310. +English Plum Pudding.+-- 1½ pounds Muscatel raisins, 1¾
pounds currants, 1 pound Sultana raisins, 2 pounds sugar, 2 pounds
bread crumbs, 16 eggs, 2 pounds finely chopped suet, 6 ounces finely
cut citron, the grated rind of 2 lemons, 1 ounce ground nutmeg,
1 ounce cinnamon, ½ ounce ground bitter almonds and ¼ pint brandy;
stone and cut up the raisins, but do not chop them; wash and dry the
currants; mix all the dry ingredients together and moisten with the
eggs, which should be well beaten; stir in the brandy and when all
is well mixed butter and flour a strong pudding cloth; put in the
mixture, tie up cloth very tightly, put into a large vessel of
boiling water and boil from 6 to 8 hours; serve with brandy sauce.
This quantity may be divided and boiled in buttered moulds. For
small families this is the most desirable way, as the above
ingredients will be found sufficient to make a pudding for 25
persons. This pudding is excellent, but any one troubled with
dyspepsia had better not eat it.

311. +Biscuit Pudding.+-- 2 cups milk, 1 cup butter, 2 cups flour, 1
cup sugar, 10 eggs, 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract and the grated
rind and juice of 1 lemon; put the milk with ½ of the butter over
the fire; as soon as it boils stir in the sifted flour and keep on
stirring until the contents of saucepan form into a smooth paste and
loosen from bottom of saucepan; then transfer it to a dish and set
aside to cool; stir the remaining butter to a cream and add
alternately the yolks of eggs, the sugar and the paste; thoroughly
stir this and add the lemon, vanilla and the 10 whites beaten to a
stiff froth; fill into a well buttered and floured form, boil 2
hours and serve with wine cream sauce. NOTE.--This pudding should be
served as soon as taken from the form. The above ingredients will
make a pudding sufficient for 10 persons.

312. +Cottage Pudding (baked).+-- Take 1½ cups milk, 3 cups prepared
flour, ½ cup sugar, ½ cup butter, 3 eggs and the grated rind of 1
lemon; stir butter and sugar to a cream, add by degrees the eggs and
lemon and lastly, alternately, the flour and milk; butter a long tin
pan, sprinkle with bread crumbs, pour in the mixture and bake ½
hour; serve with wine or nutmeg sauce; in serving cut the pudding
into squares; sufficient for 10 persons.

313. +Cottage Pudding (boiled).+-- Prepare a batter the same as in
foregoing recipe, butter a pudding form, sprinkle with bread crumbs
and pour in the mixture; the form should be about ¾ full; boil 2
hours and serve with following sauce:--Stir ½ cup butter with 1½
cups powdered sugar to a cream, add the yolk of 1 egg, some pitted
or preserved cherries and 1 tablespoonful brandy; or add bruised
strawberries, blackberries or peaches cut into small pieces.

314. +Cottage Apple Pudding.+-- Prepare a batter as for Cottage
Pudding (baked) and add 3 cups finely cut apples; in other respects
treat the same as foregoing recipe and serve with lemon sauce.

315. +Batter Fruit Pudding.+-- ¼ pound butter, 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar, 4 eggs, 2 cups milk, 4 cups prepared flour, 1 cup seedless
raisins and currants, ½ cup finely cut citron, the grated rind of 1
lemon and a little nutmeg; stir butter and sugar to a cream and add
the eggs by degrees; then add alternately the sifted flour and milk,
next the fruit, lemon and nutmeg; butter a pudding form, sprinkle
with bread crumbs, put in the mixture and boil 2 hours; serve with
hard, brandy or punch sauce. NOTE.--The fruit should be dusted with
flour before adding it to the batter; sufficient for 10 persons.

316. +Prince Regent Pudding.+-- After removing the crust off a 5 cent
loaf of stale bread grate on a grater and pour 1 pint milk over it;
then stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter with 4 tablespoonfuls sugar to a
cream, add the yolks of 7 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls finely cut citron,
¼ pound well cleansed seedless raisins, the bread and the beaten
whites of the eggs; fill this into a pudding form which has been
well buttered and sprinkled with bread crumbs, close tightly and
boil 2 hours: serve with sherry wine, cream or brandy sauce.

317. +Layer Pudding (German style).+-- Cut a 5 cent Vienna loaf of
bread (after the crust has been removed) into thin slices; butter
these on both sides, dip each slice into milk, lay them on top of
one another and set aside; mix together ½ cup stoned raisins, 3
tablespoonfuls well cleansed currants, 2 tablespoonfuls finely cut
citron and ½ teaspoonful cinnamon; beat 8 eggs to a froth and add,
stirring constantly, 1 pint milk; next butter a pudding form and
sprinkle thickly with bread crumbs; put in a layer of the slices of
bread, sprinkle over them some of the fruit mixture and 2
tablespoonfuls sugar; then put in another layer of bread, fruit and
sugar; continue until all is used; then pour over it the milk and
eggs, cover the form closely and boil 1½ hours; serve with hard or
cherry sauce; sufficient for 12 persons.

318. +Portugal Pudding.+-- Grate the crust from a small loaf of bread
and soak the latter in milk; when soft press it out and put in a
saucepan with 1 tablespoonful butter and 1 tablespoonful clarified
dripping; stir for 5 minutes over the fire, transfer it to a dish
and as soon as cold mix with the yolks of 6 eggs, 5 tablespoonfuls
sugar, ¼ pound stoned raisins, ¼ pound well washed currants, the
grated rind and juice of 1 lemon, 2 tablespoonfuls finely cut
citron, ½ cup Cognac or rum and lastly the beaten whites of the
eggs; butter a pudding form, sprinkle with fine bread crumbs, fill
in the mixture, close tightly and boil 2 hours; serve with hard or
wine sauce; sufficient for 10 persons.

319. +Ipsilanti Pudding.+-- Mix 1 cup bread crumbs with 1 cup sweet
cream and let it stand ½ hour; stir ¼ pound butter with 6
tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream and add by degrees the yolks of 8
eggs; after this is well blended together add by degrees the bread,
the grated rind of 1 lemon, 6 ounces finely cut citron, 4
tablespoonfuls bread crumbs fried in butter, 1 teaspoonful ground
cinnamon and if handy 2 tablespoonfuls finely cut preserved ginger;
beat the whites of the 8 eggs to a stiff froth, mix all well
together, fill the mixture into a pudding form which has been well
buttered and sprinkled with bread crumbs, boil 2 hours and serve
with wine or cherry sauce.

320. +Fine Cherry Pudding (of fresh fruit, for a family of 6).+-- ¼
pound finely chopped suet, ½ pound flour, 2 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls
sugar, ½ pint milk or water, 1½ teaspoonfuls baking powder sifted
with the flour and a little salt; mix all the ingredients together;
add ½ pound cherries (minus the pits) to the batter and fill the
mixture into a pudding form which has been well buttered and
sprinkled with bread crumbs; boil the pudding 2 hours and serve with
the following sauce:--Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter with 8 of
powdered sugar to a cream, add the yolks of 2 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls
Cognac, rum or sherry wine and lastly the whites of the eggs beaten
to a stiff froth and ½ cup stoned cherries. 2 tablespoonfuls of
lard, butter or clarified drippings may be substituted for suet, and
instead of cherries any other kind of fruit may be used.

321. +Cherry Pudding (of preserved Cherries).+-- ¼ pound finely
chopped suet, 2 cups flour, 1½ teaspoonfuls baking powder, 2
tablespoonfuls sugar, ½ teaspoonful salt, 2 eggs and 1 cup milk or
water; sift flour, sugar, salt and powder into a bowl and mix them
with the finely chopped suet; make a hole in center, put in the
yolks of the 2 eggs, gradually add the milk and mix the whole into a
smooth batter; lastly add the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff
froth; put a can of preserved cherries in a colander or sieve, drain
off all the liquor and stir 1 cup of the cherries into the batter;
butter well with butter or lard a pudding form and dust it with
finely sifted bread crumbs; fill in the mixture, put on the cover
and tie it tightly with a string; place the form in a large saucepan
of boiling water (the form should not be immersed in the water more
than half its depth), cover the saucepan with a deep dish or pan, so
that no steam can escape, and boil 2 hours; according as the water
boils away add more boiling water; when done turn the pudding onto a
round plate and serve with the following sauce:--Put 1 tablespoonful
cornstarch in a saucepan and mix it with a little cold water; add 1
cup boiling water, stirring constantly, and let it boil for 2
minutes; then remove it from fire, add 1 cup cherry syrup, 1
teaspoonful vanilla, a little more sugar, 1 glass sherry wine and
lastly 2 tablespoonfuls preserved cherries. 1 tablespoonful lard or
butter may be used instead of suet. This pudding can be made of all
kinds of preserved fruit; sufficient for a family of 6 persons.

322. +Cherry Batter Pudding.+-- Stir ½ cup butter with 3
tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream, add by degrees 4 eggs and
alternately 4 cups Hecker’s prepared flour and 2 cups milk; then add
1 quart cherries; butter a pudding form, sprinkle with bread crumbs,
put in the mixture, cover the form, set in a kettle of boiling
water, so that the form is half immersed, and boil 2 hours; serve
with cherry, hard or wine sauce; or stir one cup pitted cherries
into the hard sauce. NOTE.--If fresh cherries are not available the
California canned cherries may be used, and will be found excellent.
If canned fruit is used drain off the juice and only put the
cherries into the batter, using the liquor either for the sauce or
to make a form of jelly (see Jelly). California preserved peaches
and apricots also make very fine puddings. The above recipe is
sufficient for 12 persons.

323. +Plain Suet Pudding.+-- ½ pound finely chopped suet, 4 cups
sifted flour mixed with 3 teaspoonfuls baking powder, 1 teaspoonful
salt, ½ cup sugar, 4 eggs and 1 pint milk; beat up the eggs and add
the salt and milk; when this is well beaten together add the flour
with the powder and sugar, mix the suet with a little flour and stir
it into the batter; butter a pudding dish, sprinkle with bread
crumbs, pour in the mixture, put on the cover, set the form in a
kettle of boiling water, so that the water covers half of the form,
and boil 2 hours; serve with strawberry sauce made as follows:--Stir
2 tablespoonfuls butter with 1 cup powdered sugar to a cream; wash
and mash finely 1 cup strawberries and mix them with the sauce; stir
a handful of whole berries into it, put the sauce into a glass dish,
smooth it with a knife and set some whole strawberries all around
the top. Pitless cherries, cut up peaches, pitless plums or
blackberries may be substituted for strawberries. The above
quantities will make a pudding sufficient for 12 persons.

324. +Suet Pudding (with Apples).+-- Dust 3 cups finely chopped
apples with flour and stir them into the plain suet pudding mixture;
otherwise treat the same as Plain Suet Pudding and serve with hard
or sherry wine sauce.

325. +Blackberry Pudding+ is made in the same manner as Plain Suet
Pudding, except that 1 quart well washed and floured blackberries
are stirred into the batter; serve with hard sauce, into which 1 cup
bruised blackberries may be stirred. Huckleberry pudding is made the
same way.

326. +Cherry Suet Pudding.+-- Add to the plain suet pudding mixture 1
pound stoned cherries (which should be dusted with flour before
adding) and finish the same as Apple Suet Pudding; serve with
following sauce:--Take 1 pound cherries and pound half of them fine
in a mortar; place the whole cherries with the pounded ones in a
saucepan over the fire, add 1 cup water and boil till tender; then
strain them through a sieve, return the liquor to saucepan, sweeten
to taste, add 2 teaspoonfuls cornstarch dissolved in a little cold
water, a piece of cinnamon and boil a few minutes; then add ½ pint
claret and serve; or stir into the hard sauce 1 cup pitted cherries.
Both of these sauces are excellent with cherry pudding.

327. +Suet Pudding (with Nuts).+-- Stir into the plain suet pudding
mixture 1 cup chopped almonds, walnuts or any kind of nuts; boil in
the form the same as Plain Suet Pudding and serve with nut sauce,
which is made as follows:--Stir ½ cup butter with 1½ cups powdered
sugar to a cream and add the yolks of 2 eggs and 1 cup chopped nuts.

328. +Suet Pudding (with Raisins).+-- Stir into the plain suet
mixture 1½ cups stoned raisins broken into pieces, boil the same as
Plain Suet Pudding and serve with hard sauce flavored with rum and
mixed with ½ cup blanched almonds or walnuts broken into pieces.

329. +Suet Fruit Pudding.+-- 1 cup finely chopped suet, 1 cup milk, 1
cup molasses, 1 cup seedless raisins, 1 cup currants, 1 teaspoonful
cinnamon, ½ teaspoonful cloves, ½ nutmeg, ½ teaspoonful salt, 4
eggs, 2 cups bread crumbs and 2 cups sifted prepared flour; mix all
the ingredients together, fill the mixture, into a well buttered
pudding form, boil 2½ hours and serve with the following
sauce:--Boil 1½ cups water, add 1 tablespoonful flour wet with ½ cup
cold water and boil for a few minutes; then add 1 tablespoonful
butter, a little nutmeg, the juice of 1 lemon and sweeten to taste.

330. +Marrow Pudding.+-- ¼ pound finely chopped beef marrow, ¼ pound
finely chopped suet, 5 eggs, 2 cups bread crumbs, ½ cup milk, ½
pound prepared flour, ½ cup rum, ½ cup sugar, ¼ pound raisins, the
same of well washed currants, 2 ounces finely cut citron, the grated
rind of 1 lemon, ½ grated nutmeg and 1 teaspoonful salt; mix all
together with the yolks of 5 eggs and add lastly the whites of the
eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; put the mixture in a well buttered
pudding form and boil 3 hours; serve with hard or brandy sauce. This
pudding may also be boiled in a cloth, but is much finer when done
in a form; sufficient for 10 persons.

331. +Fig Pudding.+-- ½ pound finely chopped suet, 4 eggs, 1 pint
milk, ½ pound figs cut into pieces, 1 pound flour and 3 teaspoonfuls
baking powder; mix flour and baking powder together, add suet, eggs,
1 teaspoonful salt, the figs and mix it with the milk into a stiff
batter; add 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, fill the mixture into a well
buttered pudding form and boil 2 hours; serve with hard or wine
sauce.

332. +Apple Pudding (baked).+-- Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter to a
cream, add ¼ pound sugar, ½ cup chopped almonds, the yolks of 6
eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls flour, the grated rind of 1 lemon and 1 quart
stewed apples; mix all together, add the beaten whites of the eggs,
fill the mixture into a buttered pudding dish and bake 1 hour; when
done sprinkle with powdered sugar and serve without sauce in the
same dish in which it was baked.

333. +Pineapple Pudding (or Souflée).+-- Boil 1 pint milk with 1
tablespoonful butter, while boiling sprinkle in 1 pint sifted flour
and stir constantly until it has formed into a smooth dough and
loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; transfer it to a dish to
cool; stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream, add alternately the
yolks of 4 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 cup milk, the grated rind
of 1 lemon and the paste (1 spoonful at a time); lastly add the
whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; butter a deep pudding
dish and sprinkle with bread crumbs; put in a layer of the mixture
and sprinkle over it a few bread crumbs; put over this a layer of
stewed or preserved pineapples (cut into small dice) and sprinkle
over a few bread crumbs; then a layer of the mixture and pineapples,
until all is used; let the last layer be the mixture; bake 1 hour
and serve with raspberry sauce; sufficient for a family of 8.
Preserved peaches, apricots or cherries may be used instead of
pineapples.

334. +Almond Sponge Pudding.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 pint milk and
1 tablespoonful butter over the fire; as soon as it boils stir in ½
pound sifted flour, keep stirring until it forms into a smooth dough
and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; then transfer it to a
dish and set aside to cool; stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream
and add alternately the yolks of 9 eggs, 9 tablespoonfuls sugar and
the dough; stir it with a potato masher until all the dough, the 9
yolks and 9 tablespoonfuls sugar have been used; add 1 cup finely
chopped or grated almonds, the juice and rind of 1 lemon and lastly
the beaten whites of 9 eggs; fill this mixture into a pudding form
which has been well buttered and sprinkled with bread crumbs or
flour and boil 2 hours; serve with the following sauce:--Place a
saucepan over the fire with 1 pint white wine, 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar, a little lemon rind and 3 whole eggs; beat this until just
about to boil; instantly remove from the fire and serve in a
sauciere with the pudding. NOTE.--The pudding should be served
immediately after being turned out.

335. +Nut Pudding.+-- Remove the shells from 1 pound walnuts, scald
the nuts in boiling water and remove the fine brown skin; pound them
in a mortar with white of egg and mix them with ¾ cup milk; boil ½
pint milk with ½ tablespoonful butter and while boiling add slowly 1
cup sifted flour; stir until it forms into a smooth paste and
loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; put the paste in a dish, mix
it with the pounded nuts and set aside to cool; stir 1½
tablespoonfuls butter to a cream and add by degrees the yolks of 8
eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and (by spoonfuls) the paste; when all
is well mixed add the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth;
butter a pudding dish, sprinkle with bread crumbs, fill in the
mixture, set the dish into a pan of hot water and bake 1 hour in a
medium hot oven; when done turn it onto a dish and serve with fruit
or nut sauce; care should be taken not to use too small a dish, as
the pudding raises very light; serve as soon as baked.

336. +Uncle Tom’s Pudding.+-- Mix 2 teaspoonfuls baking powder with 3
cups sifted flour and a little salt, add 1 cup molasses, 1 cup
finely chopped suet, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 teaspoonful ground
ginger, 1 teaspoonful cinnamon, ½ teaspoonful cloves, ½ grated
nutmeg, 1 cup buttermilk and 3 eggs; butter a pudding form, sprinkle
with bread crumbs, fill in the mixture and boil 2 hours; serve with
lemon or hard sauce.

337. +Plain German Flour Pudding.+-- Sift 4 cups flour, add ½
teaspoonful salt, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, the grated rind of 1
lemon, 1 cup seedless raisins, 1 yeast cake dissolved in ½ cup warm
milk, 2 tablespoonfuls melted butter, 1½ cups warm milk and 2 eggs;
mix all together into a stiff batter; butter a pudding form,
sprinkle with bread crumbs, fill in the mixture and set in a warm
place till it rises to double its height; then cover the form and
boil 2 hours; serve with roast meat and stewed fruit or with sauce.

338. +The Queen of Puddings (with Strawberries).+-- 1 cup sugar, 2
cups fine bread crumbs, 6 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls butter, the grated
rind of 1 lemon, 4 cups milk and 1 pint strawberries; soak the bread
crumbs in the milk for ½ hour; stir butter and sugar to a cream, add
by degrees the yolks of the eggs and next the bread crumbs (by
spoonfuls), stirring constantly; lastly add the whites of 3 eggs,
beaten to a stiff froth, and the lemon; fill this into a buttered
pudding dish, which should be a large one and but ⅔ full; bake until
done; draw to the front of oven, put a layer of fresh strawberries
over it, sprinkle with sugar and cover with a meringue made of the 3
remaining whites of eggs and 1 tablespoonful powdered sugar; put it
back in the oven and bake for a few minutes, until the meringue
begins to color; serve cold with cream or vanilla sauce. Any kind of
fruit may be used instead of strawberries, as may also jelly or
marmalade.

339. +Indian Pudding (boiled).+-- Bring 1 pint milk to a boil, stir
into it 1 cup yellow Indian meal and boil 5 minutes, stirring
constantly; then take it from the fire and mix with 1 cup molasses,
1 tablespoonful ground ginger, 1 cup chopped suet, ½ teaspoonful
salt and 2 eggs; when this is well blended together fill it into a
buttered pudding form and boil 3 hours; serve with the following
sauce:--Mix 2 teaspoonfuls cornstarch with a little cold water, add
1½ cups boiling water and boil a few minutes; then add ¼ teaspoonful
salt, 1 tablespoonful butter, the juice of 1 lemon, 1 cup sugar, 1
teaspoonful vanilla and some grated nutmeg.

340. +Economical Boiled Pudding.+-- 1 cup milk, 1 cup stoned raisins,
1 cup fine chopped suet, ½ cup molasses, ½ cup brown sugar, 3 cups
flour, 1½ teaspoonfuls baking powder, 1 teaspoonful grated nutmeg,
the same of cinnamon, ½ teaspoonful cloves. Mix all together and
boil in a form 2 hours; serve with lemon or vanilla sauce.

341. +Graham Flour Pudding (also called Imitation Plum Pudding).+--
Two large slices of bread, ½ cup milk, ¼ pound butter, 1 cup stoned
raisins, 1 cup currants, ½ cup finely sliced citron, 1 cup molasses,
1 cup graham flour, 1 cup sugar, 1 glass brandy and 1 teaspoonful
baking soda dissolved in a little hot water; mixed with the
molasses, 3 eggs, 1 teaspoonful allspice, ½ grated nutmeg and ½
teaspoonful salt; break the bread into small pieces and put it with
the milk into a bowl; stir butter and sugar to a cream; add the
eggs, one at a time, stirring a few minutes between each addition;
next add the spice; then, alternately, the bread, molasses and
flour; when this is well mixed dust the fruit with flour and stir it
into the mixture; butter a pudding form and dust with fine bread
crumbs; put in the mixture, close the form and set it in a kettle of
boiling water (only enough water to half cover the form should be
used); cover the kettle and boil 3 hours; serve with brandy or hard
sauce. Half of the above quantities will make a pudding sufficient
for a family of 6 persons.

342. +Madeira Pudding.+-- Pare the crust off a 6 cent loaf of bread;
cut the bread into slices and dip each slice in Madeira wine; mix 5
tablespoonfuls sugar with ¼ pound finely cut preserved orange peel,
a little nutmeg and cinnamon; have ready a well buttered pudding
form, which sprinkle with fine bread crumbs; first put in a layer of
bread and sprinkle over it some of the mixed sugar; then a layer of
currant jelly; continue in this fashion until all is used up; lay 1
tablespoonful butter in small pieces on top; beat up 6 eggs with 1
pint cream or milk and pour it into the form over the bread; close
the form and boil 1½ hours; serve with the following sauce:--Put 1
pint Madeira wine in a saucepan with 3 or 4 eggs, the peel of 1
lemon, a piece of cinnamon and ½ cup sugar; place over the fire and
stir with an egg beater until nearly boiling; instantly remove and
serve with the pudding. If the sauce is allowed to boil it will be
spoiled.

343. +Almond Pudding.+-- Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter to a cream, add
5 tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 6 eggs, 1 cup chopped almonds,
the grated rind and juice of 1 lemon, 2 cups fine bread crumbs and
lastly the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; butter a
pudding form, sprinkle with bread crumbs, cover tightly and boil 1½
hours; serve with wine or cream sauce.

344. +Boiled Bread Pudding.+-- Stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream
with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and add by degrees the yolks of 4 eggs,
the grated rind of ½ lemon, 2 cups bread crumbs, ½ cup milk, 2
ounces seedless raisins, the same quantity of well cleansed currants
and 2 tablespoonfuls finely chopped almonds; add lastly the beaten
whites of the eggs; butter a form, sprinkle with bread crumbs, fill
it with the mixture, put on the cover and boil 1½ hours; serve with
sherry wine or cream sauce.

345. +Zwieback Pudding, No. 1.+-- Butter a form and sprinkle with
bread crumbs; take ½ pound round zwieback, ¼ pound seedless raisins,
the same quantity of well cleansed currants and chopped almonds; put
a layer of zwieback into the form and sprinkle some of the fruit
over it; continue in this way until all is used; then beat up 6 eggs
with 6 tablespoonfuls sugar and add 2½ cups milk; pour this over the
zwieback in the form, cover tightly and let it stand 1 hour; then
boil 2 hours; serve with fruit, wine or hard sauce; sufficient for
10 persons.

346. +Cabinet Pudding.+-- Stir ½ cup butter with 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar to a cream and add by degrees the yolks of 8 eggs and the
grated rind and juice of 1 lemon; cut the crust off a 5 cent loaf of
bread, grate the white part and add it to the above mixture with 1½
cups milk, ¾ cup finely cut citron and the whites of the eggs beaten
to a stiff froth; in the meantime pour over ¼ pound vanilla wafers
and ½ pound macaroons, some Madeira or sherry wine and sprinkle with
finely sifted bread crumbs; put a layer of the bread mixture, an
inch in thickness, into the form and cover it with a layer of
macaroons and wafers; then bread again; continue in this way until
all is used, the last layer being the bread mixture; close the form
tightly and boil 2 hours; serve with wine cream or hard sauce;
sufficient for 12 persons.

347. +Lemon Pudding (baked).+-- Stir 1 cup butter to a cream and add
by degrees the yolks of 10 eggs, 2 whole eggs, the grated rind and
juice of 3 lemons, 1 cup finely chopped almonds, 1 cup sugar and
lastly the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; line a
pudding dish with rich pie crust, put in the mixture and bake 1
hour. Or take ¼ pound stale sponge cake, broken into small pieces,
the juice of 4 lemons and the grated rind of 2, 1½ cups sugar, 1
pint cream, a little salt and nutmeg, the yolks of 6 eggs and the
beaten whites of 3; put this into a pudding dish lined with pie
crust and bake ½ hour.

348. +Zwieback Pudding, No. 2.+-- Soak ½ pound zwieback in 1 pint
milk; stir ¼ pound butter with 3 tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream;
add by degrees the yolks of 6 eggs, ¼ teaspoonful cinnamon and 1 cup
finely chopped almonds; add lastly the zwieback and the whites of
the eggs beaten to a stiff froth; put the mixture into a well
buttered pudding form and boil 1 hour; serve with wine sauce.

349. +Pumpernickel Pudding.+-- Cut some stale pumpernickel into
slices and dry them in the oven; then lay on a board, roll fine and
sift them; take 1 cup pumpernickel crumbs, 4 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls
dripping or ½ cup finely chopped suet, 5 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1
teaspoonful cloves, the same quantity of cinnamon and the grated
rind and juice of 1 lemon; stir the yolks of eggs and sugar to a
cream; add by degrees the dripping, bread crumbs and other
ingredients; add lastly the beaten whites of the eggs; fill this
into a well buttered form and boil 1½ hours; serve with lemon or
brandy sauce; sufficient for a family of 6 persons. This pudding is
the equal of a fine plum pudding.

350. +Vienna Pudding.+-- Stir ¼ pound butter with 1 cup sugar to a
cream and add by degrees the yolks of 7 eggs, 2 whole eggs, the
grated rind of ½ lemon and the juice of 2; set this in a vessel of
boiling water and stir over the fire till it begins to thicken; then
remove it, stir until cold and add the whites of the eggs, beaten to
a stiff froth; butter a pudding form and sprinkle it with fine
zwieback crumbs; fill in the mixture, put on the cover, set the form
in a kettle of boiling water, cover closely and boil slowly for 1
hour; in serving turn the pudding onto a warm dish and send wine
cream or fruit sauce to table with it. This pudding should be served
immediately upon being turned out of the form.

351. +Chocolate Pudding.+-- Stir 2 ounces butter with 1 cup powdered
sugar to a cream, add by degrees the yolks of 9 eggs and stir for 20
minutes; then add 2 ounces finely chopped almonds, the grated rind
and juice of 1 lemon, ¼ pound grated chocolate and 6 ounces rye
bread which has been dried in the oven and rolled fine with a
rolling pin; add lastly a glass of Madeira wine or rum and the
whites of the 9 eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; put the mixture into
a well buttered form, boil 2 hours and serve with wine or punch
sauce.

352. +Apple Pudding (with Almonds).+-- Place a saucepan over the fire
with 1 tablespoonful butter; add 1 soup plate finely cut apples, 2
tablespoonfuls well cleansed currants, the same quantity of seedless
raisins and finely cut citron, ¼ pound finely chopped almonds, the
grated rind of ½ lemon or orange and ¾ cup sugar; stir this over the
fire until the apples begin to get soft, add ½ cup raspberry or
currant jelly and set aside to cool; beat up the yolks of 7 eggs,
add by degrees ¼ pound finely rolled zwieback, the apples and lastly
the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; fill this into a
well buttered pudding dish and bake ¾ hour in a medium hot oven;
when done turn the pudding onto a dish, dust with sugar and serve
without sauce; sufficient for 10 persons. It may also be served in
the dish in which it is baked.

353. +Nudel Pudding.+-- Prepare the nudels from the yolks of 2 eggs
and sufficient flour to make a stiff dough; roll it out thin and cut
into long strips about 1½ inches wide; lay 4 strips on top of one
another and cut them as fine as possible; then drop them into
boiling milk and boil 10 minutes; drain on a sieve, return the
nudels to the fire, add ½ tablespoonful butter, 3 macaroons pounded
fine, 1 tablespoonful currant or apple jelly and a glass of sherry
wine; shake this several times over the fire, spread the mixture on
buttered tins ¾ inch in thickness and set in a cool place; put 1
ounce finely chopped or pounded almonds in ½ pint milk, let it stand
½ hour, add 1 whole egg, the yolks of 6 and 3 tablespoonfuls sugar;
when well mixed strain through a sieve and cut the nudels with a
cake cutter into rounds; put them in rows over one another into a
form which has been well buttered and sprinkled with bread crumbs,
sprinkle some pounded macaroons between, pour the cream over it and
place the form in a vessel of hot water; set it on the stove to
simmer gently for 1 hour; when done carefully turn the pudding out
onto a dish and serve with almond, cream or fruit sauce. These
quantities are sufficient for a family of 8 persons.

354. +Potato Pudding.+-- Boil 8 large potatoes with their skins in
water until done; take from the water and set them for a few minutes
in the oven to dry; then set them in a cool place; when cold remove
the skins and grate the potatoes on a grater; use only that portion
which falls behind the grater; this should make 1 quart of grated
potatoes; stir ¼ pound butter with 1 cup sugar to a cream and add by
degrees the yolks of 8 eggs, the grated rind of 1 lemon, ¼ pound
blanched almonds well pounded and 2 tablespoonfuls dry farina; when
this is well mixed add the potatoes and lastly the whites of the
eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; butter a pudding dish, sprinkle well
with bread crumbs, put in the mixture and cover tightly; set the
form into a vessel of boiling water (use only enough water to half
cover the form), cover the vessel closely and boil slowly for 2
hours; when done take the form from the water and set it for a few
minutes in the oven; then carefully turn the pudding onto a round
plate and serve with the following sauce:--Stir 2 tablespoonfuls
butter with 1 cup powdered sugar to a cream and add the yolks of 2
eggs and 1 cup fresh strawberries (either stir them into the sauce
whole or mash them). Fresh cherries freed of their pits or preserved
cherries may be used in place of strawberries. The pudding may also
be served with either wine, lemon or fruit sauce; it should be
served as soon as taken from the form.




BREAD AND APPLE PUDDINGS.


355. +Plain Bread Pudding, No. 1.+-- Lay 3 slices of a 5-cent loaf of
bread (minus the crust) in a pudding dish and pour over them 1 quart
cold milk; set the dish on the side of stove to heat gradually; when
hot stir 2 eggs with 2½ tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream and add a
little cold milk or water and 1 teaspoonful essence of lemon; stir
this into the bread and milk; put ½ tablespoonful butter in small
bits on top, grate over some nutmeg, bake in oven from 20 to 30
minutes and serve hot or cold without sauce.

356. +Plain Bread Pudding (baked), No. 2.+-- Put 3 slices of bread
(minus the crust) into a pudding dish and pour over them 1 quart
boiling milk; cover the dish and let it stand until cold; then beat
up the bread with a fork; stir 3 eggs with 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar to a cream and mix it with the bread; flavor with lemon; put a
few small pieces of butter with a little grated nutmeg on top and
bake in the oven till thick; serve with lemon or nutmeg sauce. ¼
pound raisins or currants may be added if liked.

357. +Bird’s Nest Pudding.+-- Peel 6 good sized greening apples,
remove the cores with an apple corer without breaking the fruit, put
them in a long, shallow tin pan, pour over 2 cups boiling water,
cover with a pan of same size and let them boil on top of stove for
5 minutes; then drain off all the water and put 1 teaspoonful apple
or currant jelly into each apple. For batter take 1 cup flour, 1½
teaspoonfuls baking powder, 1 cup milk, 2 eggs, ¼ teaspoonful salt,
1 tablespoonful lard, butter or clarified dripping and 2
teaspoonfuls sugar; sift flour, powder, sugar and salt into a bowl;
put in the butter or lard and chop it fine in the flour; make a
hollow in center and put in the yolks of the 2 eggs; then add the
milk gradually and mix the whole into a smooth batter; add lastly
the whites of the eggs beaten to a stiff froth; pour the batter over
the apples and bake ½ hour in a medium hot oven; serve as soon as
done and send the following sauce to table with it:--Stir 1
tablespoonful butter with 4 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a white
cream and add the yolk of 1 egg, 1 tablespoonful rum or brandy and a
little nutmeg; lastly stir in the white of the egg, beaten to a
stiff froth; in serving give to each individual an apple on a small
plate and a large spoonful of sauce on each apple; sufficient for a
family of 6. This pudding has the advantages of being healthy and
excellent, while not being expensive.

358. +Bread Pudding (boiled).+-- Soak ¾ pound stale bread (minus the
crust) in water; when soft press it out either in a napkin or with
the hands; melt 2 tablespoonfuls butter or clarified dripping in a
saucepan, add the bread and stir over the fire till it has formed
into a compact mass and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan;
transfer the bread to a dish; stir the yolks of 6 eggs with 4
tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream and add them by degrees to the
bread; add 2 cups well cleansed currants, ½ cup finely chopped
almonds, the grated rind and juice of ½ lemon, a little nutmeg and ½
teaspoonful cinnamon; add lastly the whites of 6 eggs, beaten to a
stiff froth; butter a pudding form and sprinkle with bread crumbs;
fill in the mixture, put on the cover, place the form in a vessel of
boiling water, cover closely and boil 2 hours; serve with lemon,
fruit or hard sauce.

359. +Bread Fruit Pudding.+-- Pare off the crust from a 5-cent loaf
of bread and cut the loaf into thin slices; spread the slices on
both sides with any kind of fruit marmalade; butter a pudding form,
sprinkle with bread crumbs and lay in the bread; stir 8 eggs with ½
cup sugar and the grated rind of 1 lemon until they foam; add by
degrees 1 pint hot milk, stirring constantly; pour this over the
bread, cover the form tightly and boil 1½ hours; serve with wine
cream sauce.

360. +Bread Sponge Pudding.+-- Boil 1 cup milk with 1 tablespoonful
butter; stir in while boiling 1 cup sifted flour and keep stirring
until it has formed into a smooth paste and loosens itself from
bottom of saucepan; transfer the paste to a dish; stir 1
tablespoonful butter to a cream and add, alternately, the yolks of 5
eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, the paste, ¼ pound well cleansed
currants, a little nutmeg and grated lemon peel; pour ½ cup rum over
1 cup fine bread crumbs and add them to the above mixture with the
beaten whites of the 5 eggs; butter a pudding form, sprinkle with
bread crumbs, fill in the mixture and boil in a tightly covered
vessel of water for 2 hours; serve with wine cream, fruit or hard
sauce; sufficient for 8 persons.

361. +Hanoverian Pudding.+-- Pare and quarter 6 large pippin or
greening apples and cut them into fine slices; put them in a
saucepan with 1 tablespoonful butter, ½ cup sugar, 1 tablespoonful
well cleansed currants, 1 tablespoonful seedless raisins, 2
tablespoonfuls finely cut citron and the grated rind and juice of ½
lemon; stir this over the fire till the apples begin to get soft;
add ½ cup raspberry or currant jelly and set aside to cool; soak ¼
pound bread (minus the crust) in water and press it out in a napkin;
then place it in a saucepan with 1 tablespoonful butter and stir
over the fire until the bread loosens itself from bottom of
saucepan; stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream and add,
alternately, the yolks of 5 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and the
bread (by spoonfuls); add lastly the beaten whites of the eggs; next
butter a pudding dish and sprinkle with bread crumbs; put in a layer
of bread mixture and over it a layer of apples; continue in this way
until all is used; bake 40 minutes; serve with or without sauce.

362. +Huckleberry Pudding (German style).+-- Soak a 5-cent loaf of
bread (minus the crust) in milk till soft; press it out, put in a
saucepan with 1 tablespoonful butter and stir over the fire to a
smooth paste; transfer it to a dish and set aside to cool; stir 1
tablespoonful butter to a cream and add (alternately) the yolks of 8
eggs, 5 tablespoonfuls sugar and the bread (by spoonfuls); when this
is well mixed add 1 pint huckleberries and lastly the whites of the
eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; fill this into a well buttered and
floured pudding form, cover closely and boil in a kettle of water 2
hours; serve with hard or wine sauce. This pudding may be made of
peaches, apples, cherries or blackberries; sufficient for 12
persons. For a small family ½ the above quantities will suffice.

363. +Rye Bread Pudding.+-- Stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream
and add by degrees ½ cup sugar and the yolks of 6 eggs; stir this
for ½ hour; then add ¼ pound finely pounded almonds, ½ teaspoonful
cloves, 1 teaspoonful cinnamon, a little cardamon and nutmeg and ¼
pound rye bread which has previously been cut into slices, dried in
the oven and rolled fine with a rolling pin; add lastly the grated
rind of 1 lemon, a small glass of Cognac or rum and the whites of
the 6 eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; butter a pudding form, sprinkle
with bread crumbs, fill in the mixture and cover and set the form in
a kettle of boiling water; the form should only be immersed in water
half way; boil 1½ hours, keeping the kettle closely covered; serve
with brandy, wine or hard sauce.

364. +Apple Pudding (German art).+-- Pare, core and cut into quarters
6 good sized tart apples, put them in a stewpan with a little water
and boil till half done; then carefully remove the apples to a
pudding dish, pour 3 tablespoonfuls raspberry syrup or jelly over
them and set aside to cool; place a saucepan over the fire with 1
pint milk and ½ tablespoonful butter; as soon as it boils put in 1
cup sifted flour and stir until the mixture forms into a smooth
paste and loosens itself from the bottom of saucepan; transfer it to
a dish; stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream and add alternately
the yolks of 5 eggs, 5 tablespoonfuls sugar and the paste,
a spoonful at a time; when this is well blended together add the
grated rind of 1 lemon, ½ cup finely chopped almonds and lastly the
beaten whites of 5 eggs; pour this mixture over the apples and bake
in a medium hot oven for ¾ hour; it may be served with wine, fruit
or hard sauce or may be dusted with sugar and served without a
sauce. NOTE.--When peaches, cherries, plums or berries are used they
need not be cooked before baking.

365. +English Apple Pudding.+-- Butter a deep pudding dish and
sprinkle with bread crumbs; line the sides of dish with a rich pie
crust and put a narrow strip around the bottom so as to leave the
center of bottom uncovered; next fill the dish with finely cut
apples with some sugar sprinkled between them; add a very little
nutmeg, a pinch of cinnamon and a little butter in small pieces;
cover with the same crust and bake 1 hour; when done turn the
pudding out onto a dish and serve with hard sauce. (See Sauce.)

366. +Apple Pudding (boiled).+-- 1 cup finely chopped suet, 3 cups
flour, 1 cup milk, 3 eggs, ½ cup sugar, 3 cups finely cut apples, ½
teaspoonful salt, a little grated lemon peel and 2 teaspoonfuls
baking powder; sift flour, salt and powder into a bowl and add
grated lemon peel and suet; next add the yolks of the eggs and mix
the whole with the milk to a stiff batter; then add the beaten
whites of the eggs; dust the apples with flour and stir them into
batter; butter a pudding form, sprinkle with bread crumbs, fill in
the mixture, cover tightly and boil 2 hours; serve with hard sauce.
NOTE.--The apples and dough may be put in layers in the form,
putting first a layer of dough, then a layer of apples, then dough,
and so on. This pudding may also be made of apricots, peaches, figs,
plums or currants, citron or raisins.

367. +Apple Bread Pudding (German art).+-- Pare and cut into slices 8
large tart apples; soak a 5 cent loaf of bread in cold water; when
soft press it out and put in a saucepan over the fire with 2
tablespoonfuls butter; stir for 5 minutes and transfer it to a dish
to cool; stir 4 tablespoonfuls sugar with the yolks of 4 eggs to a
cream and add the bread, the sliced apples and lastly the whites of
the eggs beaten to a stiff froth; butter a pudding form, sprinkle
with bread crumbs, fill in the bread mixture, boil 2 hours and serve
with hard sauce.

368. +Bread Pudding (with Apples).+-- Cut 3 slices of bread, ½ inch
in thickness, from a 9 cent loaf of bread and soak them in cold
water for 10 minutes; press out and put them over the fire in a
saucepan with 1 tablespoonful butter; stir for 5 minutes, or until
it has formed into a compact mass; transfer it to a dish; when cold
stir the yolks of 3 eggs with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream and
add the bread; then add 2 cups finely chopped apples, 2
tablespoonfuls fine bread crumbs and lastly the beaten whites of the
eggs; butter a form, sprinkle with bread crumbs, fill in the bread
mixture, close tightly and boil for 2 hours; serve with hard, fruit
or wine sauce.

369. +Apple Rice Pudding (German art).+-- Place a saucepan with ½
pound rice covered with cold water over the fire and boil 5 minutes;
drain in colander, rinse off with cold water and return rice to
saucepan; add 1 quart milk, ½ teaspoonful salt and boil till tender;
pare and cut into slices 6 large tart apples and stew them in 2
tablespoonfuls butter till nearly done; put them into a pudding
form; when rice is cold mix it with ¼ pound sugar, the yolks of 6
eggs and lastly the beaten whites of the eggs; pour it over the
apples, bake in the oven and serve with the following sauce:--Put
the apple peels and cores in a saucepan, cover with water and boil
till tender; strain through a jelly bag, return the liquor to
saucepan, add the juice of 1 lemon and boil 5 minutes; add 1 cup
sugar and let it boil 5 minutes; serve with the pudding.

370. +Apple Pudding à l’allemande.+-- Pare and core 6 medium sized
greening apples, put them in a long, shallow tin pan, add 2 cups
boiling water, cover with another pan of same size and boil 5
minutes; drain off the water and put them into a pudding dish of a
size large enough to admit of the apples standing side by side.
Prepare the pudding batter as follows:--Put 1 cup milk in a saucepan
over the fire, add 1 tablespoonful butter and when it boils add 1
cup sifted flour, stirring constantly; continue the stirring until
the mixture has formed into a smooth paste and loosens itself; then
take it off the fire and let cool; in the meantime stir 1
tablespoonful butter to a cream and add 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and
the yolks of 4 eggs, adding 1 yolk and 1 spoonful sugar at a time,
stirring well; then add a little of the paste and continue in this
way until all the paste, yolks and sugar are well mixed; add lastly
the whites of the 4 eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; put 1 teaspoonful
currant jelly into each apple, pour the batter over the apples and
bake ¾ hour; serve with hard sauce.

371. +Old-Fashioned Apple Pudding.+-- ½ pound finely chopped suet, 1
pound flour, 1 teaspoonful salt and 1 cup cold water; sift flour and
salt into a bowl, add the suet and mix the whole with the water into
a stiff paste; roll it out on a floured board ¼ inch in thickness,
put in the center ½ dozen finely cut tart apples, sprinkle 1
tablespoonful sugar and a little flour between them and add a pinch
of nutmeg and 1 teaspoonful butter in small pieces; dip a large
napkin in hot water, ring out and dust it with flour; cover the
apples with the paste, lay the pudding in center of cloth, fold the
cloth together and tie it tightly; have a large kettle of water with
½ tablespoonful salt over the fire; as soon as it boils put in the
pudding, cover the kettle and boil 2 hours; serve with hard, brandy
or cherry wine sauce and if liquor is objected to serve with nutmeg
sauce. The pudding should be served as soon as taken from the water.
For a small family half these quantities will be sufficient.

372. +Roly-Poly.+-- 1 cup finely chopped suet, 2 cups prepared flour,
1 egg and ¾ cup water; mix this into a stiff dough, roll out ⅛ of an
inch in thickness, brush it over with beaten egg and sprinkle over 1
tablespoonful bread crumbs; put on a layer of finely cut apples,
sprinkle over 1 spoonful sugar, roll the dough up like a music
sheet, brush the outside all over with beaten eggs and sprinkle with
fine bread crumbs; dip a napkin into hot water, wring out dry and
dust the inside with flour; put the pudding in center of cloth, fold
the napkin around it, lap the ends over and fasten with a pin; tie a
string around it, drop into slightly salted boiling water and boil
for 2 hours; serve with the following sauce:--Mix 1 tablespoonful
cornstarch with ½ cup cold water and add 1 cup boiling water and 2
tablespoonfuls butter; boil 5 minutes, strain through a sieve, add 1
cup sugar, a little lemon juice and 1 cup sherry wine; or serve with
hard sauce.

373. +Roly-Poly Tutti Frutti.+-- Prepare a dough the same as in
foregoing recipe; roll out ⅛ of an inch thick, brush over with
beaten egg and sprinkle 1 tablespoonful bread or cracker crumbs over
it; pare, core and slice ½ dozen tart apples and put them with 1½
tablespoonfuls butter and 3 tablespoonfuls sugar in a saucepan; add
½ cup currants, the same quantity seedless raisins and finely cut
citron; cover saucepan and stew over the fire till apples begin to
soften; pour them into a dish and when cold spread the apples over
the dough; lay 2 tablespoonfuls currant or apple jelly in small
pieces all over the apples; then finish the same as Roly-Poly; serve
with the following sauce:--Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter with 1 cup
powdered sugar to a cream and add by degrees 2 whole eggs, a little
nutmeg and 4 tablespoonfuls Jamaica rum or brandy; or serve with
lemon or nutmeg sauce.




SOUFLÉS, PANCAKES, OMELETS AND FRITTERS.


374. +Plain Souflé.+-- Boil 1½ cups milk with ½ tablespoonful butter
and add, stirring constantly, 1½ cups sifted flour; stir till it has
formed into a smooth paste and loosens itself from bottom of
saucepan; transfer the paste to a dish and set aside to cool; stir 1
tablespoonful butter to a cream and add alternately the yolks of 6
eggs, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, the grated rind of 1 lemon, the paste
and lastly the beaten whites of the eggs; butter a pudding dish,
sprinkle with bread crumbs and fill it ½ full of fruit--either
peaches, pears pared and cut into quarters, cherries without the
pits, currants, raspberries or finely cut apples; blackberries or
huckleberries may also be used; sprinkle some zwieback crumbs
between the fruit, add sufficient sugar to sweeten, pour over the
souflée mixture and bake 1 hour. All kinds of stewed or preserved
fruits may be used the same way; serve with claret or fruit sauce.

375. +Almond Souflé.+-- Boil 1 cup milk with ½ tablespoonful butter;
mix 1 cup rice flour with 1 cup cold milk; stir it into the boiling
milk; continue boiling, stirring constantly, until it has formed
into a smooth paste and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan;
remove the paste from fire, mix it with the yolks of 2 eggs and set
aside to cool; stir ½ tablespoonful butter to a cream and add,
alternately, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 6 eggs and the
paste; add first 1 spoonful sugar to the butter, then 1 yolk, then a
small spoonful paste; stir each part well before another is added;
the stirring is best done with a potato masher; when these
ingredients are well mixed add by degrees ½ cup finely chopped or
grated almonds; add lastly the beaten whites of 6 eggs and fill the
mixture into a white porcelain pudding dish which has been well
buttered and sprinkled with bread crumbs; bake in a medium hot oven
for 40 minutes; when done take the souflée from the oven, dust with
powdered sugar, set the dish either in an ornamented silver dish or
fold a napkin around it and serve at once with raspberry sauce.
NOTE.--Plain flour may be substituted for rice flour; this is
sufficient for 10 persons.

376. +Lemon Souflé.+-- Boil 1 cup milk or cream with ½ tablespoonful
butter; mix 1 cup sifted flour with 1 cup cold milk and stir it into
the boiling milk; continue stirring until the contents have formed
into a smooth paste and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan;
transfer it to a dish and set aside; when cold stir ½ tablespoonful
butter to a cream and add, alternately, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, the
yolks of 8 eggs and the paste (by spoonfuls); stir each part well
before another is added; then add the grated rind and juice of 1
lemon and lastly the whites of 6 eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; fill
the mixture into a well buttered form and bake in a moderately hot
oven from 30 to 40 minutes, when done serve at once with wine cream
sauce and sprinkle the souflée with powdered sugar.

377. +Vanilla Souflé+ is made the same as Almond or Lemon Souflée,
omitting the almonds or lemon and adding 2 tablespoonfuls vanilla
extract. Extract of lemon may be used the same way.

378. +Orange Souflé+ is made the same as lemon, using in place of
lemon the juice of 2 oranges and the grated rind of 1. Soufflées may
be put into a well buttered form, set in a vessel of hot water and
either boiled or baked in the oven.

379. +Chocolate Souflé.+-- Boil 4 tablespoonfuls grated chocolate in
1 cup milk; mix 3 tablespoonfuls cornstarch with 1 cup cold milk,
stir it into the boiling chocolate, add 1 teaspoonful butter and
continue stirring until the contents loosen themselves from bottom
of saucepan; transfer the paste to a dish and set aside; when nearly
cold stir ½ tablespoonful butter to a cream and add alternately 6
tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 8 eggs and the chocolate paste
(by spoonfuls); add lastly the beaten whites of 6 eggs and finish
the same as Lemon Souflée; serve with vanilla sauce.

380. +Macaroon Souflé.+-- Put into a buttered pudding dish a layer of
macaroons and small sponge cakes; over this a layer of cherries from
which the pits have been removed; then again a layer of macaroons
and sponge cake; continue in this way until the form is filled; whip
the yolks of 6 eggs with 1 bottle Rhine wine and 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar over the fire to a cream, but do not allow it to come to a
boil; pour this over the cake and fruit, set the dish in a vessel of
hot water and bake ½ hour; when done draw the souflée to the front
of oven; beat the whites of the 6 eggs with 4 tablespoonfuls currant
juice or jelly to a stiff froth, spread it over the souflée, set it
back in the oven and bake a few minutes; serve without sauce.

381. +Apple Souflé, No. 1.+-- Pare and core 6 greening or pippin
apples, set in a pan, add 1 quart hot water, cover with another pan
of same size and let them steam on top of stove for 5 minutes;
carefully remove the apples to a pudding dish and set aside to cool;
boil 1 cup milk with a little salt and 1 tablespoonful butter and
stir in gradually 1 cup sifted flour; continue stirring until the
contents have formed into a smooth paste; transfer the paste to a
dish and set aside to cool; stir the yolks of 4 eggs with 4
tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream, add by degrees the paste and when
well mixed together add the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff
froth; put a little jelly or marmalade into each apple, pour the
mixture over them and bake 1 hour; serve with wine or hard sauce.

382. +Apple Souflé; No. 2.+-- Pare 8 or 10 greening or pippin apples,
cut into fine slices and put them in a saucepan with 1 tablespoonful
butter, ½ cup sugar, 3 tablespoonfuls finely cut citron and the same
quantity of seedless raisins and currants; stew this over the fire
till apples are tender, but not broken; add 2 tablespoonfuls apple
or quince jelly and set aside to cool; if jelly is not handy any
kind of marmalade will do; boil 1½ cups milk with ½ tablespoonful
butter and stir in 1 cup sifted flour; stir over the fire to a
smooth paste; remove from fire and when cold stir 1½ tablespoonfuls
butter to a cream and add, alternately, the yolks of 6 eggs, 4
tablespoonfuls sugar, the paste (by spoonfuls) and lastly the whites
of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; next butter a pudding dish and
put in a layer of bread crumbs ⅛ of an inch in thickness; then a
layer of apples and little bits of butter; again bread crumbs, again
a layer of apples; pour over the top the souflée mixture and bake 1
hour; serve without sauce in the same dish in which the souflée is
baked.

383. +Apple Souflé, No. 3.+-- Strain 1 quart apple sauce through a
sieve, sweeten to taste and add the juice and grated rind of 1
lemon, the yolks of 5 eggs and lastly the whites of the eggs, beaten
to a stiff froth; put this into a buttered pudding dish and bake
till it cracks on top; sprinkle with sugar and serve without sauce.

384. +Apple Souflé, No. 4.+-- Pare, core and quarter 6 apples, cut
each quarter into fine slices and put them into a saucepan with 1
tablespoonful butter, ½ cup sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls seedless raisins
and the same quantity of currants and finely cut citron; cover and
stew till apples are tender, but not broken; add 2 tablespoonfuls
quince or apple jelly and set aside; when cold butter a pudding dish
and sprinkle with bread crumbs; have a souflée mixture prepared the
same as in foregoing recipe; put first a layer of the souflée
mixture in the dish and sprinkle over some zwieback crumbs; then a
layer of the apples; continue in this way with apples and souflée
mixture till dish is full; bake 1 hour; when done turn the souflée
onto a round dish and serve with fruit or wine sauce; or without
sauce and dust with sugar.

385. +Pineapple Souflé.+-- Prepare a souflé mixture the same as for
Plain Souflée; butter a pudding dish and sprinkle with bread crumbs;
put in a layer of the souflée mixture and sprinkle over 1 spoonful
zwieback crumbs; put over this a layer of stewed or preserved
pineapples cut into small dice, sprinkle over a little zwieback
crumbs and cover with souflée mixture; put in another layer of
pineapple and a little zwieback crumbs; put the remaining souflée
mixture on top and bake 1 hour; when done turn the souflée onto a
dish and send raspberry or wine sauce to table with it.

386. +Rhubarb Souflé.+-- Pare and cut the rhubarb finely and put it
in a saucepan over the fire to boil; add a little water and
sufficient sugar to sweeten; when done press it through a sieve;
take 1 quart of this stewed rhubarb and mix it with the yolks of 5
eggs and lastly the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth;
bake in buttered dish till it cracks open on top, which will take
about ¾ hour; serve without sauce.

387. +Cherry Souflé+ is made the same as Pineapple Souflé. Remove
the pits from 1 or 2 pounds cherries, sprinkle with sugar and let
them stand 1 hour; then put them in alternate layers with the
souflée mixture into a well buttered dish and finish the same as
Pineapple Souflée; serve with cherry sauce. Peach, apricot and
blackberry souflées are made the same way.

388. +Gooseberry Souflé.+-- Stew the berries with a little white
wine, sweeten to taste and finish the same as Rhubarb Souflée.

389. +Raspberry Souflé.+-- Press 1 quart raspberries with 1 handful
red currants through a sieve, sweeten to taste and mix with the
yolks of 6 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls cream, 3 tablespoonfuls zwieback
crumbs and the beaten whites of the eggs; bake ½ hour.

390. +Cherry Omelets.+-- Remove the pits from 1 pound cherries, put
them with ½ cup sugar and a little water over the fire and stew till
done; transfer them to a dish and set aside to cool; mix 2
tablespoonfuls prepared flour with 1 cup milk, the yolks of 6 eggs
and lastly the 6 whites beaten to a stiff froth; pour half of this
into a hot pan with butter and fry a light brown on the underside;
then slip the omelet onto a plate and set it for a few minutes in
the hot oven; then take out, put 2 or 3 tablespoonfuls stewed
cherries over it, double up and return to the oven until the second
one is finished; sprinkle over some sugar and serve with stewed
cherries.

391. +Fruit Pancakes.+-- Mix 1½ cups sifted flour with ½ teaspoonful
baking powder and add ½ teaspoonful salt, the yolks of 3 eggs and 1½
cups milk or water; when this is well mixed stir in the whites of
the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; bake from this mixture 4 large,
thin pancakes; wash some ripe strawberries, sweeten with sugar and
mash them all up with a silver spoon; put a layer of the mashed
fruit over each pancake, lay them on top of one another, dust with
powdered sugar and serve.

392. +Huckleberry Pancakes.+-- Prepare a batter the same as for Apple
Pancakes; put a pan with 1 tablespoonful lard over the fire; when
hot pour in some of the batter, about ¼ inch in thickness, and let
it bake for a few minutes; then put on a thick layer of
huckleberries and sprinkle over 2 tablespoonfuls zwieback crumbs;
when done on the underside slip the cake onto a large plate; lay a
piece of butter and lard on top of the berries, put over the
fryingpan and turn the cake back onto the pan; cover and fry slowly
about 6 or 8 minutes; then upset the fryingpan upon a hot dish and
sprinkle with sugar; set a plate with the cake over a saucepan of
hot water until all are baked in the same manner; lay the cakes on
top of one another, dust the whole with sugar and serve. NOTE.--The
huckleberries may be stewed with a little lemon juice and sugar and
thickened either with zwieback crumbs or cornstarch; a glass of port
wine added to it will make a great improvement. They may then be
served either separately or put between the cakes. Pancakes with
stewed plums or cherries, or any kind of stewed fruit, are very
nice.

393. +Strawberry Pancakes.+-- Wash 1 quart strawberries and drain
them in colander; then prepare 4 large pancakes the same as for
Cherry Pancakes; as soon as one is done lay the cake on a plate,
cover it with strawberries and sprinkle over some sugar; set the
plate over a saucepan of hot water and continue baking until they
are all done; lay them over one another with strawberries between
and dust the top with fine sugar. Blackberries are treated the same
way. Or cover the surface of each pancake with strawberries and
sugar, roll each one up separately like a music roll, dust them over
with sugar and serve hot.

394. +Cherry Pancakes.+-- Remove the pits from 1 pound red cherries;
put 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water over the fire and boil a few
minutes; put in the cherries and boil 3 minutes; remove from fire
and set aside to cool; prepare 4 large pancakes as follows:--Take 2
cups flour, 1 teaspoonful salt, 6 eggs and 1 pint milk; sift flour
and salt together, add the milk, the well beaten yolks of the eggs
and mix it into a thin batter; beat the batter for 5 minutes with a
wooden spoon or German quill; beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff
froth and stir them lightly through the mixture; bake 4 large
pancakes from this, lay them on one another, with a layer of the
stewed cherries between, dust the top with powdered sugar and serve
hot. Or spread over the surface of each pancake a layer of cherries,
roll each one up separately, arrange the rolls neatly on a long dish
and dust over with powdered sugar; serve while hot. This is a nice
dish for dessert.

395. +Pancakes (with Currants and Raspberries).+-- Strip ½ pound
currants of their stems, pick over an equal portion of raspberries,
put them in a colander and rinse with cold water; put them in a dish
with 1½ cups sugar and let them stand for several hours; bake 3 or 4
medium sized pancakes the same as Cherry Pancake, lay them over one
another, with a layer of the sugared fruit between, dust with sugar
and serve hot.

396. +Plain German Pancakes.+-- 3 cups sifted flour, 2½ cups water,
3 eggs, yolks and whites beaten separately, and 1 teaspoonful salt;
put the sifted flour into a bowl, add the salt, make a hollow in the
center, add the yolks and mix it gradually with the water into a
smooth batter; beat it with a wooden spoon for 5 minutes; then add
the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; put a large
fryingpan with ½ tablespoonful lard and butter over the fire; when
hot pour in some of the mixture, sufficient to cover the bottom of
pan, about ⅛ of an inch in thickness, shake the pan to and fro and
bake till light brown on the underside; slip the pancake onto a
large plate, put a little butter and lard in center, put over the
fryingpan, turn the pancake back into the pan and bake a light
brown; slip the cake onto a hot plate and serve either with syrup,
sugar or jelly; continue the baking until all the batter is used.

397. +Lemon Pancakes.+-- Bake pancakes the same as in foregoing
recipe and when done squeeze over each one some lemon juice, dust
with sugar and lay them over one another; stir 1 tablespoonful
butter with 3 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a cream, set it in a
saucepan of hot water and stir till thin; cut the pancakes into
pieces, pour some of the sauce over each piece and serve hot.

398. +Peach Pancakes.+-- Pare and cut some ripe peaches into fine
slices, sprinkle them with sugar and set in a cool place for 1 hour;
bake the pancakes the same as in foregoing recipe and lay the
peaches between.

399. +Apple Pancakes.+-- Mix 2 cups sifted flour with 2 cups water, ½
teaspoonful salt and the yolks of 3 eggs; when these are well mixed
together add the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; place
a fryingpan with 1 tablespoonful lard over the fire; when hot pour
in some of the mixture, about ¼ inch in thickness, put over this a
thick layer of very finely cut apples, slip a knife underneath the
pancake to keep it from burning and shake the pan too and fro; when
the underside is a light brown slip the pancake onto a plate; put a
piece of butter and lard on top of the apples, lay the fryingpan
over it and turn the pancake over into the pan; cover the pan and
let it fry slowly until apples are soft; slip the pancake onto a hot
plate and set it over a saucepan of hot water until the remaining
mixture is baked the same way. These ingredients will make from 3 to
4 cakes, according to the size of pan. They can be served separately
or piled on top of one another. Sprinkle some sugar over each
pancake.

400. +Apple Fritters.+-- 1 pint flour sifted with 1 teaspoonful
baking powder, 3 eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, ½ tablespoonful
butter, ½ cup milk and 2 cups finely chopped apples; stir butter and
sugar to a cream and add the yolks of 3 eggs; then flour and milk,
next the chopped apples and lastly the whites of the eggs, beaten to
a stiff froth; cut with a spoon a portion from this mixture the size
of a large walnut, drop into boiling fat and fry till done; serve
dusted with sugar and send wine or snow sauce to table with it. The
above recipe will make 20 fritters. If plain flour is used mix it
with 1½ teaspoonfuls baking powder and ½ teaspoonful salt.

401. +Cherry Fritters.+-- Remove the pits from 1 pint nice, ripe
cherries, mix them with the same ingredients as Apple Fritters, fry
in boiling lard, dust with powdered sugar and serve with cherry or
wine sauce.

402. +Orange Fritters.+-- Pare and quarter 6 oranges and remove the
white skin and pits; mix the orange pieces with the same ingredients
as Apple Fritters, drop the mixture, by spoonfuls, into boiling lard
and fry a light brown. See that each fritter has 3 pieces of orange
and serve with following sauce:--Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter with 6
tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a cream and add the yolks of 2 eggs
and ½ cup finely cut orange pieces; set the sauce in a saucepan of
boiling water and stir till it is melted; then serve. Care should be
taken to choose oranges that are not bitter.

403. +Rice Fritters.+-- Put 1 cup rice in a saucepan, add cold water
and boil 5 minutes; drain in colander and rinse with cold water;
return rice to saucepan and add 1 pint milk, ½ teaspoonful salt and
½ tablespoonful butter; boil until rice is thick and soft; transfer
it to a dish and when cold mix with 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, the
yolks of 4 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls prepared flour and lastly the
whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; drop this with a
tablespoon like small dumplings into boiling lard and fry till done;
pile them on a dish, dust over with sugar and serve with snow sauce
flavored with wine and a little vanilla.

404. +Cocoanut Fritters.+-- Make a batter the same as for Apple
Fritters, stir 1 large cup freshly grated cocoanut into it and
finish the same as Apple Fritters. Serve with the following
sauce:--Boil 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water till it forms a thread
between 2 fingers; remove from fire; beat the whites of 2 eggs to a
stiff froth; add the boiling hot sugar syrup slowly, beating
constantly with an egg beater; then stir in 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls
cocoanut.

405. +Currant Fritters.+-- 2 cups flour sifted with 1 teaspoonful
baking powder, ½ tablespoonful dripping or butter, 2 tablespoonfuls
sugar, the grated rind of ½ lemon, ½ cup milk, 2 eggs and ½ cup
well washed and dried currants; stir dripping and sugar to a cream
and add the yolks of 2 eggs; then the sifted flour and milk; the
lemon and currants next; add lastly the whites of the eggs, beaten
to a stiff froth; cut with a spoon small portions, the size of a
walnut, from the mixture, drop them into boiling lard or dripping
and fry a light brown and well done; dust them with sugar and serve
with a syrup made as follows:--Boil 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water
till it begins to turn yellow; then remove from fire, add a little
boiling water, stir for a few minutes and serve. These quantities
make 20 fritters.

406. +Walnut Fritters.+-- Break the nuts into small pieces and stir 2
cupfuls into a batter made the same as for Apple Fritters. Or bake
the fritters plain, prepare a hard sauce, stir some nuts into it and
serve with the fritters. Walnut fritters may be served with wine,
hard or fruit sauce, or they may be served dusted with sugar without
a sauce.

407. +Omelette Souflé à la vanille.+-- Stir the yolks of 9 eggs with
3 tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream; add a little salt, 1 teaspoonful
vanilla extract and 6 macaroons pounded fine; add lastly the whites
of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; place an omelet or large
fryingpan with butter over the fire; when hot put in ⅓ the egg
mixture, shake the pan a little to and fro and bake the omelet to a
delicate brown; have ready a buttered dish, turn the omelet into it,
with the brown side up, set in the oven and bake another omelet the
same way; lay the omelet on top of the one in dish, with brown side
up; then bake the third one; lay it on top of the two and bake the
whole 10 to 15 minutes; draw them to the front of oven, sprinkle
with sugar and hold a red hot shovel over, to brown the sugar; then
remove from oven and serve at once. Omelet souflées should be eaten
as soon as done.

408. +Omelette Souflé Confitures.+-- Prepare 3 or 4 omelets the same
as in foregoing recipe, spread over each omelet some peach marmalade
or fruit jelly, pour over them when done some warm fruit jelly and
serve.

409. +Omelette Souflé (with Chocolate).+-- Prepare the omelets the
same as in foregoing recipe and sprinkle over each one a
tablespoonful grated chocolate.

410. +Omelette Souflé (with Cocoanut).+-- Prepare 3 or 4 omelets the
same as in foregoing recipe, lay them in a buttered dish on top of
one another with thick layers of cocoanut between and bake 10
minutes; dust the souflée with sugar and serve at once.

411. +Rum Or Maraschino Souflé.+-- Melt 2 ounces butter in a
saucepan, add 2 tablespoonfuls flour and stir for a few minutes; add
1 cup boiling milk and stir till it forms into a smooth paste;
remove it from the fire and set aside; when cold stir 2
tablespoonfuls sugar with the yolks of 6 eggs to a cream and add by
degrees the paste and 4 tablespoonfuls rum or maraschino; add lastly
the beaten whites of the eggs and bake in a well buttered and
floured dish ½ hour; serve as soon as baked with lemon cream or wine
cream sauce.

412. +Vienna Souflé.+-- Place a saucepan with ¾ cup milk, 1
tablespoonful flour and 2 tablespoonfuls butter over the fire and
stir till thick; remove from fire and when cold add, alternately,
the yolks of 6 eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 teaspoonful lemon
extract and lastly the whites of the 6 eggs, beaten to a stiff
froth; fill this into a well buttered and floured dish and bake ½
hour in a medium hot oven; when baked take it from the oven, dust
with sugar and serve with raspberry sauce.

413. +Peach Souflé.+-- Pare, quarter and stew 1 dozen large, ripe
peaches in ½ cup water and 1 cup sugar; when done press them through
a sieve and add a little more sugar if not sweet enough; mix with
the yolks of 6 eggs and lastly the beaten whites of the eggs; bake
in a well buttered dish 40 minutes. Another way is to omit the yolks
of the eggs and take only the beaten whites, cherries, huckleberries
and blackberries. Currants and raspberries can also be used the same
way.

414. +Apricot Souflé.+-- Take a can of California apricots, press
them through a sieve, add the syrup and if necessary a little more
sugar; mix with 1 cup zwieback crumbs the yolks of 6 eggs and lastly
the beaten whites of the eggs; put this into a buttered dish and
bake 40 minutes.

415. +Farina Souflé (Vienna art).+-- Put 1½ pints milk with 1
tablespoonful butter over the fire; as soon as it boils stir in 6
ounces farina; stir over the fire until it has formed into a smooth
paste and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; transfer this
paste to a dish; when cold stir ¼ pound butter to a cream, add 4
tablespoonfuls sugar, by degrees the yolks of 8 eggs and the farina
paste; add lastly the grated rind of 1 lemon and the whites of the
eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; fill the mixture into a buttered
pudding dish and bake ¾ hour; serve with fruit or wine sauce.

416. +Farina Souflé (Italian art).+-- Prepare farina the same
as in preceding recipe; when cold stir ¼ pound butter with 5
tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream; add by degrees the yolks of 9 eggs
and the boiled farina; flavor with the rind of 1 lemon; add lastly
the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; fill a layer, 2
inches thick, into a well buttered pudding dish, spread a thick
layer of fruit marmalade over it and continue with layers of farina
mixture and marmalade till all is used; let the last layer be
farina; bake ¾ hour and serve with wine cream sauce.

417. +Farina Souflé.+-- Boil 1 cup milk with ½ tablespoonful butter;
add slowly 4 tablespoonfuls farina and stir till it has formed into
a smooth paste and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; transfer
it to a dish and set aside; when nearly cold stir ½ tablespoonful
butter to a cream and add alternately 5 tablespoonfuls sugar, the
yolks of 5 eggs and the farina paste; stir each part well before
another is added; add lastly the whites of the eggs, beaten to a
stiff froth, 1 teaspoonful essence of lemon and finish the same as
Almond Souflée; serve either with wine cream or fruit sauce.

418. +Strawberry Souflé.+-- Wash and press through a sieve 1 quart
fresh strawberries; mix them with 6 tablespoonfuls sugar and the
beaten whites of 6 eggs; fill this into a buttered dish, sprinkle
with sugar and bake slowly 40 minutes; souflées of any kind of fruit
jelly or marmalade are made the same way.

419. +Chestnut Souflé.+-- Put 30 large chestnuts with cold water over
the fire and boil 5 minutes; take them from the fire and remove the
outside shells and the brown skins; boil the chestnuts in milk till
tender and press them through a sieve; melt ¾ tablespoonful butter,
add 1 tablespoonful flour and stir for a few minutes over the fire;
add ¾ cup boiling milk, stir and let it boil up, remove from fire
and set aside; when cooled off mix it with the chestnut purée and
add 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla and the beaten
whites of 6 eggs. This souflée may be baked either in paper boxes or
in a dish; dust with sugar when ready to serve.

420. +Beignet Souflé.+-- Boil ½ pint milk with ½ tablespoonful
butter, 1 tablespoonful sugar and add by degrees, while boiling, 1
cup sifted flour; stir constantly till it has formed into a smooth
paste and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; remove the paste
from fire and set aside to cool; then mix it with 2 whole eggs and
the yolks of 2; place a wide saucepan with lard over the fire, drop
with a teaspoon small dumplings into the boiling fat and fry them to
a delicate brown; drain them on blotting paper, lay them onto a warm
dish, dust with sugar and serve at once.

421. +Potato Souflé.+-- Boil 6 large potatoes with the skins in water
until done; when cold remove the skins and grate the potatoes on a
grater; use only that portion which lies behind the grater and be
sure there is 3 cupfuls; then stir 1½ tablespoonfuls butter to a
cream and add alternately the yolks of 6 eggs, 6 tablespoonfuls
sugar and the grated rind of 1 lemon; add ½ cup ground or pounded
almonds and 3 tablespoonfuls dry farina; then add the grated
potatoes and lastly the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth;
put this mixture into a well buttered form and bake 1 hour; serve
with the following sauce:--Mix 1 tablespoonful butter with 1½
teaspoonfuls cornstarch, add 1 cup boiling water and stir over the
fire to a thick, creamy sauce; then add 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1
cup sherry wine, a little lemon juice and ½ teaspoonful vanilla;
strain through a sieve and serve.

422. +Vanilla Koch.+-- Put 1½ cups milk in a saucepan and add 3
tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 6 eggs and 3 teaspoonfuls flour;
mix this well together, place the saucepan in a vessel of boiling
water and stir over the fire till nearly boiling and thick; remove
it from the fire and set saucepan in cold water; when cold mix it
with 1½ teaspoonfuls vanilla extract and the whites of the 6 eggs,
beaten to a stiff froth; fill this into a well buttered and floured
mould, set in a pan of hot water and bake in a medium hot oven ½
hour, or till done; when ready to serve send to table either in the
same dish or turn onto another dish and send claret or strawberry
sauce to table with it. Koch of all kinds should be served
immediately upon being done.

423. +Cream Koch (boiled).+-- Stir together the yolks of 6 eggs with
6 tablespoonfuls cream and 3 tablespoonfuls flour and lastly the
whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff froth; butter a mould, dust
with flour, put in the mixture, cover tightly and place in a vessel
of boiling water; boil slowly 1 hour; or place the form in a pan of
hot water and bake in the oven; when baked turn the koch onto a dish
and serve with fruit or claret sauce.

424. +Nudel Souflé.+-- Boil 1 quart milk with ¼ teaspoonful salt and
add 2 cups finely cut home-made nudels; continue the boiling for 15
minutes; then pour the nudels into a dish and when cold stir 1
tablespoonful butter to a cream, add alternately the yolks of 6 eggs
and 6 tablespoonfuls sugar; also add the grated rind of 1 lemon;
then add the nudels by degrees and lastly the whites beaten to a
stiff froth; pour this mixture into a buttered pudding dish, bake 1
hour and serve in the same dish in which it was baked; either set in
a silver dish or fold a napkin around it. For sauce boil ½ cup
water, dissolve 1 teaspoonful cornstarch in a little cold water and
add it to the boiling water; boil a few minutes; then add 1 cup
apple or currant jelly; continue boiling, stirring constantly, till
jelly is dissolved; then strain through a sieve, add ½ cup white
wine and a little sugar if not sweet enough.

425. +Macaroon Souflé.+-- ¼ pound macaroons pounded fine, ½
tablespoonful butter, 3 cups boiling milk and 1 tablespoonful flour;
put the butter in a saucepan and when melted add the flour; stir for
a few minutes; then add the boiling milk and the macaroons; stir
this until it forms a smooth paste; transfer it to a dish and set
aside to cool; stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream and add
alternately the yolks of 8 eggs, the macaroon paste and 2
tablespoonfuls sugar; add lastly the whites beaten to a stiff froth;
fill this mixture into a well buttered form and bake 1 hour; serve
with wine cream sauce or without sauce.

426. +Zwieback Koch.+-- Boil 1 pint milk and add 3 ounces rolled
zwieback and ½ tablespoonful butter; continue boiling, stirring
constantly, until it has formed into a smooth paste; remove from
fire and when cold mix with the yolks of 4 eggs, ¼ pound grated
hazel nuts, ½ cup sugar and lastly the whites beaten to a stiff
froth; fill the mixture into a well buttered dish and bake ½ hour;
when done turn the koch out onto a round dish and pour raspberry
sauce over it.

427. +Almond Koch (with Snow Sauce).+-- Melt 1½ tablespoonfuls butter
and add 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and the yolks of 6 eggs; stir this
over the fire till thick and smooth; remove from the fire and add ¼
pound finely cut almonds, 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract and the
whites of 4 eggs beaten to a stiff froth; put the mixture into a
well buttered and floured form, cover, set in a vessel of boiling
water and boil 1 hour; when done turn the koch onto a warm dish and
pour a snow sauce over it, which is made as follows:--Boil ¾ cup
sugar with ½ cup water until it begins to turn yellow; then remove
from fire and stir it slowly into the beaten whites of 2 eggs while
stirring constantly with an egg beater; flavor with 1 teaspoonful
lemon extract; pour the sauce over the turned out koch, set it for a
few minutes in the oven and serve; or the sauce may be served
separate with the koch.

428. +Plain Koch (with Strawberry Chaudeau).+-- Melt in a saucepan ¼
pound butter and add ¼ pound sugar and the yolks of 8 eggs; stir
this over the fire till thick and smooth; remove and mix it with the
juice and grated rind of 1 lemon, 1 tablespoonful flour and the
whites of 4 eggs beaten to a stiff froth; fill this into a well
buttered and floured pudding dish, cover with a tin plate, set dish
in a pan of hot water and bake 1 hour; when done turn the koch onto
a dish and pour the following strawberry sauce over it:--Beat the
whites of 4 eggs to a froth; press the juice from 1 pint
strawberries and put it in a saucepan with ½ cup white wine or the
juice of 1 lemon, ½ cup sugar and the yolks of 4 eggs; beat this
with an egg beater over the fire till it begins to rise; remove
instantly, continue beating for a few minutes longer and add the
beaten whites; then pour it over the koch or serve it in a sauce
dish; or serve the koch with snow sauce.

429. +Apple Koch; No. 1.+-- Wash and cut 5 medium sized apples into
pieces, put them in a saucepan with a little water and boil till
tender; press them through a sieve and mix with 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar, the yolks of 4 eggs, a little grated orange or lemon peel, ½
cup fine bread crumbs and lastly the 4 whites beaten to a stiff
froth; bake in a buttered dish 1 hour; when done dust with sugar and
serve without sauce.

430. +Apple Koch, No. 2.+-- Pare and cut fine ½ dozen greening or
pippin apples, put them in a saucepan with ½ cup white wine, 2
tablespoonfuls sugar and a little lemon or orange peel and let them
stew till tender; press through a sieve and set aside to cool; stir
the yolks of 4 eggs with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream and add 2
ounces finely cut citron, 2 ounces grated almonds and 3
tablespoonfuls fine bread crumbs; add the apples and lastly the 4
whites beaten to a stiff froth; fill the mixture into a well
buttered form, sprinkle with bread crumbs and bake ¾ hour.

431. +Apple Koch (with Almonds and Raisins).+-- Mix the yolks of 4
eggs with 3 tablespoonfuls sugar and add 4 tablespoonfuls bread
crumbs, 1 cup finely cut apples, 2 ounces finely cut almonds, ½ cup
seedless raisins, 2 tablespoonfuls cream and lastly the whites
beaten to a froth; bake in a buttered dish ¾ hour; when done turn
the koch onto a dish; put 1½ cups claret with 3 tablespoonfuls
sugar, a piece of cinnamon, a little lemon peel and a few cloves
over the fire; let it boil up, strain and pour over the koch.

432. +Jelly Koch.+-- Stir 2 tablespoonfuls sugar with 1 tablespoonful
butter to a cream and add by degrees ½ cup raspberry, currant, apple
or quince jelly; continue stirring until well mixed; then add
gradually the yolks of 4 eggs and lastly the whites beaten to a
stiff froth; bake in a buttered form ¾ hour and serve turned onto a
dish dusted with sugar. If this koch is to be boiled take the yolks
of 5 eggs and the whites of 2; in serving pour a wine cream sauce
around it.

433. +Cream Koch.+-- Put in a saucepan 1½ cups milk, the yolks of 6
eggs, ½ cup sugar, 3 teaspoonfuls flour and stir over the fire till
nearly boiling; remove it, set saucepan in a pan of cold water and
stir till cold; then mix it with the whites beaten to a stiff froth;
fill into a well buttered pudding dish, sprinkle over some sugar and
finely chopped almonds and bake 20 minutes.

434. +Cream Koch (with Sponge Cake).+-- Spread 8 small slices of
sponge cake with quince, apple or currant jelly, put 2 together, cut
them through the center and lay into a buttered dish; pour over a
little cherry, Madeira or fruit syrup; pour over it a cream koch the
same as in foregoing recipe, sprinkle with sugar and bake about 10
minutes. Or dip the cake into the syrup of preserved fruit--either
peaches or cherries--and lay some fruit over it; then cover with
same cream and bake 15 minutes.

435. +Almond Koch.+-- Stir 1½ tablespoonfuls butter with 4
tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream and add the yolks of 6 eggs and 4
ounces finely chopped blanched almonds; add lastly the beaten whites
of 4 eggs and ½ teaspoonful vanilla; butter a small form, sprinkle
with flour, put in the above mixture, cover and set the form in a
vessel of boiling water; boil gently 1 hour; when done turn the koch
onto a dish and serve with strawberry sauce.

436. +Nudel Koch.+-- Prepare a nudel dough from the yolks of 2 eggs,
a pinch of salt and sufficient flour to form a stiff paste; roll
out, cut them fine and boil in cream or milk till tender and thick;
then set aside to cool; stir 4 tablespoonfuls sugar with 1
tablespoonful butter to a cream and add by degrees the yolks of 5
eggs and the grated rind and juice of 1 lemon; add gradually the
nudels and lastly the beaten whites of 3 eggs; put this into a well
buttered form and bake ¾ hour; serve with fruit or wine sauce or
snow sauce.

437. +Nudel Koch (boiled).+-- Butter a pudding form, sprinkle with
bread crumbs and lay thin slices of citron all around the form;
prepare the nudels the same as in foregoing recipe, add some finely
cut citron and put them in the form; boil slowly 1 hour; when done
turn the koch onto a dish, sprinkle with sugar, hold a red hot
shovel over and pour over the juice of 1 orange; serve with wine
cream sauce.

438. +Nut Koch, No. 1.+-- Melt 1 tablespoonful butter in a small
saucepan and add 3 tablespoonfuls sugar and the yolks of 6 eggs;
stir this constantly over a slow fire till thick; remove from fire
and when cold mix it with 3 tablespoonfuls almond paste and the
whites beaten to a stiff froth; butter a pudding form and dust with
flour; set the form in a deep pan of boiling water, cover and set in
a medium hot oven to bake 1 hour; serve with the following
sauce:--Place a saucepan with 1½ cups white wine, 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar and 3 eggs over the fire; beat constantly with an egg beater
until it begins to rise; remove instantly, set saucepan for a few
minutes in cold water and continue the beating; then pour the sauce
in a sauciere and serve. If almond paste is not handy a small cup of
almonds grated on a nutmeg grater may be used.

439. +Nut Koch, No. 2.+-- Melt 1½ tablespoonfuls butter and add the
yolks of 8 eggs and 3 tablespoonfuls sugar; stir this over the fire
till thick; remove it from the fire and mix with ¼ pound finely cut
hazel or walnuts, 2½ tablespoonfuls fine bread crumbs which have
been wet with 3 tablespoonfuls cream or milk and lastly the 8 whites
beaten to a stiff froth and mixed with 2 tablespoonfuls powdered
sugar; butter a pudding form, sprinkle with bread crumbs, fill in
the mixture, cover and set in a vessel of boiling water (the water
should reach half way up the form) and boil 1 hour; serve with the
following sauce:--Beat the whites of 3 eggs to a froth; let ¾ cup
fruit syrup or jelly get boiling hot and add it slowly to the beaten
whites, beating constantly with an egg beater; when the pudding or
koch is turned out onto a dish pour the sauce around it and serve at
once.

440. +Rice Koch.+-- Soak 3 tablespoonfuls rice for 2 hours in cold
water, drain and dry it on a sieve; then pound it fine and boil in 1
pint cream or milk until thick; when cold stir 1 tablespoonful
butter to a cream with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and add by degrees the
yolks of 4 eggs, the rice, 1 tablespoonful rum, the rind of 1 lemon,
2 tablespoonfuls finely cut citron and lastly the whites, which must
be beaten to a stiff froth; butter a pudding form, sprinkle with
fine bread crumbs, fill it with the rice mixture, close the form
tightly and boil 1½ hours; or set the form in a pan of hot water in
the oven and bake 1 hour; serve with fruit sauce.

441. +Vanilla Almond Koch.+-- Stir 3 tablespoonfuls sugar with the
yolks of 5 eggs to a cream and add 2 tablespoonfuls fine bread
crumbs, 2 tablespoonfuls almond paste, 1 tablespoonful melted
butter, 1 teaspoonful vanilla and lastly the whites beaten to a
stiff froth; fill this into a well buttered and floured form, cover,
set in a pan of hot water and bake 1 hour; when done turn the koch
onto a warm dish, pour over some rum, light it and bring to table in
a blaze; send hard sauce to table with it. This koch may also be
boiled on top of stove.

442. +Koch (with Orange Chaudeau).+-- Melt in a small saucepan 2
ounces butter and add 3 tablespoonfuls sugar and the yolks of 5
eggs; stir this over a slow fire till thick and smooth; remove and
mix it with ¼ pound finely grated or pounded nuts, 2 tablespoonfuls
finely cut citron, the grated rind of 1 lemon and ½ ounce finely cut
candied orange peel; add lastly the whites of 4 eggs beaten to a
stiff froth and finish the same as Nut Koch.

443. +Orange Chaudeau.+-- Put the juice of 3 oranges and 1 lemon with
½ cup water in a saucepan and add 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and the
yolks of 4 eggs; beat this over the fire with an egg beater till
nearly boiling; remove, stir for a few minutes longer and serve
either in a sauciere or pour it over the turned out koch. If liked a
little rum may be added to the chaudeau. It is then called Punch
Chaudeau.

444. +Koch (with Nut Cream).+-- Melt 2 ounces butter and add the
yolks of 5 eggs and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; stir over the fire till
thick; remove and mix it with ¼ teaspoonful cinnamon, a pinch of
cloves, the grated rind of 1 lemon and 1½ tablespoonfuls bread
crumbs wet with 2 tablespoonfuls rum or Cognac; remove the shells
from ¼ pound hazel nuts or walnuts and grate the kernels on a nutmeg
grater; add them to the above mixture with the whites of 3 eggs
beaten to a stiff froth and finish the same as in foregoing recipe;
serve with the following cream:--Grate 2 ounces almond, hazel or
walnuts on a nutmeg grater, put them into 1 pint boiling cream or
milk, cover and let it stand till cold; then strain through a fine
sieve; put the milk in a saucepan with the yolks of 5 eggs and 2
tablespoonfuls sugar; stir this with an egg beater over the fire
till nearly boiling; remove instantly, continue the stirring for a
few minutes longer and either pour it over the koch or serve in a
sauciere.

445. +Koch (with Chocolate Beguss).+-- Melt 1 tablespoonful butter
and add 3 tablespoonfuls sugar and the yolks of 5 eggs; stir this
over the fire till thick and smooth; remove and set aside to cool;
soak 2 milk rolls without the crust in milk or cream; when soft put
them with the milk over the fire and boil and stir till it forms
into a smooth paste; remove from fire and when cold mix it with the
above egg mixture; add 1 cup grated nuts and lastly the whites
beaten to a stiff froth; put the mixture into a well buttered and
floured dish; cover and set the dish into a deep pan of hot water,
set in a hot oven and bake 1 hour; when done turn the koch onto a
round dish and pour the following sauce over it:--Boil ¼ pound
grated chocolate with 1½ cups water and ½ cup sugar for 10 minutes;
or boil ¾ cup sugar with ½ cup water until it begins to get light
brown; take from the fire, let it stand for a few minutes and then
pour it over the koch.

446. +Beignets of Buns.+-- Take some long baker’s buns (ones which
are a day or 2 old are the best), cut them into halves, dip each
half separately into cold milk and lay them on a dish; mix 1 cup
sifted flour with ⅛ teaspoonful salt, the yolks of 2 eggs and 1 cup
milk to a smooth, thin batter; add lastly the 2 whites beaten to a
stiff froth; put a large fryingpan with 1 tablespoonful lard and
butter over the fire; when hot dip each half of bun into the batter,
lay them in the pan and fry on both sides to a fine brown color;
serve on a long dish; dust with sugar and lay 1 spoonful stewed
fruit--such as plums, cherries, apples, huckleberries or stewed
gooseberries--or some fruit jelly over each one.

447. +Beignets of Zwieback.+-- Lay 1 dozen round zwiebacks on a long
dish, pour over some cold milk and let them lay until they begin to
get soft; dip each one separately into a batter, the same as
Beignets of Buns; fry in ½ lard and ½ butter on both sides to a
light brown color, dust with sugar and serve with fruit or snow
sauce.

448. +Poor Knights (Arme Ritter).+-- Cut a long loaf of bread (2 days
old) into slices ¼ inch thick, dip each slice into cold milk, lay
them on a dish on top of one another, pour a little milk over the
whole and let them lay for 10 minutes; beat up 3 eggs with 3
tablespoonfuls milk, dip each slice into the beaten eggs and then
fry in ½ butter and ½ lard in a fryingpan to a light brown on both
sides; serve on a hot dish dusted with sugar. Stewed or preserved
huckleberries may be sent to table with it or poured over the bread.
Jellies of fruit or marmalade may also be served with it.

449. +Apple Beignets.+-- Pare and core with an apple corer ½ dozen
large apples, cut them into slices ½ inch in thickness, put them in
a dish, sprinkle over some sugar, a little cinnamon and pour over 1
glass rum; let them lay for 2 hours, tossing them up now and then;
shortly before serving wipe dry, dip them in a batter, the same as
Beignets of Buns, and fry in boiling lard to a light brown color;
serve them piled up on a dish, dusted with sugar, and serve with
wine or snow sauce; or send to table without sauce.

450. +Poveison.+-- Cut a loaf of French bread which is 2 days old
(after the crust has been removed) into slices about ½ inch in
thickness; stew 1 pound dry prunes with a piece of cinnamon and a
little sugar and lemon peel; when done drain them on a sieve, remove
the pits and boil the liquor down to ½; chop the plums fine and mix
them with the liquor; add a little more sugar; spread this plum
marmalade a finger thick on one side of each slice of bread, dip
them separately into milk, lay onto a dish and let them lay ½ hour;
then dip them into beaten egg and fry in boiling lard; when they are
all fried dust them with powdered sugar and a little cinnamon;
arrange them on a dish with a napkin under and serve hot. The
poveison may also be dipped first in beaten eggs and then in bread
crumbs. In place of plums any kind of fruit or marmalade may be
taken, but it must be thick.

451. +Poveison of Pineapple.+-- Prepare the bread the same as in
foregoing recipe, spread one side of the slices with a thick layer
of pineapple marmalade and finish the same as in preceding recipe.

452. +Beignets à la Marie-Louise.+-- Prepare a biroche dough (as in
No. 773), roll it out 1 inch thick, cut into rounds and brush half
of them over with beaten eggs; put in the center 1 teaspoonful peach
or apricot marmalade, cover them with the remaining rounds and press
the edges together; cut them out again with a cutter a little
smaller than the first one, let them lay on a floured board with a
floured napkin under them and set in a warm place for about 1 hour
to rise; shortly before serving fry in boiling lard to a light brown
color, lay them on a soft cloth, to absorb the fat, and serve with
fruit sauce.

453. +Beignets de creme à la française.+-- Beat up 3 whole eggs, the
yolks of 6 and add 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, ¾ cup cream or milk and a
little vanilla; put this into 6 buttered cups, set them in a pan of
water, cover and bake till firm; remove them from oven and when cold
turn them out and cut each one into 3 slices; lay them onto a tin
pan, cut a round piece out of the center and fill up the hole with
warm marmalade; when cold dip the beignets first into pounded
macaroons, then in beaten egg, then in fine bread crumbs and fry in
boiling lard to a light brown; serve on a napkin dusted with sugar
and send either a snow, vanilla or caramel sauce to table with them.

454. +Peach Beignets.+-- Pare and cut into halves 1 dozen large
peaches, sprinkle over ½ cup sugar and pour a glass of Cognac or
white brandy over them; cover and let them stand about 2 hours;
shortly before serving lay them in rows upon a clean cloth and press
another cloth lightly upon them to absorb the moisture; have ready a
batter, dip each one separately into it and fry in boiling lard to a
light brown color; lay them onto blotting paper, to absorb the fat,
dust with powdered sugar and serve with the following sauce:--Heat
the peach syrup to boiling point; beat the whites of 3 eggs to a
stiff froth, add slowly the hot syrup, beating constantly, and
serve.

455. +Batter for Beignets.+-- Mix 1 cup sifted flour with a little
salt, the yolks of 2 eggs and 1 cup milk to a smooth, thin batter;
beat the 2 whites to a stiff froth; then add the batter slowly to
the whites, beating constantly; it is then ready for use.

456. +Pineapple Beignets.+-- Pare a small, ripe pineapple, cut into
very thin slices and remove the hard part in center with a cutter or
apple corer, so they have the shape of rings; dip the rings first
into sugar, then in batter and fry in boiling lard; lay them on
paper or soft cloth, to absorb the fat, dust with sugar and serve
with orange snow sauce made as follows:--Put the juice of 3 oranges
with ½ cup sugar over the fire to boil for 5 minutes and add a
little grated rind; have the whites of 3 eggs beaten to a stiff
froth, add the hot orange syrup slowly, beating constantly, and
serve; or the beignets may be served without sauce or brushed over
with orange glaze. Oranges may be used instead of pineapples.

457. +Beignets of Nudels.+-- Prepare nudels from 2 eggs; cut fine and
boil them in 3 cups milk with ½ tablespoonful butter and 2
tablespoonfuls sugar until thick; spread them ¼ inch in thickness
onto buttered tins and when cold cut them into rounds with a biscuit
cutter or small wineglass; spread 1 side with marmalade or jelly,
lay 2 and 2 together and dip them in beaten eggs and fine zwieback
or bread crumbs; fry in boiling lard and serve on a napkin dusted
with sugar.

458. +Beignets à la polonaise.+-- Bake ½ dozen small, thin pancakes,
put them on paper and cover each cake with the following cream:--Put
in a saucepan 1 tablespoonful flour, 1 cup milk, the yolks of 3
eggs, a pinch of salt, 1½ tablespoonfuls sugar, a teaspoonful butter
and a little vanilla; stir this over the fire till it begins to
boil; remove from the fire and when cold spread it over the
pancakes; roll them up, cut into 2 pieces, press the edges together,
dip each in egg and bread crumbs and bake in boiling lard; serve on
a napkin dusted with sugar and send fruit sauce to table with them.
They may also be dipped into batter and then fried.

459. +Pannequets à la royale.+-- ½ pound sifted flour, 5 ounces
melted butter, 6 eggs, 1½ cups cream or milk, ⅛ teaspoonful salt and
2½ tablespoonfuls sugar; stir the 6 yolks, sugar and salt together
and add slowly the melted butter, flour and the lukewarm cream; add
lastly the 6 whites beaten to a stiff froth; bake this mixture into
small pancakes the size of a saucer, spread them with fruit
marmalade or jelly, roll them up, lay them together in squares,
sprinkle with sugar and hold a red hot shovel over to glaze; arrange
them on a dish in two rows over each other and serve with sabayon of
oranges or wine chaudeau. These pancakes may be served with any kind
of sweet sauce. Stewed fruit may also be laid in center of dish and
the pancakes laid around it.

460. +Pannequets à la vanille.+-- Prepare some pancakes the same as
in Pannequets Meringués, spread over boiled cream, roll each one up
separately, cut them into two pieces, arrange them onto a round dish
in a circle, sprinkle over some sugar and pounded macaroons and let
them heat through slowly in the oven; serve with vanilla sauce.

461. +Pannequets Meringués.+-- Mix ½ cup sifted flour with ½ cup
cream and add a pinch of salt, 2 whole eggs, the yolks of 6, 1½
tablespoonfuls sugar, 2 ounces finely pounded macaroons and 1 pint
rich, sweet cream; mix all the ingredients well together and bake ½
hour before serving thin pancakes from this in an omelet pan; lay
the pancakes on a round dish and spread over each a layer of cream
the same as Beignets à la polonaise; put the cakes on top of one
another; beat the 6 whites to a stiff froth, mix with ½ cup powdered
sugar and spread this meringue all over the cakes; set dish in oven
for a few minutes; put little bits of bright jelly on top and serve
without sauce.

462. +Plain Omelet.+-- 3 eggs, 3 spoonfuls, ¼ teaspoonful salt and a
pinch of white pepper; stir yolks, pepper, salt and milk together;
beat the whites to a stiff froth and add the above mixture slowly to
them, beating constantly; put a large frying or omelet pan over the
fire with ½ tablespoonful butter; when hot pour in the omelet
mixture; do not stir, but as the eggs set slip a broad-bladed knife
under the omelet to keep it from burning on the bottom; when done
slip the knife under one side of the omelet and double it over; slip
it onto a warm plate and set for 2 minutes in a hot oven; serve at
once.

463. +Rum Omelet.+-- Prepare an omelet the same as in foregoing
recipe; when it comes from the oven dust thickly with granulated
sugar; pour 4 tablespoonfuls best rum into a cup, light it with a
match and pour while burning over the omelet; serve at once; as a
dessert sufficient for 3 persons.

464. +Strawberry Omelet.+-- Wash and drain in a colander 1 pint
strawberries, put them in a dish with ½ cup sugar and set aside
until omelet is made. Ingredients for the omelet:--6 eggs, 1
tablespoonful cornstarch mixed with ¼ teaspoonful baking powder, ½
teaspoonful salt, ½ tablespoonful melted butter and 1 cup milk; stir
the yolks, salt, flour, powder and milk together; beat the whites to
a stiff froth and add the above mixture slowly to them, stirring
constantly; put a large frying or omelet pan with ½ tablespoonful
butter over the fire; when hot pour in ½ the omelet mixture; do not
stir, but as the eggs set slip a broad-bladed knife under the
omelet, to prevent burning on the bottom, and shake the pan to and
fro; when the underside is a light brown set pan with omelet for a
few minutes in oven; then scatter ½ the strawberries over the
surface; slip the broad-bladed knife under one side of omelet and
double in two, inclosing the fruit; dust over the top with powdered
sugar and let it remain in oven till the next one is baked the same
way; then serve at once; sufficient for a family of 6 persons.

465. +Huckleberry Omelet+ is made the same way as Strawberry Omelet.
Omelets of blackberries, peaches, stewed or preserved fruit, such as
cherries, plums, etc., are also made the same way.

466. +Orange Omelet.+-- Prepare an omelet the same as for Strawberry
Omelet; pare and cut fine 4 oranges, remove pits and white skin, mix
the pulp of oranges with sugar and finish the same as Strawberry
Omelet.

467. +Jelly Omelet+ is made the same way as Strawberry Omelet, using
jelly instead of strawberries.

468. +Omelette à la française.+-- Break 6 eggs into a kettle, beat
them with an egg beater until they foam and add 1 teaspoonful salt
and a little pepper; place a large frying or omelet pan with 1
heaping tablespoonful butter over slow fire; as soon as butter is
hot pour in the eggs and draw them with a spoon slowly from the side
of pan to the center; when nearly thick let it stand for a few
minutes without stirring and let it get on the underside a light
brown; fold it over from both sides and turn onto a dish with the
folded side underneath. Some finely minced chives or parsley may be
mixed into the eggs before baking.




CHARLOTTES.


469. +Charlotte of Apples, No. 1.+-- Pare and quarter 10 good sized
apples (greening or pippin) and cut each quarter into slices; put
them in a saucepan with 2 tablespoonfuls butter, 6 tablespoonfuls
sugar and the grated rind of ½ orange or 1 lemon; cover and let them
stew till apples are soft, but not broken; then add ½ cup currant or
apple jelly, ½ cup seedless raisins, the same quantity of currants,
2 tablespoonfuls finely cut citron and a little finely cut candied
orange peel; cut a large, stale loaf of bread into thin slices about
⅛ inch thick; cut each slice into rounds with a cake cutter or with
the cover of a baking powder box, dip each round piece with one side
into melted butter and fit them neatly in the bottom and sides of a
2-quart pudding dish with the buttered side towards the dish; lay
the rounds so that they lap over one another; then fill the dish
with the apples; cover them with a layer of the round pieces of
bread with the buttered sides towards the apples; bake in a medium
hot oven 40 minutes; when done turn the charlotte onto a dish, dust
with powdered sugar and serve.

470. +Charlotte of Apples, No. 2.+-- Cut ½ pound rye bread or
pumpernickel into thin slices and dry them in the oven; then roll
them fine on a pastry board with a rolling pin and mix with ½ cup
melted butter, ½ cup sugar and ½ teaspoonful cinnamon; press this
into the bottom and on the sides of a pudding dish in such a way
that the inside has a complete lining of bread; fill it with apples
prepared the same as in foregoing recipe; cover with a thin layer of
bread crumbs and bake 40 minutes; when done turn the charlotte onto
a dish, dust with sugar and serve with fruit sauce. Some of the
sauce may be poured over the charlotte before sending to table.

471. +Charlotte of Peaches.+-- Line a form with bread the same as
Charlotte of Apples, No. 1; pare and cut into halves 15 ripe
peaches; dissolve 1 pound sugar in 1 cup cold water, place it over
the fire and boil 5 minutes; add the peaches and boil about 6
minutes; take them out and set aside to cool; add to the syrup ½ cup
apple jelly and boil 10 minutes longer; when cold put the peaches
into the form, pour over ½ the syrup, cover neatly with bread and
bake 40 minutes; when done turn the charlotte onto a dish, pour the
remaining syrup over it and serve at once. Charlottes may be made of
all kinds of preserved fruits, such as peaches, cherries, apricots,
pears or plums.

472. +Charlotte of Cherries.+-- Remove the pits from 2 pounds
cherries; dissolve 1 pound sugar in 1 cup cold water and boil 5
minutes; put in the cherries and boil 3 minutes; remove the fruit
with a skimmer, boil the syrup a little longer and then set aside;
line a form with bread the same as Charlotte of Apples, put in the
cherries, pour over a little of the syrup, cover with bread and bake
40 minutes; when done turn onto a dish; add to the remaining syrup 1
glass brandy and pour it over the charlotte.

473. +Charlotte of Currants.+-- Remove 1 pound currants from their
stems and add 1 pound raspberries; wash and put them with 1½ cups
sugar into a dish and let them stand for 1 hour; line a form with
bread the same as Charlotte of Apples, put in the fruit, cover with
bread and bake 40 minutes; when done turn the charlotte onto a dish,
dust with powdered sugar and serve.

474. +Charlotte of Pineapple.+-- Line a form with bread the same as
Charlotte of Apples, No. 1; pare and cut into fine pieces 1 large
pineapple; boil 1 pound sugar with 1 cup water, add the pineapple
and boil 20 minutes; remove the fruit with a skimmer, boil the syrup
a little longer and then set aside to cool; put the pineapple in the
form with 2 tablespoonfuls crab apple jelly laid in small pieces
between, pour over a little of the syrup, cover with bread and bake
40 minutes; when done turn the charlotte onto a dish and pour the
remaining syrup over it.

475. +Charlotte à la polonaise.+-- Cut a large stale sponge cake into
slices ½ inch in thickness and pour over each slice a little
maraschino or Madeira wine; spread the bottom slice thickly with
cream frangipane (see Cream), lay over this another slice, spread
again with cream and continue until the cake has its original form
again; set the cake onto a dish; beat the whites of 6 eggs to a
stiff froth, spread it on thickly over the cake, dust with powdered
sugar and set for a few minutes in a cool oven; serve with sabayon
sauce made as follows:--Place a saucepan over the fire with ½ cup
sugar, ½ bottle Rhine wine, the peel and juice of 1 lemon, ½
teaspoonful cornstarch, 1 whole egg and the yolks of 3; beat this
with an egg beater over the fire till nearly boiling; remove
instantly, continue the beating for a few minutes longer, pour the
sauce into a sauciere and serve with the charlotte.

476. +Charlotte Russe, No. 1.+-- Cover the bottom of a round form
with white paper; split and trim 1 pound lady fingers and fit them
neatly in the bottom and sides of form; whip 1 quart cream to a
stiff froth and add 5 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar and 1½
teaspoonfuls vanilla extract; fill cream into the form, cover with
the cakes laid close together and set on ice till wanted; when ready
to serve turn the charlotte russe onto a glass dish, remove the
paper and serve.

477. +Charlotte Russe, No. 2.+-- Boil 3 cups milk with a pinch of
salt, ½ tablespoonful butter and ½ cup sugar; mix 4 tablespoonfuls
cornstarch with 1 cup cold milk; stir this into the boiling milk and
continue boiling for a few minutes; remove from the fire; beat up
the yolks of 4 eggs and mix them with the cornstarch; when nearly
cold beat the whites to a stiff froth, stir them lightly through the
custard and flavor with 1½ teaspoonfuls vanilla; put a round piece
of paper in the bottom of a mould; then line the bottom and sides
with lady fingers, fill in the cold custard, lay the cakes closely
together on top and set on ice till wanted; when ready to serve turn
the charlotte russe onto a glass dish and serve with vanilla sauce.

478. +Charlotte à la russe.+-- Cover the bottom of a round form with
white paper and line the inside of it with sponge cake; cut the cake
for the bottom into 3-cornered pieces, lay them with the points
towards the center and let them lap over on one another; cut the
pieces for the sides as long as the height of form and about 1½
inches wide; cut them a little slanting on one side towards the top,
fit them in firmly close to one another and fill the form with the
following cream:--Soak 1 ounce gelatine in a little cold water;
place a saucepan with 1 pint milk, the yolks of 6 eggs, 1 small cup
sugar and 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla over the fire and stir till nearly
boiling; remove from the fire, add the gelatine and stir till cold;
when it begins to thicken add 1 pint whipped cream and finish the
same as in foregoing recipe. If cream is not handy beat the 6 whites
to a stiff froth and add them instead of it.

479. +Charlotte à la russe (with preserved or stewed Pears).+--
Prepare the milk with gelatine and cream the same as in foregoing
recipe; cover the bottom of a round deep dish with preserved or
stewed pears, also lay some pears on the side of form, pour in the
milk mixture and set on ice till cold; when ready to serve beat the
whites to a stiff froth and add 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and ½
teaspoonful vanilla; turn the charlotte onto a dish and spread the
beaten whites over it; serve with cold strawberry sauce. This may
be made of preserved peaches, apricots or any other kind of fruit in
the same manner.

480. +Snow Eggs.+-- Beat the whites of 6 eggs to a stiff froth and
add 3 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar; put a wide saucepan with milk
and 1 tablespoonful sugar over the fire; as soon as the milk boils
set with a tablespoon large oval-shaped dumplings from the mixture
into the milk, draw saucepan to side of stove, cover and let it
stand for a few minutes; then turn them over, let the milk come to a
boil again, draw it to the side and cover; after a few minutes
transfer the dumplings with a skimmer to a sieve and set aside to
cool; prepare a crême française au chocolat or vanille (see Cream)
in a plain form; when cold turn the cream onto a dish, lay the snow
eggs in a circle around it and serve with vanilla sauce.




RICE PUDDINGS AND DISHES MADE OF RICE FOR DESSERT.


481. +To Prepare Rice Flour.+-- Pick out all the yellow kernels of a
quantity of rice and wash it several times in warm water, rubbing it
well between the fingers; drain the water off and pour boiling water
over it; let it stand until nearly cold; then pour it into a
colander and pour cold water over it; when well drained rub the rice
between a towel, spread out on shallow tin pans or on thick brown
paper and let it dry in a lukewarm oven; when completely dry pound
it to a powder in a wedged wooden mortar; it may then be put away in
jars for use; or pound the rice while wet, then dry and rub it
through a sieve. Another way is to grind the rice in a coffee mill.

482. +Rice Beignets.+-- Wash ½ pound rice, put it with cold water
over the fire and boil for a few minutes; drain in a colander and
rinse with cold water; return the rice to saucepan and add 5 cups
milk, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, ½ tablespoonful butter and ½
teaspoonful salt; boil until tender; then mix it with 3 well beaten
eggs; spread it evenly a finger thick onto buttered tin pans and set
aside; when cold cut the rice into rounds or square pieces, dip them
in beaten egg and bread crumbs and fry in boiling lard; serve with
wine or fruit sauce. Some finely chopped almonds may be boiled in
the rice.

483. +Rice Pears.+-- Parboil ¼ pound rice in water, drain in a
colander and rinse with cold water; return it to the saucepan, add 1
pint milk, a little salt, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 tablespoonful
butter, a little grated lemon peel and boil slowly till done; remove
the rice from the fire; when cooled off add the yolks of 3 eggs and
1 tablespoonful finely chopped almonds; spread this rice onto a long
dish and when cold divide it into equal parts with a spoon the size
of an egg; form them into the shape of a pear and press a preserved
cherry or a little marmalade in the center of each; roll them first
into fine bread crumbs, then into the beaten white of egg; then roll
again in the bread crumbs and fry them a light brown in boiling
lard; put a small piece of cinnamon in the end of each piece, to
form the stern, and serve hot with wine sauce.

484. +Rice Beignets (with Chocolate).+-- Prepare ½ pound rice the
same as in foregoing recipe without the butter and add while hot ¼
pound grated chocolate; spread the mixture evenly a finger thick
onto buttered tins and when cold cut it into small rounds with a
wineglass; dip them into beaten egg and bread crumbs and fry in
boiling lard; dust them with sugar and serve without sauce.

485. +Rice Boiled with Raisins.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 cup rice
over the fire, cover with cold water and boil for a few minutes;
drain in a colander and rinse with cold water; return the rice to
saucepan again, add 1 quart milk, ½ teaspoonful salt, 1
tablespoonful sugar and boil 20 minutes; then add ¼ pound well
cleansed seedless raisins and boil till done; serve dusted with
sugar; or boil the rice in water instead of milk, add very little
sugar, the raisins and a little salt and serve with meat.

486. +Rice Coteletten.+-- Boil ¾ pound rice in water 5 minutes, drain
in a colander and rinse with cold water; return it to the fire and
boil in milk with a little salt till tender and thick; when cold mix
it with 2 eggs and 2 ounces melted butter; form the rice into
cotelettens, brush over with egg, sprinkle with fine bread crumbs
and fry in ½ butter and ½ lard a light brown; dust them with sugar
and serve with stewed fruit. If the cotelettes are to be sweet add
some sugar, finely chopped almonds, the grated rind of 1 lemon,
a little rum or rose water and fry the same way as above recipe;
served with wine, lemon, cream, chocolate or fruit sauce.

487. +Rice à la Creole.+-- Parboil ½ pound rice in water and drain
and rinse with cold water; boil it in 1½ quarts sweet cream or milk
and a little salt; when done sweeten with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and
flavor with 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract; in the meantime put 2
tablespoonfuls sugar in a pan and let it roast to a caramel,
stirring constantly; dissolve it with a little water; add this to
the rice, put on a round flat dish, sprinkle with sugar and hold a
red hot shovel over for a few minutes to glaze it.

488. +Lemon Rice.+-- Place a saucepan with ½ cup rice over the fire,
boil 5 minutes and drain and rinse with cold water; return the rice
to saucepan, add 1 pint milk, ½ teaspoonful salt and boil until
tender; when done add 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; put it into a
blanc-mange mould and let it stand till cold; peel a lemon very
thin, cut the peel into shreds about ½ inch in length and as fine as
possible, put them into a saucepan, cover with water and boil ½
hour, changing the water 3 times; lest they should be bitter pour
about 1 teacupful fresh water upon them; squeeze and strain the
juice of the lemon, add it with 1 cup sugar to the water and shreds
and let it stew gently for ½ hour; then set aside to cool; having
turned out the jellied rice into a glass dish, pour the syrup
gradually over it, taking care that the little shreds of the peel
are equally distributed over the whole.

489. +Rice à la française.+-- Put ½ pound well washed rice over the
fire with cold water, boil 3 minutes, drain in a colander and rinse
with cold water; return the rice to saucepan, add 5 cups milk, ½
teaspoonful salt, ½ tablespoonful butter and boil till nearly done;
then add 8 finely pounded bitter macaroons, 2 tablespoonfuls finely
cut candied orange peel, ½ cup preserved cherries freed from the
pits and cut fine and a little orange water; put the rice when done
on a round flat dish, sprinkle with sugar, hold a red hot shovel
over to glaze and serve with wine sauce.

490. +Rice Cherry.+-- Prepare 1 quart cherry sauce as follows:--Boil
1 pound sour cherries in 1 quart water, crack some of the stones so
as to obtain the flavor from the pits and add a piece of cinnamon,
the peel of 1 lemon, ½ pint wine and a few pounded bitter almonds;
sugar to taste; when done stir it through a fine sieve, return the
sauce to saucepan and add ½ pound rice which has been previously
well washed and boiled in water with a little salt for 5 minutes;
then drain and rinse with cold water; boil the rice in the cherry
sauce till tender; remove from the fire, mix it with the yolks of 6
eggs and when cold add the whites beaten to a stiff froth; rinse out
a mould with cold water, sprinkle the inside with granulated sugar,
fill in the rice and set it on ice for 2 hours; then serve with or
without sweet cream or vanilla sauce.

491. +Poor Man’s Rice Pudding.+-- Place a saucepan with 3
tablespoonfuls rice and cold water over the fire, boil 5 minutes,
drain the rice in a sieve and rinse with cold water; put the rice in
a pudding dish with 1 quart milk, ½ teaspoonful salt, 3
tablespoonfuls sugar and 1 teaspoonful essence of lemon; bake in a
slow oven till the rice is real soft and serve when cold.

492. +Rice Custard Pudding.+-- Place in a saucepan 3½ tablespoonfuls
rice, cover with cold water, boil 5 minutes, drain in a colander and
rinse with cold water; return it to saucepan, add 1 pint milk, ½
teaspoonful salt and boil till tender; when cold mix it with 3 well
beaten eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 pint milk and a teaspoonful
of lemon essence; put this into a pudding dish, lay 1 tablespoonful
butter in small bits on top of it, grate nutmeg over and bake till
the custard is set; ½ cup seedless raisins may be added to the
pudding if liked; serve without sauce.

493. +Rice Pudding (Minutatim).+-- Place a saucepan with ¼ pound rice
covered with cold water over the fire, let it boil a few minutes,
pour into a colander and rinse with cold water; return rice to
saucepan, add 1 pint milk, ½ teaspoonful salt, ½ tablespoonful
butter and boil slowly till tender; transfer the rice to a dish and
when cold mix it with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, ½ cup milk, the finely
chopped peel of 1 lemon, the yolks of 3 eggs and lastly the whites
beaten to a stiff froth; butter some small cups or moulds, line them
with a few pieces of citron cut into small, thin slices, fill the
cups 3 parts full with the rice mixture and bake in the oven; when
done turn them onto a long dish, with a little jelly onto each one,
and serve with lemon or fruit sauce.

494. +Rice Snowballs.+-- Put 1 cup rice covered with cold water over
the fire, boil 5 minutes, drain in a colander and rinse with cold
water; return rice to saucepan, add 1 quart milk, a little butter, 2
tablespoonfuls sugar, ½ teaspoonful salt and boil slowly till
tender; add a flavoring of essence of almonds; when the rice is done
put into teacups and let it remain till cold; then turn the rice out
in a glass dish, pour over a cold custard and on the top of each
ball place a small piece of bright colored preserves or jelly.
NOTE.--The custard may be served separate in a saucer with the
balls, but the flavoring of it should correspond with the rice.
Vanilla or lemon essence may be used instead of almond.

495. +Cold Rice Flour Pudding.+-- Let 1½ pints milk come to a boil,
add 4 tablespoonfuls rice flour, mix with ½ pint cold milk and stir
for 10 minutes over the fire; beat up the yolks of 5 eggs and add
them with 2 tablespoonfuls orange water to the rice mixture; add
lastly the whites beaten to a stiff froth; rinse out a mould with
water; sprinkle with coarse sugar, pour in the pudding and put the
form either on ice or in cold water; when cold turn it onto a dish
and serve with fruit sauce.

496. +Rice Souflée.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 cup milk and ½
tablespoonful butter over the fire; when it boils mix 1 cup rice
flour with milk, add it to the boiling milk and stir constantly;
continue stirring until it forms into a smooth paste and loosens
itself from the bottom of saucepan; transfer the rice mixture to a
dish to cool; stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream and add
alternately the yolks of 5 eggs, 5 tablespoonfuls sugar and the rice
paste; add lastly the grated rind of 1 lemon and the 5 whites beaten
to a stiff froth; pour the whole into a buttered souflée or pudding
dish and bake ½ hour in a moderate oven; all souflées should be
served immediately on being taken out of the oven, or they will sink
and be nothing more than an ordinary pudding; when done take it out,
sprinkle powdered sugar over and send the souflée to table in the
dish in which it was baked, either with a napkin pinned around or
inclosed in a more ornamental dish; serve with wine, cream,
raspberry or cherry sauce.

497. +Rice Flour Pudding (colored).+-- Place a saucepan with 2 cups
milk, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, the grated rind of 1 lemon and ¼
teaspoonful salt over the fire; as soon as it boils mix 4
tablespoonfuls rice flour with 1 cup milk, stir into the boiling
milk and stir constantly about 10 minutes; set the saucepan into a
vessel of hot water, to keep warm; place another saucepan over the
fire with 3 cups fruit juice, ½ currant and ½ raspberry; when it
boils mix 4 tablespoonfuls rice flour with 1 cup claret, add it with
1½ cups sugar to the boiling juice and boil, stirring constantly,
till contents form a smooth paste; then take a handsome form, brush
the inside with almonds or fine olive oil, sprinkle with coarse
sugar and fill the rice mixture in alternate layers with a wet spoon
into the form--first the white, then the red, and so on until form
is filled; smooth each layer evenly with the wet spoon; in serving
turn it out carefully and lay a border of whipped cream around it.
This makes a very handsome dish. Half the above quantities will be
sufficient for a family of 8 persons.

498. +Rose Rice Pudding.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 cup water and 2
cups currant or raspberry juice over the fire, add a piece of
cinnamon and when it boils mix 4 tablespoonfuls rice flour with 1
cup water; add it to the boiling water, stirring constantly, and
boil about 10 minutes; remove the cinnamon and sweeten with sugar to
taste; rinse out a form with water, sprinkle with sugar, pour in the
contents and place the form on ice; when cold turn it out on a dish
and lay whipped cream flavored with vanilla around it; or serve with
vanilla sauce.

499. +Cold Rice Pudding (with Almonds).+-- Put ½ pound rice covered
with cold water over the fire, boil a few minutes and drain in a
colander; return the rice to saucepan, add 1 quart milk, ½
teaspoonful salt and boil till nearly tender; then add 1 cup finely
chopped almonds, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and boil till done; rinse
out a melon-shaped form, sprinkle with coarse sugar, pour in the
rice when nearly cold and set it aside to cool; in serving turn it
out on a glass dish and serve with cold cream or fruit sauce.

500. +Rice Snowballs (with Apples).+-- Place a saucepan with ½ pound
rice covered with cold water over the fire, boil 5 minutes, drain in
a colander and rinse with cold water; return rice to saucepan, add ½
teaspoonful salt, 1 quart milk and boil till nearly done; then set
aside to cool; pare and core 6 large apples (greenings or pippins
are the best) and put into each apple a little butter, sugar and
finely chopped lemon peel; take 6 small, square pieces of white
muslin, such as is used for apple dumplings, dip into hot water and
dust them with flour; spread over each cloth a layer of boiled rice
about ½ inch thick, put an apple in the center of each one, fold the
cloth with the rice around it so that the apple is covered with the
rice, drop them into boiling water and boil ½ hour; serve with wine
or lemon sauce.

501. +Rice kalte Shale (with Wine).+-- Boil 1 cup sugar with 3 cups
water and the peel of 1 lemon for 10 minutes, when cold add 1 bottle
white wine, the juice of 2 lemons and ¼ pound rice which has been
boiled in 2 waters till tender; place the kalte Shale on ice till
wanted.

502. +Rice Radetzky.+-- Put ½ pound rice covered with cold water over
the fire, boil 5 minutes, drain in a colander and rinse with cold
water; return rice to saucepan, cover with water, add ½ teaspoonful
salt and boil till done and thick; in the meantime melt ½
tablespoonful butter and add 4 tablespoonfuls sugar; stir this over
the fire till light brown; then add 3 tablespoonfuls boiling water
and the juice of 1 orange and 1 lemon; let it boil up, add the rice
and let it remain a little longer over the fire; remove from the
fire, mix it with 3 tablespoonfuls rum and put it on a glass dish in
layers with fruit marmalade between it; let the last layer be rice;
cover with the whites of 3 eggs beaten to a froth, sweeten with
sugar and flavor with vanilla; sprinkle over some finely chopped
almonds, set it for a few minutes in oven, to take color, and serve
when cold.

503. +Rice (with Strawberries).+-- Parboil ½ pound rice, drain in a
colander and rinse with cold water; return the rice to saucepan,
cover it with water, add the juice of 2 lemons, the peel of 1 and
boil till done, but in such a manner that the kernels remain whole;
let it drain on a sieve; then put it in a dish and pour over 1 pint
boiling sugar syrup; when cold arrange the rice on a glass dish in
the form of a pyramid with layers of sugared strawberries between
and decorate the whole with large strawberries.

504. +Rice (with Apples).+-- Parboil ½ pound rice in water, drain in
a colander and rinse with cold water; then place it over the fire
with 1 quart milk, add ½ teaspoonful salt, a piece of cinnamon and
boil till tender; transfer the rice to a dish and set it aside to
cool; in the meantime pare and cut fine 6 large apples (either
greenings, pippins or Baldwin’s); put them on a soup plate, sprinkle
with sugar, a little cinnamon, the grated rind of 1 lemon and a
pinch of cloves; cover them with another plate and let them stand
until the rice is cold; next butter a deep pudding dish and put the
apples in the bottom of it; then stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter with 2
tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream and add alternately the rice (by
spoonfuls) and the yolks of 5 eggs, a little cinnamon and the finely
chopped peel of 1 lemon; add lastly the whites beaten to a stiff
froth; spread the rice evenly over the apples, put small pieces of
butter over and then sprinkle over some sugar and finely chopped
almonds; bake 1 hour in a medium hot oven; serve with or without
wine sauce.

505. +Rice (with Marmalade).+-- Boil ½ pound rice the same as in
foregoing recipe and press it through a sieve; when cold stir ¼
pound butter with ½ cup sugar to a cream and add by degrees the
yolks of 6 eggs, the rice and lastly the whites beaten to a stiff
froth; fill this mixture into a well buttered pudding dish with
layers of fruit marmalade between the rice (let the last layer be
rice) and bake in a medium hot oven ¾ hour; send to table sprinkled
with sugar and serve with or without sauce.

506. +Rice (dressed with Sugar and Cinnamon).+-- Place a saucepan
with 1 cup rice covered with cold water over the fire and boil 5
minutes; pour the rice into a sieve to drain and rinse with fresh
water; return it to saucepan, add ½ teaspoonful salt, 1 quart milk
and boil slowly till done; if the rice should be too thick add more
milk; when done fill the rice into a deep dish, lay small pieces of
butter all over the top and sprinkle thickly with sugar into which a
little cinnamon has been mixed; serve as a dessert.

507. +Fine Rice Pudding (with Oranges).+-- Wash ½ pound rice in
several waters, put in a saucepan covered with water and boil 10
minutes; drain in a colander and rinse with water; boil ½ pint white
wine with ½ pound sugar, the grated rind and juice of 1 lemon and ½
pint water for 5 minutes, add the rice and boil till tender; when
done transfer the rice to a dish to cool; place a saucepan in a
vessel of hot water with ½ teaspoonful cornstarch, ½ pint white
wine, 3 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, the juice of 1 lemon and ½
ounce gelatine soaked in cold water; stir this over the fire with an
egg beater until just about to boil; remove instantly from the fire
and stir for a few minutes longer; then set it aside to cool; rinse
a nicely shaped mould with cold water, sprinkle with coarse sugar
and set it into cracked ice; put in first a layer of rice, then a
layer of oranges which have been peeled, cut into slices and freed
of their pits, sprinkle with sugar, pour some of the wine sauce over
it and continue alternately with the layers until the form is
filled; let it stand in ice over night; in serving turn the rice
onto a dish and garnish with sugared oranges.

508. +Fried Rice.+-- Place ½ pound washed rice in a saucepan with
cold water over the fire and boil 5 minutes; drain in a colander,
return rice to saucepan, add 1 quart milk, ½ teaspoonful salt and
boil slowly till tender; when done remove from the fire, mix with
the yolks of 2 eggs and spread it on a flat dish; when cold cut it
into strips 1 inch wide and 2 inches long, brush them over with the
beaten whites of eggs, sprinkle with fine bread crumbs or cracker
dust and fry in ½ butter and ½ lard to a fine golden color; serve on
a hot dish dusted with sugar.

509. +Rice Pudding (baked).+-- Soak ½ pound rice for 1 hour in water,
drain and boil it in water 15 minutes; pour the rice onto a sieve
and after draining it well return to saucepan; add 1 quart milk, ¾
teaspoonful salt and boil till tender; add 3 ounces butter, ¼ pound
sugar and the grated rind of 1 lemon; when cold mix it with the
yolks of 6 eggs, ½ cup finely chopped almonds and 3 tablespoonfuls
finely cut citron; add lastly the whites beaten to a stiff froth;
fill the whole into a well buttered pudding dish and bake 1 hour in
a medium hot oven; serve with fruit sauce.

510. +Boiled Rice Pudding.+-- Place a saucepan with ½ pound rice
covered with cold water over the fire and let it boil 5 minutes;
then pour it into a colander and rinse with cold water; return the
rice to saucepan, add 1 quart milk, a piece of cinnamon, the peel of
1 lemon, 1 teaspoonful salt and boil slowly till tender (but the
kernels must be whole); when cold stir ¼ pound butter with 1 cup
sugar to a cream and add 1 cup finely chopped almonds, 1 cup
stoneless raisins, 1 tablespoonful finely cut preserved orange peel
and the yolks of 8 eggs; add the rice and lastly the 8 whites beaten
to a stiff froth; fill the mixture into a well buttered pudding form
and boil 2 hours; serve with wine cream sauce made as follows:--
Place a saucepan over the fire with 1 pint white wine, the yolks
of 3 eggs, 1 teaspoonful cornstarch, the peel of 1 lemon and 4
tablespoonfuls sugar; stir this with an egg beater until just about
to boil; then remove it instantly from the fire, beat the whites to
a stiff froth and mix it with the sauce; or send cherry sauce to
table with it (see Sauce). This pudding is sufficient for 12
persons. If a smaller one is desired use half the quantities.

511. +Rice Flour Pudding.+-- Take 1 pint milk, 2 small cups rice
flour, 3 tablespoonfuls butter, the grated rind of 1 lemon, 8 eggs,
whites and yolks beaten separately, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 2
tablespoonfuls finely cut citron and ½ teaspoonful salt; put the
milk with ½ of the butter over the fire; mix the rice flour with a
little cold water or milk, add the salt and when the milk boils stir
the flour into it; stir until the contents have formed into a smooth
paste and loosens itself from the bottom of saucepan; remove it from
the fire and set aside to cool; stir the remaining butter to a cream
and add alternately the sugar, the yolks and the rice dough (by a
spoonful at a time); add the lemon, the citron and lastly the whites
of eggs beaten to a stiff froth; blend all well together; have ready
a pudding form well buttered and sprinkled with bread crumbs, fill
it with the mixture and boil 2 hours; serve with wine or cream sauce
the same as in foregoing recipe; sufficient for a family of 10
persons.

512. +Rice Flour Pudding (baked).+-- Place a saucepan with 1 pint
milk and 1 tablespoonful butter over the fire and when it boils stir
into the boiling milk sufficient rice flour to make a smooth dough
that loosens itself from the bottom of saucepan; then remove it from
the fire and set aside to cool; stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a
cream and add by degrees the yolks of 5 eggs, 5 tablespoonfuls
sugar, the grated rind of 1 lemon, the dough of rice flour and
lastly the stiff froth of the 5 eggs; bake ½ hour; serve with wine
cream sauce.

513. +Rice Pudding (baked).+-- Place a saucepan with ½ pound rice
covered with cold water over the fire, let it boil a few minutes,
pour the rice into a colander and rinse with cold water; return it
to saucepan, add 1 quart milk, ½ teaspoonful salt, 1 tablespoonful
butter, a piece of cinnamon, the peel of 1 lemon and boil slowly
till tender; when done remove the rice from fire and let it cool a
little; stir the yolks of 4 eggs with 3 tablespoonfuls sugar to a
cream; mix it with the rice, remove the lemon and cinnamon and add
lastly the whites beaten to a stiff froth; fill the mixture into a
form which has been well buttered and sprinkled with bread crumbs
and bake 1 hour in a medium hot oven; when done turn the pudding
onto a round plate and serve with fruit sauce.

514. +Rice Pudding (with Peaches).+-- Cut 12 large peaches in halves
and peel and boil them in ½ pound sugar syrup; crack the stones,
take out the pits, remove the brown skins and boil the pits with the
peaches; when done transfer the fruit to a dish and set aside to
cool; put ½ pound rice with cold water over the fire and let it boil
up; drain in a sieve and rinse with cold water; return rice to
saucepan with 1 pint sweet cream and boil till tender, but in such a
way as to leave the kernels remain whole; when cold mix the rice
with 5 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract, ¼ pint
maraschino and 1¼ ounces gelatine; put the dish in cracked ice and
stir 1 pint whipped cream through it; fill into a form, cover
tightly, pack it in cracked ice with rock salt sprinkled between it
so that the whole form is completely covered with ice; let it remain
thus for 2 hours; in serving dip the form in hot water, turn the
pudding onto a round dish, lay the peaches all over it and the pits
on top of peaches; pour the syrup around it and serve. Rice with
apples, pears, apricots or any kind of fruit may be made in the same
manner.

515. +Rice Pudding à la Palerino.+-- Put ½ pound rice with cold water
over the fire, boil 3 minutes, pour it into a sieve and rinse with
cold water; return the rice to saucepan, add 1 bottle white wine,
the juice of 4 oranges and ¼ pound sugar and boil slowly till
tender; add 1½ ounces gelatine which has been soaked in cold water
and stir both till it begins to thicken; in the meantime cut some
preserved pineapples into small dice; boil 6 ounces seedless raisins
in sugar syrup till tender; put them with ½ pint preserved cherries
on a sieve to drain; thin ¼ pound apricot marmalade with a little
water, add it with the pineapples, raisins and cherries to the rice
and lastly stir 1 quart whipped cream through it; fill the mixture
into a pudding form, pack it in ice and rock salt and let freeze for
4 hours; in serving dip the form in hot water, turn its contents
onto a round dish, lay preserved apricots around it and put on top
some whipped cream, so as to make this fine dish as tempting as
possible.

516. +Rice à la Malte.+-- Boil 1 pound rice 5 minutes, drain in a
sieve and rinse with cold water; return rice to saucepan, cover with
water and boil till tender, but in such a way that the kernels
remain whole; pour the rice in a sieve and let the water drain off;
rub off the skin of 6 oranges with loaf sugar and pound the sugar
fine; then peel the oranges, divide them into quarters, remove the
pits and lay the fruit on a dish; sprinkle 6 tablespoonfuls sugar
over and set them aside in a cool place; press the juice from 6
oranges; put the rice with 1½ pints white wine in saucepan, add ½
pound sugar and boil till thick; add the orange juice and the juice
of 1 lemon, let it boil a few minutes longer, remove from the fire
and stir the orange sugar into it; rinse out a form with white wine,
pour in the rice mixture and when cold put it on ice for 3 hours; in
serving turn it out on a round dish and garnish with the orange
quarters; boil the juice of 3 oranges with ½ cup sugar and ½ cup
water to a syrup; when cold pour some over the rice and serve the
rest in a sauciere with the pudding.

517. +Rice Pudding à la Wellington.+-- Boil ½ pound rice for 15
minutes in water, drain it in a sieve and rinse with cold water;
return rice to saucepan, add ½ bottle Rhine wine, the peel of 1
lemon, the juice of 3 lemons and sweeten with sugar; when done pour
it into a border form and set it in a cool place; in serving turn it
onto a round dish, decorate with preserved or stewed cherries and
pour a little white syrup over the rice; have ready a plombière of
frozen raspberry ice in a high pointed form and put it in the center
of the rice.

518. +Rice Pudding (with Pineapple).+-- Take a sponge cake (one that
was baked in a round form), hollow it out about 1½ inches, pour some
Madeira wine over and sprinkle with finely chopped almonds; set it
in a cool oven to dry a little; then place it on a round dish with a
fine napkin and cut it down to ⅓ its height into 12 pieces; boil ¾
pound rice 5 minutes in water, drain and rinse with cold water;
return rice to saucepan and boil it in water till nearly done; pour
it onto a sieve and drain off the water; then return it again to
saucepan with some pineapple syrup and boil till done; mix a few
tablespoonfuls finely cut pineapple with it, fill the rice (half
warm) into the sponge cake and decorate with slices of pineapple and
preserved red cherries; serve with apricot sauce. Preserved
pineapple may be used for this.

519. +Rice Pudding (with Apples).+-- Put ½ pound rice in a saucepan
with cold water, let it boil 5 minutes, drain in a colander and
rinse with cold water; return rice to saucepan, add 1 pint milk, ½
tablespoonful butter, ½ teaspoonful salt and boil till tender; pour
into a dish to cool; stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter to a cream with 4
tablespoonfuls sugar and add by degrees the yolks of 6 eggs and the
rice; add 2 tablespoonfuls rum and a finely minced lemon peel; beat
the whites to a stiff froth and add them to the mixture; pare and
cut into quarters 8 large tart apples; put peels and cores in a
saucepan, cover with water, place over the fire and boil till
tender; strain through a jelly bag; put the liquor in a saucepan and
boil 5 minutes; add 1 cup sugar, the rind and juice of 1 lemon and
when it boils put in the apples; boil nearly done; remove them with
a skimmer and put into a dish to cool; butter a pudding dish and
sprinkle with bread crumbs; put in ½ the rice mixture, lay over this
the apples and over them the remaining ½ of rice; lay a few pieces
of butter on top, sprinkle with a little sugar and cinnamon and bake
1 hour in a medium hot oven; serve with the syrup. Half the above
quantities will be sufficient for a family of 6.

520. +Rice Pudding (with Cherries).+-- Put ½ pound rice in a
saucepan, cover with cold water, boil 3 minutes, drain in a colander
and rinse with cold water; return rice to saucepan, add 5 cups milk,
½ teaspoonful salt and boil slowly till tender (the kernels must
remain whole); transfer it to a dish and when cold stir ¼ pound
butter to a cream, add alternately 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks
of 6 eggs, the rice and lastly the whites beaten to a stiff froth;
butter a deep pudding dish and sprinkle with bread crumbs; put in a
layer of rice mixture, then a layer of cherries which have been
previously freed from the pits, stewed with sugar and drained on a
sieve; or take preserved cherries, drain off the liquor and put them
between the layers of rice till the dish is filled; let the last
layer be rice; bake 1 hour in a medium hot oven; when done decorate
the top with preserved or stewed cherries and send a cherry sauce to
table with it. Rice pudding with apricots or peaches may be made the
same way.

521. +Rice Pudding (with Almonds).+-- Prepare the rice the same as in
foregoing recipe; when cold stir ¼ pound butter to a cream, add ¼
pound sugar, the grated rind of 1 lemon, 1 cup finely chopped or
ground almonds, the yolks of 6 eggs, the rice and lastly the whites
beaten to a stiff froth; fill the mixture into a well buttered form
and bake 1 hour; when done dust it with powdered sugar and serve
with fruit or wine sauce.

522. +Lemon Rice Pudding.+-- Let ½ cup rice come to a boil, drain in
a colander and rinse with cold water; return the rice to saucepan,
add 1 cup milk, ¼ teaspoonful salt and boil till tender; when done
pour it into a dish and set aside to cool; stir 1 tablespoonful
butter to a cream, add the yolks of 4 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar,
then the rice and the grated rind of 1 lemon; whip the juice of 1
lemon with the whites of 4 eggs to a froth, stir into the rice
mixture, put it in a well buttered pudding dish and bake ¾ hour;
serve with wine sauce.

523. +Rice Scallop.+-- Place a saucepan with ½ pound rice and cold
water over the fire, boil 5 minutes and drain in a colander; return
rice to saucepan, add 1 quart milk, ½ teaspoonful salt, a small
piece of butter and boil till rice is soft and thick; pare, core and
slice fine 10 large apples, put them in a saucepan with 1
tablespoonful butter, 2 tablespoonfuls finely cut citron, ½ cup well
cleansed currants, ½ cup sugar and stew slowly until apples are
soft; add ½ cup currant jelly or fruit marmalade and set aside to
cool; butter a pudding dish, put in a layer of rice and over it a
layer of apples; continue in this way alternately with rice and
apples till all are used; let the last layer be rice; put little
pieces of butter all over the top of rice and bake ¾ hour; serve
either hot or cold.

524. +Cream of Rice Flour.+-- Mix in a saucepan 4 tablespoonfuls rice
flour with 1 quart milk and add 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 ounce
finely cut orange peel, the yolks of 6 eggs and the grated rind of 1
lemon; stir this over the fire until it begins to boil; remove it
from the fire, add the whites beaten to a stiff froth and serve it
when cold in a glass dish; sprinkle it with sugar, hold a red hot
shovel over to brown the sugar and serve without sauce.

525. +Rice kalte Schale (with Cream).+-- Put ¼ pound rice with cold
water over the fire, boil 5 minutes, drain in a colander and rinse
with cold water; return rice to saucepan and add 1 quart milk, ½
teaspoonful salt, a piece of cinnamon and a little vanilla and lemon
peel; when done remove peel and cinnamon and add the yolks of 4 eggs
and 1 quart boiling hot cream; sweeten to taste and serve when cold.
NOTE.--Milk may be substituted for cream.

526. +Rice Jelly.+-- Mix ¼ pound rice flour with 1 quart milk and add
¼ pound sugar, ½ ounce gelatine which has been soaked for a few
minutes in cold water, 6 pounded bitter almonds and a little lemon
peel; stir this over the fire constantly and boil 15 minutes; remove
lemon peel, fill the mixture into a form which has been well rinsed
out with cold water and sprinkled with sugar and set the form on ice
to cool; in serving turn the jelly out onto a dish and send fruit
syrup to table with it.

527. +Apples with Rice Border.+-- Place a saucepan with ½ pound rice
covered with cold water over the fire, boil a few minutes, drain the
rice in a colander and rinse with cold water; then return it to
saucepan, cover with 1 pint milk and boil till tender and thick;
then stir through it carefully 1 tablespoonful butter, 3
tablespoonfuls sugar, the grated rind of ½ lemon and the yolks of 2
eggs; next butter a mould (special moulds are made for rice border),
fill it with rice and set in a warm place for 10 minutes; pare 12
small tart apples, remove the cores without breaking the fruit and
boil them in sugar syrup with 1 tablespoonful apricot marmalade or
fruit jelly; turn the rice border onto a dish and lay little pieces
of currant jelly on top of it; pile the apples high up in the
center; reduce the syrup by boiling a little longer and pour it over
the apples. Pears, peaches, apricots and cherries the same way.
Preserved fruit may also be used.

528. +Rice Cream.+-- Boil 6 ounces parboiled rice in 3 cups sweet
cream and a little salt till tender; when done mix it with ½ ounce
gelatine which has been soaked in cold water; when this is well
mixed with the rice remove it from the fire, add the well beaten
yolks of 6 eggs, 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and when cold add 1
glass maraschino and the 6 whites beaten to a stiff froth; fill this
into a form and place it on ice to get firm; in serving turn the
cream onto a glass dish and garnish with macaroons.

529. +Rice Cream (with Chocolate).+-- Place 6 ounces well washed rice
with cold water over the fire, boil for a few minutes, drain in a
colander and rinse with cold water; return rice to saucepan, add 3
cups sweet cream, ¼ teaspoonful salt and boil till tender; then mix
with 1 ounce gelatine which has been soaked for 5 minutes in cold
water; also add 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla
extract, ¼ pound finely grated chocolate and when cold add 1 pint
whipped cream; fill the mixture into a form, bury the form in finely
cracked ice with a little rock salt sprinkled between and let it
remain 4 hours; in serving dip the form into hot water and turn the
cream onto a glass dish. NOTE.--The chocolate may be left out of the
cream and a chocolate sauce served with it.

530. +Rice Cream (with Fruit).+-- Put 6 ounces well washed rice with
cold water over the fire, let it boil a few minutes and drain and
rinse it with cold water; return the rice to saucepan, add 3 cups
sweet cream, a little salt and boil till done; when cold mix it with
3 tablespoonfuls sugar, the grated rind of 1 lemon and ½ ounce
gelatine soaked in cold water; when nearly cold add 1 pint whipped
cream and put the mixture into a form with layers of preserved
fruit, such as cherries, peaches, plums, etc., between it; set the
form into a pail with layers of cracked ice and rock salt sprinkled
between; the form should be entirely covered with ice; set in a cold
place for 4 hours; in serving turn the cream out of the form onto a
glass dish and garnish with fruit jelly.

531. +Rice Croquettes (served with Sauce as Dessert).+-- Parboil ½
pound rice for a few minutes in water and drain in a colander;
return the rice to saucepan with 1 pint milk, 3 tablespoonfuls
sugar, ½ tablespoonful butter, ½ teaspoonful salt and boil till
tender; when done remove it from the fire and mix with the yolks of
3 or 4 eggs, the grated rind of 1 lemon and set it aside to cool;
form the mixture into balls the size of a walnut, dip them into
beaten white of eggs, roll them in zwieback crumbs and fry in
boiling lard; serve with wine sauce.

532. +Brioche Dough.+-- Put 1 pound flour into a dish, add ½
teaspoonful salt, make a hollow in the center, pour 1 cup warm milk
in which 1 yeast cake has been dissolved into the center, mix it
with some of the flour and set in a warm place for 1 hour; then stir
¼ pound butter to a cream and add by degrees 2 eggs; mix this with
the flour and yeast to a soft dough, cover and let it rise to double
its height in a warm place; then work it through once more, roll it
out with a rolling pin about ⅛ of an inch in thickness, cut it into
rounds with a tumbler and put in the center either force meat, fruit
jelly or rice; bend them over so that the edges meet; wet them with
beaten egg and press the edges firmly together; set in a warm place
to rise; then brush over with beaten egg, dust with bread crumbs and
fry in hot lard.

533. +Rice Brioche.+-- Prepare a brioche dough the same as in
foregoing recipe with the addition of 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and the
grated rind of 1 lemon; while this is rising put 1 cup rice in a
saucepan with cold water over the fire, let it come to a boil, drain
in a sieve and rinse with cold water; return the rice to saucepan,
add 1 pint milk, ½ teaspoonful salt and boil till tender; remove it
from the fire and when cold mix the rice with the beaten whites of 3
eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, 4 tablespoonfuls finely chopped
almonds, 2 tablespoonfuls finely cut citron and ¼ teaspoonful
cinnamon; when the dough has risen to double its height divide it
into 2 equal parts and roll each part out on a floured board to ½
inch in thickness; spread over each part an equal portion of the
rice, fold together, press the edges firmly, so that the rice cannot
fall out, shape it in the form of a long square and lay in buttered
tin pans; brush over with the yolks of the 3 eggs, sprinkle thickly
with finely chopped almonds and dust with powdered sugar; set in a
warm place and let it rise for ½ hour; then bake in a medium hot
oven about ½ hour; if the oven should be too hot cover with paper;
serve with the following sauce:--Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter with 8
tablespoonfuls powdered sugar to a cream and add 2 eggs, a little
nutmeg and 4 tablespoonfuls rum with 1 teaspoonful vanilla; stir
until white; put the bowl which holds the mixture into a vessel of
boiling water, stir over the fire, add gradually 1 cup boiling
water, stir to a creamy sauce and serve. NOTE.--Half these
quantities will be sufficient for a family of 6 persons.

534. +Poveison (with Prunes).+-- Stew some dried prunes with a stick
of cinnamon and lemon peel; sweeten with sugar and set aside to
cool; remove the pits and chop the prunes fine; reduce the liquor by
boiling it down to ½, add the prunes and mix all together; grate the
crust from 3 or 4 milk rolls, cut them into slices about ⅛ of an
inch in thickness, spread each slice with the prunes and lay 2
pieces together with the prunes between them; after all the slices
have been prepared in this way lay them on a long plate, pour some
cold milk over and let them stand for ½ hour; then dip them first in
beaten egg and then in fine bread crumbs and fry in boiling lard;
serve them dusted with sugar.

535. +Croquettes of Nudels.+-- Prepare some finely cut nudels with 1
egg and the necessary flour and boil them in milk with a piece of
butter, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and a pinch of salt; when done
transfer them to a dish and mix with the yolks of 3 eggs, the grated
rind of ½ lemon and 3 bitter macaroons broken into small pieces; set
this mixture on ice and when cold form it into round balls the size
of an egg; dip them in the white of egg, then in boiling lard and
fry in boiling lard to a fine brown; serve with wine or fruit sauce.

536. +Apple Croquettes.+-- Prepare a fine apple sauce, press it
through a sieve and add some finely chopped almonds and a little
vanilla; bake some thin pancakes of eggs, milk and flour, spread
some of the apple sauce over each one, roll them up, turn the ends
over and fasten them with egg; dip them first into beaten egg, then
into fine zwieback crumbs and fry in boiling lard to a nice golden
color; dust them with powdered sugar and serve with a sauce made of
apple jelly thinned with vanilla liquor or maraschino.

537. +Nudels (with Jelly).+-- Boil 2 cups home-made nudels in salt
water 15 minutes; then drain in a colander, put the nudels in a
saucepan with 1 tablespoonful butter and toss them over the fire
till they are well mixed with the butter; then put them in a glass
dish alternately with currant or apple jelly in layers between,
cover the top with jelly and serve. A cupful of freshly grated
cocoanut laid over the top of this dish and dotted with small bits
of jelly is a decided improvement.

538. +Apple Scallop.+-- 1 pound bread crumbs, ¾ cup sugar, 10 large
greening or pippin apples and ¾ cup butter; pare, quarter and cut
the apples into fine slices; put ¼ of the butter into a pudding dish
and let it melt; then put in a layer of bread crumbs and over them a
thick layer of apples; sprinkle over some sugar and lay little bits
of butter over; continue this way alternately with bread crumbs,
butter, apples and sugar till all is used; let the last layer be
bread with bits of butter on top; cover the dish and bake ¾ hour;
shortly before the scallop is done uncover the dish and let it brown
a little; serve either hot or cold without sauce.

539. +Nudel Scallop.+-- Prepare a nudel dough of 1 egg, ½ teaspoonful
butter, 1 tablespoonful water, a pinch of salt and sufficient flour
to make a stiff dough; divide the dough into 4 parts, roll each part
out on a paste board as thinly as possible and let them lay for 15
minutes; then cut each part into long strips 1½ inches in width; lay
4 strips on top of one another and cut them fine, about as thick as
a straw; shake the nudels apart and spread them on a board to dry
for 1 hour; then put them into boiling salted water, boil 10 minutes
and drain in a colander; pare, core and cut into fine slices 10
large greening apples; put the apples in a saucepan with 1
tablespoonful butter and ½ cup sugar, cover and stew gently till
they begin to soften; remove them from fire, add ½ cup apple or
currant jelly and set aside to cool; butter a pudding dish and put
in a layer of nudels; lay little bits of butter over and put over
the nudels a layer of apples; then nudels again; continue in this
way till all is used; let the last layer be nudels; mix 3 eggs with
1 cup milk, a little sugar and 1 teaspoonful vanilla; pour it over
the nudels and bake ¾ hour; serve either hot or cold. NOTE.--Stewed
prunes, peaches or cherries may be used instead of apples. This may
be served without sauce.




+COLD PUDDINGS MADE WITH MILK.+


540. +Cocoanut Custard Pudding, No. 1.+-- 2 cups grated cocoanut, 1
cup sugar, 5 eggs and 1 quart milk; beat up the eggs to a froth, add
the sugar, stir until melted, then add milk and cocoanut; butter a
pudding dish, pour in the mixture and bake till the custard
thickens; the best way to ascertain when pudding is done is to place
the handle of a teaspoon into the center of the pudding; if it is
thick remove instantly and set aside in a cool place; serve when
cold in the same dish in which it was baked, with a napkin folded
around, or place it in an ornamental dish.

541. +Cocoanut Custard Pudding, No. 2.+-- Boil 3 cups milk with 1 cup
sugar; dissolve 2 tablespoonfuls cornstarch in 1 cup cold milk and
add it to the milk; continue the boiling for a few minutes and
remove from fire; beat up the yolks of 4 eggs and after the custard
has cooled a little add them to it; when cold beat the whites to a
stiff froth and stir them into the custard; butter a pudding dish
and put in ½ the custard and a layer of macaroons; then a thick
layer of cocoanut on top into which 2 tablespoonfuls sugar have been
mixed; bake in the oven to a delicate brown color; serve cold
without sauce.

542. +Pudding à la Princess.+-- Take 1 pound any kind of cake
(sponge, pound, cup or raisin cake), which is several days old, cut
it into slices and lay them in a glass dish; put on to each slice 1
teaspoonful currant or apple jelly and pour ½ cup sherry wine and
the juice of 1 lemon over; soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup milk 15
minutes; place a saucepan over the fire with 3 cups milk, ½ cup
sugar, the yolks of 6 eggs and 1½ teaspoonfuls vanilla extract; stir
this over the fire till nearly boiling; then add the gelatine by
degrees, stirring constantly, but do not allow it to boil; as soon
as gelatine is melted remove it from the fire, set the saucepan in
cold water and stir its contents till cold; pour the custard over
the cake; beat the 6 whites to a stiff froth and beat into it
gradually ½ cup currant, cranberry or apple jelly; spread this
meringue over the custard and dot it with little bits of jelly laid
on in a pattern. Half the above quantities will be sufficient for a
small family.

543. +Cold Sponge Pudding.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup milk for
15 minutes; place a saucepan over the fire with the yolks of 6 eggs,
3 cups milk, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla extract
and stir with an egg beater till nearly boiling; add by degrees the
gelatine, beating constantly; remove from the fire and set aside to
cool, stirring it now and then; when cold and beginning to thicken
have the whites beaten to a stiff froth and stir them lightly
through the cream; rinse out a mould with cold water, sprinkle the
inside with sugar, pour in the mixture and set in a cool place to
form; in serving loosen the edge on top with your finger and turn
the pudding onto a dish; serve with cold fruit or claret wine sauce.

544. +Chocolate Pudding.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup milk; boil
¼ pound grated chocolate in 1 cup water and add 1 pint milk, the
yolks of 3 eggs, 5 tablespoonfuls sugar and the gelatine; beat this
with an egg beater over the fire till nearly boiling; remove from
the fire and set aside to cool, stirring it now and then; when cold
and beginning to thicken add the beaten whites of 6 eggs; rinse a
form with cold water, sprinkle with sugar, pour in the mixture and
set aside to form; serve with vanilla sauce made of the 3 remaining
yolks.

545. +Sago Pudding.+-- Boil 1 quart milk with a little salt and while
boiling sprinkle in slowly ¼ pound sago; continue the boiling until
the sago looks clear and is thick; when done remove the saucepan to
side of stove add 4 tablespoonfuls sugar; beat up the yolks of 4 or
5 eggs with a little cold milk, add them to the sago and while hot
add the whites beaten to a stiff froth; turn it into a jelly mould
which has previously been rinsed with cold water and sprinkled with
sugar and place it on ice or in cold water till firm; serve with
fruit or vanilla sauce.

546. +Sago Pudding with Almonds+ is prepared the same as in
preceding recipe. While the sago is boiling add 1 cup finely chopped
almonds. Walnuts or hazel nuts may be used the same way.

547. +Sago Pudding (Allemande).+-- Boil 1 quart milk with a little
salt and while boiling add slowly ¼ pound best sago, ½ cup finely
chopped almonds and 4 tablespoonfuls sugar; continue the boiling for
20 minutes longer, then remove the saucepan to side of stove, add
the beaten whites of 4 eggs and 1 teaspoonful lemon extract; pour
the sago into a well rinsed and sugared jelly mould and set aside to
cool; put the 5 yolks with 3 cups milk, 1 teaspoonful cornstarch and
3 tablespoonfuls sugar over the fire and stir until it begins to
boil; remove instantly, flavor with vanilla or lemon essence and
serve cold with the pudding.

548. +Sago Meringue (with Apples).+-- Boil ¼ pound sago in 1 quart
milk with a little salt and a little butter; in the meantime pare
and core 6 large apples, put them into a long tin pan with 1 quart
boiling water, cover them with another pan and boil 5 minutes;
transfer the apples to a long-shaped pudding dish and put 1
teaspoonful jelly into each apple; when the boiled sago is cold mix
it with the yolks of 4 eggs and 4 tablespoonfuls sugar; pour this
over the apples and bake in the oven; when done draw the pudding to
the front of oven; have the 4 whites beaten to a stiff froth and add
2 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar and a little essence of lemon;
spread this over the pudding, close the oven and let the pudding
bake for a few minutes longer; eat without sauce, either hot or
cold.

549. +Sago Cream.+-- Put ½ pound sago with boiling water over the
fire, let it boil 5 minutes and drain on a sieve; return the sago to
saucepan, add 3 pints water and boil slowly 1½ hours; add 1 bottle
claret, the juice of 2 lemons and the rind of 1; add sufficient
sugar to sweeten and boil ½ hour more; rinse out a jelly mould or
small cups with cold water, sprinkle them with sugar, fill them with
the sago cream and set in a cool place to get firm; serve cold with
whipped cream or vanilla sauce; or take currant juice instead of
wine and otherwise prepare the same as above; when cold turn the
cream onto a glass dish, lay a border of whipped cream sweetened
with sugar and flavored with vanilla around it and serve without
sauce.

550. +Rothe Grütze.+-- Stew ½ pound currants and ½ pound raspberries
with ½ pint water about 20 minutes; strain them through a jelly bag;
put the juice in a saucepan with the same quantity of water and add
sufficient sugar to sweeten; as soon as it begins to boil sprinkle
in slowly some of the best sago, allowing 4 tablespoonfuls sago to 1
quart liquid; add a piece of cinnamon and boil slowly till sago is
clear, which will take about ½ hour; stir it constantly; turn it
into cups or jelly moulds; eat when cold with milk or cream.

551. +Milk Pudding.+-- Boil 1 quart milk with 6 tablespoonfuls sugar,
the peel of 1 lemon and add 16 sheets red gelatine which has been
soaked for 5 minutes in cold water; stir until the gelatine is
dissolved; remove it from fire and add 1 pint Rhine wine; pour it
into a jelly mould which has been rinsed with cold water and
sprinkled with sugar, set it on ice to get firm and serve with
vanilla or lemon custard sauce.

552. +Fruit Custard Pudding.+-- Dip 6 small sponge cakes into the
juice of 1 can peaches and lay the cake in a glass dish; lay ½ the
peaches over the cake and pour some cold custard over it which is
made as follows:--Place a saucepan with 1 quart milk, 4
tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 4 eggs and a pinch of salt over
the fire and add 2 tablespoonfuls cornstarch; stir constantly till
just about to boil; then remove from the fire and when cold pour it
over the cake and peaches; beat the whites to a stiff froth, mix
with 2 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar, spread it over the top and
serve.

553. +Macaroon Meringue.+-- Place a saucepan with 1 quart milk, the
yolks of 4 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1 tablespoonful
cornstarch over the fire and stir constantly till just about to
boil; remove instantly and when cold stir 1 cup finely chopped
almonds through it; put a layer of macaroons in a glass dish, pour
over ½ the custard, put another layer of macaroons and then custard
again; beat the whites to a stiff froth, add 1 tablespoonful
powdered sugar and spread it over the top.

554. +Lemon Custard Pudding.+-- 1 quart milk, 2 tablespoonfuls
cornstarch, 3 eggs, the juice of 2 lemons, the grated rind of 1 and
½ tablespoonful butter; mix the cornstarch with a little cold milk;
put the remaining milk over the fire, add the butter and as soon as
it begins to boil stir in the cornstarch; boil a few minutes,
stirring constantly; remove from fire and when cold mix the eggs
with ¾ cup sugar, add the lemon juice and rind, stir this to a cream
and add gradually to the cornstarch; when well mixed fill it into a
buttered pudding dish and bake till the custard is set; serve cold.

555. +Cornstarch Pudding.+-- 1 quart milk, 4 tablespoonfuls
cornstarch, 5 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and ¼ teaspoonful salt;
mix the cornstarch with a little milk; put the remaining milk with
sugar and salt in a saucepan over the fire; as soon as it boils add
the cornstarch and let it boil for a few minutes, stirring
constantly; when done remove it to side of stove, add the well
beaten yolks of the 5 eggs; when well mixed together keeping it hot,
and beat the whites to a stiff froth and stir them into the mixture;
rinse out a mould with cold water, sprinkle with sugar, pour in the
mixture and set either in a cool place or on ice; serve with fruit
sauce.

556. +Cornstarch Meringue.+-- 1 quart milk, 4 tablespoonfuls
cornstarch, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 4 eggs and 4 tablespoonfuls
fruit jelly; bring the milk to a boil and stir in the cornstarch,
which should be previously dissolved in a little cold milk; boil a
few minutes, stirring constantly; remove it from the fire and while
yet hot stir in the yolks beaten up with the sugar and flavor with 1
teaspoonful vanilla; fill it into a glass dish; beat the whites with
4 tablespoonfuls currant or apple jelly to a froth, spread it over
the pudding and serve when cold.

557. +Armor Pudding.+-- Boil 1 quart milk with the rind of 1 lemon;
dissolve 1 cup cornstarch in 1 cup cold milk and add it slowly to
the milk, stirring constantly; add ¾ cup sugar and a little salt and
continue the boiling for a few minutes; when done remove the
saucepan to side of stove, keeping it hot; beat the whites of 6 eggs
to a stiff froth and mix them with the cornstarch; turn it into a
jelly mould and serve cold with strawberry or vanilla sauce. The
mould should be previously rinsed with cold water and sprinkled with
granulated sugar.

558. +Red Cream Pudding.+-- Boil 1 pint fruit juice and 1 pint water;
add 4 tablespoonfuls cornstarch dissolved in cold water, sweeten to
taste and continue the boiling for 5 minutes; remove it to side of
stove, and while yet hot mix it with the whites of 6 eggs beaten to
a stiff froth; turn it into a jelly mould which has been rinsed with
water and sprinkled with sugar and serve cold with vanilla sauce.

559. +Floating Island.+-- Mix 1 quart milk with the yolks of 4 eggs,
4 tablespoonfuls sugar and ½ tablespoonful cornstarch; stir this
over the fire until just about to boil; remove instantly and add 1
teaspoonful vanilla essence; set a glass dish on a wet cloth and
pour in the hot custard; beat the whites to a stiff froth, spread it
over the custard, sprinkle a little sugar over and cover it up for
20 minutes; then set it on ice or in a cool place; serve cold; or
beat the whites with 4 tablespoonfuls fruit jelly to a stiff froth,
heap this meringue upon the custard when cold and dot it with bits
of jelly laid all over it.

560. +Banana Float.+-- Put in a saucepan 1 quart milk, ½
tablespoonful cornstarch, ½ cup sugar and the yolks of 4 eggs; set
the saucepan in a vessel of boiling water and stir over the fire
till nearly boiling; remove instantly, pour the custard into a dish
and add 1 teaspoonful lemon extract; when cold have ½ dozen bananas
cut into slices and stir them into the custard; beat the whites to a
stiff froth, mix with a little powdered sugar, cover the custard
with the meringue, set lady fingers around the edge of dish and
serve.

561. +Peach Float.+-- Blanch 1 cup almonds, chop them very fine and
stir into a custard made the same as in foregoing recipe; pare and
cut some ripe peaches into eighths and stir them into the custard;
put into a glass dish with meringue on top and garnish with kisses
or lady fingers, Orange float is made the same as Banana Float.

562. +Lemon Custard.+-- Boil 1 quart milk with ½ cup sugar and while
boiling stir in 2½ tablespoonfuls cornstarch previously wet with a
little cold milk; stir constantly and boil a few minutes; then
remove it from the fire and add 2 teaspoonfuls lemon essence and the
well beaten yolks of 4 eggs; turn the custard into a glass dish,
beat the whites to a stiff froth, spread it over the top, sprinkle a
little sugar over and serve when cold.

563. +Lemon Cream Pudding.+-- Place a saucepan over the fire with the
rind of 1 lemon and the juice of 3; add 1 cup sugar, 1 cup white
wine and the yolks of 4 eggs; stir this until nearly boiling; remove
it from the fire and add ¾ ounce gelatine which has been soaked for
10 minutes in cold water; when nearly cold add 1 pint sweet cream
beaten to a stiff froth, turn into a jelly mould and set on ice to
get firm; serve without sauce. Or put in a saucepan the yolks of 6
eggs, ½ pint white wine, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, the juice of 3
lemons and the peel of 1; stir this over the fire until it begins to
boil; remove it and add 1 ounce gelatine which has been previously
soaked in cold water; stir until the gelatine is dissolved; when
nearly cold add the whites beaten to a stiff froth; turn into a
jelly mould and set on ice to get firm; serve without sauce.

564. +Custard Bread Pudding.+-- Mix the yolks of 4 eggs with 1 quart
milk, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1 teaspoonful vanilla; pour this
into a pudding dish and lay 2 slices of buttered bread on top of the
custard; bake until nearly done; beat the whites to a froth, mix
with 1 tablespoonful sugar, spread it over the pudding and bake to a
light brown color; serve cold.

565. +Custard.+-- Beat 5 eggs with ½ cup sugar to a cream and add 1
quart milk and 1 teaspoonful vanilla or lemon essence; pour this
into a pudding dish and bake in a medium hot oven till done; to
ascertain when the custard is done put the handle of a teaspoon into
the center of dish; if the custard is thick and jelly-like, and no
milk is to be seen, remove instantly from the oven and serve when
cold, or pour the custard into small cups, set them in a long pan of
hot water and bake in a medium hot oven till the custard is thick.

566. +Apple Custard.+-- Pare and core 6 medium sized apples, put them
in a pan half filled with boiling water, cover with another pan of
same size and let them boil till soft all through, but not broken;
transfer them carefully to a glass dish, sprinkle over some sugar
and when cold put 1 teaspoonful apple, currant or quince jelly in
center of each apple; pour over a cold soft custard. For custard mix
1 pint milk with 3 well beaten eggs and add 2 tablespoonfuls sugar
and 1 teaspoonful cornstarch; stir over the fire till nearly
boiling, flavor with essence of lemon and set aside to cool.

567. +Pineapple Custard.+-- Pare and cut a ripe pineapple into small
pieces, taking care not to lose any of the juice; put the fruit with
sugar into a glass dish and set on ice; boil 1 pint milk; mix 2
tablespoonfuls cornstarch with 1 cup cold milk, add it with a little
salt to the boiling milk and stir and boil for a few minutes; remove
from fire and add 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 3 eggs and 1
teaspoonful vanilla extract; mix this well together and set aside;
when cold pour the custard over the pineapple; have the whites
beaten to a stiff froth, mix a little powdered sugar through it and
put on top of custard like a pyramid; place the dish for ½ hour on
ice before serving.

568. +Strawberry Custard.+-- Wash 1 quart strawberries, drain and put
them besprinkled with sugar in a glass dish; pour over a cold
custard and finish the same as Pineapple Custard.

569. +Peach Custard.+-- Pare and cut into slices some ripe peaches,
sprinkle over some sugar and finish the same as Pineapple Custard.
Apricot custard is made the same way.

570. +Chocolate Fruit Custard.+-- Dissolve 3 tablespoonfuls grated
sweet chocolate in a little milk and mix it with a custard made the
same as Pineapple Custard; when cold pour it over strawberries,
pineapples, oranges or any kind of preserved fruit and cover with
the whites of 3 or 4 eggs beaten to a stiff froth. If preserved
fruit is used the syrup may be used for jelly.

571. +Fruit Custard (with Cake).+-- Cut some sponge cakes several
days old into square pieces; drain off the liquor from a can of
peaches; dip each piece of cake into the liquor and lay them in a
glass dish; lay the peaches between and pour a cold custard over;
spread over the top the whites of 3 or 4 eggs beaten to a stiff
froth, sprinkle over a little sugar and serve. Any kind of stale
cake may be used up in this way.

572. +Tutti Frutti Custard.+-- Cut any kind of stale cake into small
pieces; put a layer of cornstarch custard into a buttered pudding
dish, then a layer of cake; sprinkle over the cake some finely cut
citron, raisins and currants; continue in this way until 2 layers of
cake and 2 of custard are in the dish; cover the top with a meringue
made of the whites of 3 eggs beaten to a stiff froth, add a little
powdered sugar and bake in the oven for a few minutes, till meringue
is a light brown, and serve. The raisins, currants and citron should
be boiled for 15 minutes in a little water before adding them.

573. +Apple Custard Pudding.+-- Pare and core 6 large pippin or
greening apples, place them in a long pan with 1 quart boiling
water, cover with another pan of same size and stew from 5 to 8
minutes, or until a straw will penetrate through them easily; do not
allow them to break; then remove the apples carefully to a pudding
dish and put 1 teaspoonful currant jelly into each apple; stir 5
eggs with 4 tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream and add 1 teaspoonful
lemon extract and 1 quart milk; pour this over the apples and bake
till custard is firm; serve cold in the same dish in which it has
been baked.

574. +Peach Meringue.+-- Boil 3 cups milk with a pinch of salt,
½ tablespoonful butter and 4 tablespoonfuls sugar; mix 2
tablespoonfuls cornstarch with 1 cup milk, stir it into the boiling
milk and continue boiling for a few minutes; then remove from fire
and set aside; when cold mix it with the yolks of 4 eggs and 1
teaspoonful lemon extract; pare and cut into halves 8 or 10 large,
ripe peaches, lay them in a well buttered pudding dish and sprinkle
3 tablespoonfuls sugar over; pour over the cornstarch and bake 20
minutes; draw the dish to front of oven; have the whites beaten to a
stiff froth, spread them over the top, sprinkle a little sugar over
and bake for 5 minutes longer; serve when warm with fruit sauce and
when cold with cream or vanilla sauce. Cherries and pineapples may
be used the same way.

575. +Tipsy Parson.+-- Take a sponge cake several days old, crumble
it up fine, put a layer of it in a glass dish and pour over 1 glass
wine; then add ½ cup finely chopped almonds, then a layer of whipped
cream; then begin over again, by laying another layer of cake
crumbs, almonds and cream; continue in this way till all is used;
let the last layer be cream. All kinds of cake crumbs can be used,
but sponge cake is the best.

576. +Russian Cream Pudding.+-- Rub the skin of 2 lemons and 1 orange
on ½ pound loaf sugar; pound the sugar fine, pour the juice of the
lemons and orange over it, add 1 ounce gelatine (which should be
soaked in a little cold water), 1 pint white wine, 4 whole eggs and
the yolks of 8 eggs; put this into a tin pail and set it in a vessel
of hot water; stir with an egg beater until just about to boil;
remove instantly, add ½ pound sugar and stir until cold; then add 1
quart sweet cream beaten to a froth and ½ pint Madeira wine or rum;
fill the cream into a form and set it on ice; in serving turn the
cream out and garnish with lady fingers and macaroons.

577. +Tapioca Pudding.+-- Wash 3 tablespoonfuls tapioca, put it into
a pudding dish with 1 quart milk and let it stand for 1 hour; then
set the dish on the side of stove to heat gradually; when the
tapioca is soft beat up 3 eggs with 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, stir
them into the tapioca and flavor with 1 teaspoonful lemon extract;
put small pieces of butter over the top and bake in the oven; serve
with or without sauce. Preserved peaches may be sent to table with
it.

578. +Tapioca Meringue.+-- Soak ½ cup tapioca in 1 quart milk for 2
hours; set the dish on the side of stove and let it heat slowly;
stir the yolks of 4 eggs with ½ cup sugar to a cream, add them to
the pudding and flavor with 1 teaspoonful vanilla; put 1
tablespoonful butter in small pieces over the top and bake till it
begins to thicken; beat the whites to a stiff froth and add 1
tablespoonful powdered sugar and a little lemon extract; draw the
pudding to the front of oven, spread the meringue over, set it for a
few minutes back in the oven and serve.

579. +Tapioca Pudding (economical).+-- Soak 1 cup tapioca in 3 cups
water for 3 hours; then put the tapioca into a saucepan, set this
into a vessel of hot water, add 1 cup boiling water and boil till
tapioca is done (or clear); add ½ teaspoonful salt, the juice of 1
lemon and a little grated rind; sweeten with 5 tablespoonfuls sugar,
turn into a jelly mould and serve when cold with the following sauce
made of 1 egg, 2 teaspoonfuls cornstarch and 2 cups water; sweeten
to taste; add a little butter; stir this over the fire till just
about to boil; add a little nutmeg, the juice of 1 lemon and serve
when cold with the pudding; or serve with custard sauce.

580. +Tapioca Pudding (with Lemon Sauce).+-- Soak 1 cup tapioca in 1
quart milk for 2 or 3 hours; put this in a saucepan and add ½
teaspoonful salt and 2 tablespoonfuls butter; set the saucepan in a
vessel of boiling water and boil till tapioca is soft; turn into a
jelly mould and set aside to cool; for the sauce pare 1 lemon as
thinly as possible and boil the skin for 20 minutes, changing the
water 3 times; cut the peel in small strips like straws; place a
saucepan with 1 cup sugar, ½ cup water and the lemon peel over the
fire and boil for 10 minutes; in serving turn the pudding onto a
dish and pour the cold sauce over it. This pudding may be served
with vanilla or lemon custard sauce. Tapioca prepared this way may
also be put into cups.

581. +Tapioca Pudding (with Apples).+-- Soak ½ cup tapioca in cold
water for 2 hours; then mix it with ½ cup sugar, 1 quart milk, 4
eggs and 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract; pare and core 6 pippin or
greening apples, put them in a pan with water, cover them with
another tin pan and let them boil 5 minutes; remove the apples
carefully, put them into a pudding dish, pour the tapioca mixture
over them and bake in the oven; serve with hard sauce or send it to
table without sauce sprinkled with powdered sugar.

582. +Apple Tapioca Pudding.+-- Soak 1 cup tapioca over night in 4
cups water; next morning add about 6 large tart apples, chopped very
fine (or more, according to size), and add 1 cup sugar; bake slowly
until done; to be eaten either warm or cold with cream. A delicate
dish for invalids.

583. +Farina Custard Pudding.+-- Boil 3 tablespoonfuls farina in 1
quart milk with ½ teaspoonful salt; when cold mix it with 4 well
beaten eggs, ½ cup sugar and 1½ teaspoonfuls essence of lemon; put
into a pudding dish and bake till custard is set; eat hot or cold
without sauce. This pudding may also be made with a meringue the
same as Cornstarch Meringue.

584. +Rose Pudding.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup cold water 15
minutes; then add 1 cup boiling water, the yolks of 6 eggs, 6
tablespoonfuls sugar, the peel of 1 lemon and 1 pint white wine;
stir this with an egg beater till it nearly boils; then remove
instantly, add a little cochineal to color it to a beautiful pink
and set aside to cool; when cold and beginning to thicken stir in
the whites beaten to a stiff froth; turn into a mould previously
rinsed with cold water and sprinkled with sugar and set the form on
ice for 2 hours; when ready to serve turn the pudding onto a dish
and send vanilla sauce to table with it.

585. +Figaro Pudding.+-- Soak 1 ounce gelatine in a little water for
15 minutes; place a saucepan with 1 pint sweet cream, the yolks of 4
eggs and 6 tablespoonfuls sugar over the fire and stir until nearly
boiling; add the gelatine and stir till it is dissolved; remove it
from the fire and set aside to cool, stirring it now and then; when
quite cold and beginning to thicken stir in lightly 1 pint whipped
cream and flavor with vanilla; rinse out a mould with cold water,
sprinkle with sugar, fill in the cream and set in a cool place to
form; serve with cold strawberry sauce.

586. +Farina Melusine (with Apples).+-- Bring 1 quart milk to a boil,
add, stirring constantly, 1 cup farina and stir until it forms into
a stiff paste and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; transfer
it to a dish; when cold stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter to a cream and
add alternately the yolks of 6 eggs, the farina, 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar, the rind of 1 lemon and lastly the beaten whites; pare and
core 8 large tart apples, put them in a long pan over the fire, add
1 quart boiling water, cover with another pan of same size and steam
them 5 minutes (no longer); then remove carefully, lay them into a
long shaped pudding dish, put a teaspoonful jelly into each apple
and pour the farina mixture over so the apples are entirely covered;
bake in a medium hot oven about ¾ hour and serve with the following
sauce:--Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter with 1 cup powdered sugar to a
cream, add the yolks of 2 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls rum or Cognac,
a little nutmeg and lastly the whites beaten to a stiff froth;
sufficient for a family of 8 persons.

587. +Farina Beignets.+-- Bring 1 pint milk with 1 tablespoonful
butter to a boil and add, stirring constantly, 1 cup farina;
continue stirring until it loosens itself from the bottom of
saucepan; transfer the farina to a dish and when cold mix it by
degrees with the yolks of 3 eggs, the grated rind of 1 lemon and 1
tablespoonful sugar; divide this into equal parts the size of an
egg, roll them into oblong shapes, dip them into the beaten whites,
roll in fine bread crumbs and fry in boiling lard; serve them dusted
with sugar or send fruit sauce to table with them.

588. +Farina Pudding (without Eggs).+-- Boil 3 pints milk with a
little salt and while boiling sprinkle in slowly 5 tablespoonfuls
farina; set the saucepan with the farina in a vessel of hot water
and continue the boiling for ¾ hour; pour it into a jelly mould
which has been rinsed with cold water and sprinkled with sugar and
serve cold with either wine fruit or vanilla sauce; or sprinkle with
sugar. This pudding may also be eaten with cream or milk, and is
also nice cut into slices and fried; or dip the slices into beaten
egg, roll in fine bread crumbs, fry and serve for breakfast with
meat.

589. +Farina Koch (with Chocolate).+-- Boil 3 cups milk, add 5
tablespoonfuls farina and stir constantly until thick; transfer to a
dish and when cold stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter to a cream, add by
degrees the yolks of 5 eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar and add the
farina by a spoonful at a time; add lastly the whites beaten to a
stiff froth; divide the mixture into 2 halves; mix ½ with 2 ounces
grated vanilla chocolate; put first a layer of the white farina
mixture, then a layer of the chocolate mixture into a well buttered
pudding dish; repeat this operation, lay on top some almonds cut
into strips, sprinkle over some sugar and bake ¾ hour in a medium
hot oven; it may be served with or without sauce; send to table in
the same dish in which it was baked; either set in a silver dish or
pin a napkin around it.

590. +Farina Souflée (with Almonds and Raisins).+-- Boil ¼ pound
farina in 2½ cups milk and 1½ tablespoonfuls butter until thick;
when cold mix it with the yolks of 6 eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar,
a little salt, 2 ounces finely chopped almonds, 10 bitter almonds,
2 ounces seedless raisins and the 6 whites beaten to a stiff froth;
bake in a buttered form and serve as soon as done with raspberry or
wine sauce.

591. +Farina Pudding (with Almonds).+-- Boil 1 quart milk and while
boiling sprinkle in slowly 4 tablespoonfuls farina; add 4
tablespoonfuls finely chopped almonds and continue boiling for 20
minutes; sweeten with 4 tablespoonfuls sugar; when done remove from
fire and add the yolks of 4 eggs; pour it into a glass dish, beat
the whites with 4 tablespoonfuls currant, apple or cranberry jelly
to a stiff froth and spread it over the pudding; serve with claret
sauce made as follows:--Put ½ pint water with 3 slices of lemon,
a piece of cinnamon and 2 cloves over the fire and boil 5 minutes;
then add 1 teaspoonful Bermuda arrowroot and boil 2 minutes; take it
from the fire, add ½ pint claret, sweeten with sugar, strain and
serve with the pudding when cold. If arrowroot is not handy use
cornstarch.

592. +Fine Farina Pudding (boiled).+-- Boil 1 cup farina in 1 pint
milk with a little salt and ½ tablespoonful butter until it becomes
thick and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; when cold stir ¼
pound butter to a cream and add alternately 5 tablespoonfuls sugar,
the yolks of 8 eggs and the boiled farina by a spoonful at a time;
add lastly the beaten whites and grated rind and juice of 1 lemon;
butter a pudding form, sprinkle with fine bread crumbs, fill in the
mixture, close tightly and boil 2 hours; serve with wine cream sauce
(see Sauce). NOTE.--This pudding should be served as soon as taken
out of the form.

593. +Farina Souflée.+-- Bring 1 pint milk with 1 tablespoonful
butter to a boil and add by degrees, stirring constantly, 1 cup
farina; continue stirring until it has formed into a stiff paste and
loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; then transfer it to a dish
and set aside to cool; stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream and
add alternately the yolks of 5 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, the
grated rind of 1 lemon and the farina paste by a spoonful at a time;
stir with a potato masher until all is well mixed; add lastly the
whites beaten to a stiff froth; fill the mixture into a well
buttered pudding form and bake ¾ hour; dust the souflée with sugar
and serve as soon as done; send raspberry or any kind of fruit sauce
to table with it.

594. +Farina Mush.+-- Put 1 quart milk in a saucepan over the fire
and when it boils add gradually, stirring constantly, 1 cup farina;
add ½ teaspoonful salt, a small piece of butter and continue
stirring and boiling for 10 minutes; then add by degrees 1 pint milk
and boil a few minutes longer; serve on a dish dusted with sugar and
if the flavor is liked sprinkle a little cinnamon over; some finely
chopped almonds may be added if liked; or put the farina into a
dish, sprinkle thickly with sugar and hold a red hot poker over it
to brown the sugar.

595. +Farina Pudding (cold).+-- Boil 1 quart milk with ½ teaspoonful
salt, ½ tablespoonful butter and while stirring constantly sprinkle
in slowly 5 tablespoonfuls farina; continue the boiling for 20
minutes; when done remove it to side of stove, add 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar, the yolks of 4 eggs, and while hot add the whites beaten to a
stiff froth; fill this into a form, set it in a cool place and serve
with strawberry sauce made as follows:--Place a saucepan over the
fire with 1 cup water; dissolve 1 heaping teaspoonful cornstarch in
a little cold water, add it to the contents of saucepan, boil for a
few minutes, transfer to a dish and mix with the juice of ½ lemon,
a little Rhine wine and ½ pint fresh strawberry juice.

596. +Fine Farina Pudding (with Vanilla Sauce).+-- Boil 5
tablespoonfuls farina in 1 quart milk with a little salt the same
way as in preceding recipe; as soon as done add 4 tablespoonfuls
sugar, and while hot mix it with the whites of 6 eggs beaten to a
stiff froth; fill the mixture into a jelly mould which has been
rinsed with cold water and sprinkled with granulated sugar and set
on ice to cool; put the 6 yolks with 1 quart milk and 4
tablespoonfuls sugar over the fire and stir until just about to
boil; remove instantly from the fire and flavor with essence of
vanilla.

597. +Figaro Pudding.+-- Boil 1 pint milk with a little salt and 1
tablespoonful butter and while boiling sprinkle in slowly 8
tablespoonfuls farina; stir and boil till the farina is thick and
loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; remove it to a dish to cool;
stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream and add alternately the yolks
of 8 eggs, 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, the grated rind of 1 lemon and
the boiled farina by a spoonful at a time; add lastly the whites
beaten to a stiff froth; now divide this mixture into 3 parts; color
first part by stirring a few spoonfuls cocoa into it; add to second
part a little cochineal for the red; the third part leave white; put
this into a well buttered form in 3 layers and boil 2 hours; serve
with wine cream sauce.

598. +Apples au beurre.+-- Pare, cut and quarter 12 large tart
apples, remove the cores and put the apples in a wide kettle with ¼
pound melted butter, ¼ pound sugar and 1 teaspoonful vanilla
extract; cover and let them simmer over a slow fire for 10 minutes;
then turn each piece over, add 2 tablespoonfuls water and let them
stew till tender, but not broken; transfer the apples to a dish;
pile them up high in center; add 4 tablespoonfuls apple jelly to the
syrup, let it boil up and if too thick add a little more water; pour
it over the apples and lay around the edge fleurons of puff paste.

599. +Apple Meringue.+-- Pare, core and cut into quarters 12 large
tart apples and stew them the same as in foregoing recipe; put the
cores and peels covered with water over the fire and boil to a pulp;
strain through a jelly bag; measure the liquor; allow for 1 pint
liquor 1 pound sugar; boil the liquor 10 minutes; then add the
sugar; stir until melted; then remove from fire; pile the apples up
high in a dish, pour over the jelly and when cold cover with a thick
layer of meringue; set it for a few minutes in a cool oven and serve
when cold. Apple marmalade may be used instead of apple jelly and
put into the dish in alternate layers with the apples.

600. +Apples (with Whipped Cream).+-- Pare, core and cut into
quarters 1 dozen large tart apples; boil them in rich sugar syrup
till tender, but not broken; remove the apples carefully to a glass
dish; boil the syrup a little longer and pour it over the apples;
when cold put over a thin layer of currant jelly and over this a
thick layer of whipped cream sweetened with sugar and flavored with
vanilla.

601. +Peches à la Condé.+-- Boil 10 ounces rice for 5 minutes in cold
water, drain in a colander and rinse with cold water; return the
rice to saucepan with 1½ pints sweet cream and boil until tender and
thick; then add 1½ tablespoonfuls butter, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar,
a pinch of salt, 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla extract and the yolks of 4
eggs; butter a plain border mould, dust well with flour, put in the
rice and bake 15 minutes; then set it in a warm place; pare and cut
into halves 1½ dozen peaches and boil them in sugar syrup till a
straw will pierce through them easily; take the fruit out carefully
and lay it on a sieve to drain; crack the pits, take out the
kernels, scald them in boiling water, remove the brown skins and cut
the kernels into strips; put them into the peach syrup and boil
slowly till syrup begins to thicken; put the peaches back into the
syrup and set them in a warm place; shortly before serving turn the
rice border onto a round dish, put the peaches in center, pile them
up, pour the syrup over the fruit and a little over the border and
serve at once. Apricots, apples or pears the same way.

602. +Apricots à la parisienne.+-- Pare 12 or 15 ripe apricots, cut
them in halves and boil in sugar syrup; take them out and set aside
to cool; boil 3 cups milk with ½ tablespoonful butter, 4
tablespoonfuls sugar and a pinch of salt; mix 4 tablespoonfuls
cornstarch with 1 cup cold milk, stir it into the boiling milk and
continue stirring and boiling for a few minutes; remove to side of
stove, add the yolks of 4 eggs and 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla extract;
and while hot stir in the 4 whites beaten to a stiff froth; rinse
out a border mould with cold water, sprinkle thickly with granulated
sugar, put in the cornstarch mixture and set on ice to cool; shortly
before serving turn the border onto a round dish and pile the
apricots high up in the center; reduce the syrup by boiling it a
little longer and pour over the fruit and border when cold. Made of
apples, peaches, pears, cherries, pineapples, currants or
raspberries the same way. NOTE.--Stewed cherries or finely cut
pineapples may be stirred into the cornstarch before putting it into
the form and the border. When turned on the dish it may be decorated
with fresh strawberries, cherries or raspberries. The cornstarch may
be put into a round form. When turned out onto a dish lay the fruit
all over it, cover the whole with a meringue and serve the syrup the
fruit was boiled in as a sauce with it; or serve vanilla sauce with
it.

603. +Pineapple Croutes.+-- Pare and cut a small pineapple into small
pieces and boil them in sugar syrup till tender; take the pineapple
out and reduce the syrup by boiling it down; cut a loaf of stale
bread into slices ¼ inch in thickness, cut the slices into rounds
with a cake cutter and toast them to a handsome brown color; lay
them in a pan and dust with sugar; set them for a few minutes in a
hot oven to glaze; spread a thick layer of apple marmalade over the
bottom of a round dish; also spread each piece of toast with the
marmalade; set them around the edge of dish, pour over some of the
syrup and put the pineapple in the center. Brioche when a few days
old may be used instead of bread.

604. +Cherry Croutes+ are made the same as Pineapple Croûtes. Peach
Croûtes and Apricot Croûtes are also made the same as Pineapple
Croûtes.

605. +Apples in Jelly, No. 1.+-- Pare 1 dozen Spitzenberg apples and
remove the cores with an apple corer without breaking the fruit; put
a wide kettle or saucepan over the fire with sufficient water to
cover the apples, let it come to a boil, put in the apples and boil
till a straw will easily pierce through them; then transfer them
carefully to a long glass dish; boil the liquor down to 1 quart and
add 1 cup sugar and 1 ounce gelatine soaked for 15 minutes in a
little cold water; stir it into the apple syrup, boil for a few
minutes and then set aside; when nearly cold pour the syrup over the
apples and set on ice to get firm; serve with whipped cream or
vanilla sauce. Peaches, pears or quinces are made the same way.
Finely chopped nuts sprinkled over before the jelly has hardened or
freshly grated cocoanut sprinkled over is a great improvement. Half
these quantities will be sufficient for a family of 6.

606. +Apples in Jelly, No. 2.+-- Pare 1 dozen pippin or greening
apples, remove the cores without breaking the fruit and lay the
apples into water with the juice of 1 lemon (this will keep them
from turning); put the peels and cores of apples into a kettle,
cover with water and boil until soft; strain first through
cheesecloth and then through a flannel bag till the liquor is clear;
return the liquor to kettle and when it boils put in the apples;
boil until a straw will easily pierce through them; then remove the
apples carefully to a glass dish; measure the apple water and allow
1 pound sugar for 1 pint water; boil the liquid 20 minutes; then add
the sugar, boil 3 minutes and let it cool off a little; then pour it
over the apples and serve when cold without sauce.

607. +Apples (with Custard).+-- Pare, core and cut into quarters 6
large pippin or greening apples; put ½ cup sugar with 1 cup water in
a wide, low pan over the fire and boil 2 minutes; put in as many
apple quarters as will lay in without crowding one another; boil
until a straw will pierce through them easily; then take the apples
out with a skimmer, lay them in a pudding dish and boil the
remaining apples the same way; when the apples are all done and laid
in the dish make a custard in the following way:--Beat 5 eggs until
very light and add 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla and
1 quart cold milk; pour this over the apples and bake till the
custard is firm; when done remove the dish from oven and serve when
cold with a napkin folded around the dish.

608. +Apples (with Currant Jelly).+-- Take 6 large greening apples, 1
cup currant jelly and 1 cup sugar; pare, core and cut the apples
into quarters and lay them in cold water; put the cores and peels in
a saucepan, cover with water and boil till tender; strain them
through a jelly bag and return liquid to saucepan; as soon as it
boils put in some of the apples (not too many at once, so they do
not crowd one another) and boil until a straw will easily pierce
through them; then take them out carefully, lay on a dish to cool
and boil the remaining apples the same way; when all are boiled
again strain the liquid and boil it 20 minutes; then measure it; add
to 1 pint liquid 1 pound sugar and stir until sugar is dissolved;
then add the currant jelly and stir and boil 2 minutes; then remove
from fire; rinse out a mould with cold water, sprinkle with sugar,
lay in the apple quarters and pour the liquid when nearly cold over
them; set on ice to get firm; in serving turn them onto a dish and
lay a circle of whipped cream around the dish or the whites of 3
eggs beaten to a stiff froth and mixed with 1 tablespoonful powdered
sugar; put the yolks of the 3 eggs with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1
pint milk in saucepan and stir over the fire till just about to
boil; add 1 teaspoonful vanilla and when cold serve with the apples.
This makes a pretty dish for supper or dessert.

609. +Steamed Apples.+-- Pare and core ½ dozen large tart apples and
stick 6 cloves all around into each apple; put them in a pan, put a
little sugar into each apple and pour some boiling water in the pan;
cover and steam them on top of the stove until a straw will
penetrate through them easily; transfer the apples to a dish and set
aside to cool; boil the peels and cores in water till soft; then
strain through a jelly bag, add the water the apples were boiled in
and boil the two together 20 minutes; then add for 1 pint liquid 1
pound sugar and boil 10 minutes more; put 1 teaspoonful currant
jelly into each apple and set aside to cool; arrange the apples
neatly in a long dish, pour the apple jelly over them and set in a
cool place till wanted.

610. +Baked Apples, No. 1.+-- Pare some large greening or pippin
apples and remove the cores without breaking the fruit; set the
apples in a shallow tin pan, fill them with sugar and pour a little
water in bottom of pan; set them in a hot oven to bake till done;
care should be taken not to have them broken; when done remove them
from oven, pile up high in a glass dish and dust with fine sugar.

611. +Baked Apples, No. 2.+-- Wash and dry some large tart apples and
remove the cores without breaking the fruit; set them in a long pan,
add a little water and bake in a hot oven; when done transfer them
to a dish, sprinkle over some sugar and serve hot.

612. +Baked Apples and Cocoanut.+-- Pare and core 6 large greening
apples without breaking them, set in a pan and fill each apple with
sugar; boil the peels and cores in water till soft and strain them
through a bag; pour the liquor over the apples, cover with another
pan and boil on top of stove till they are half done; transfer the
apples to another pan, sprinkle them thickly with freshly grated
cocoanut mixed with sugar and set in oven to bake till done and to a
light brown; in the meantime strain the liquor the apples were
boiled in into a saucepan and measure it; allow for 1 pint liquid 1
pound sugar and boil 5 minutes; when the apples are done remove them
to a glass dish, pour over the apple syrup and sprinkle a thick
layer of fresh cocoanut and sugar over; serve when cold.

613. +Pound Sweets (baked).+-- Remove the cores from ½ dozen pound
sweet apples without breaking them; put them in a long, shallow tin
pan, add a little water and bake till tender; remove them to a glass
dish, put into each apple 1 teaspoonful apple or currant jelly and
dust them over with sugar; serve with or without sweet cream.

614. +Pound Sweets (in Syrup).+-- Pare, core and cut into halves ½
dozen large sweet apples and lay them in cold water with a little
lemon juice or a little vinegar; put the cores and peels over the
fire, cover with water and boil till soft; strain through a coarse
bag, return the liquor to saucepan and add the juice of 1 lemon,
a little of the rind and 1 cup sugar; as soon as it boils put in the
apples; let them boil until a straw will pierce through them easily;
remove the apples to a dish and strain the liquor over them; serve
when cold. A few whole cloves and a piece of cinnamon may be added
if the flavor is liked.

615. +Apples Baked with Jelly.+-- Pare and core 6 good sized greening
or pippin apples and stick cloves all around the top near the
opening into each one; put them in a tin pan in a hot oven, add ½
cup water and bake till done; put the peels and cores in a saucepan,
cover with water and boil till tender; strain through a jelly bag,
return the juice to saucepan and boil 20 minutes; then add for 1
pint juice 1 pound sugar and boil 10 minutes; remove the apples to a
glass dish, pour the apple jelly over them and serve cold.

616. +Apple à la Neige.+-- Pare, core and cut into quarters 6 large
tart apples; put them in saucepan with the peel of ½ lemon, ½ cup
water and cover and stew till the apples fall apart; then press them
through a coarse sieve or colander (the former is the best), add ½
cup sugar and set aside; when cold beat the whites of 6 eggs to a
stiff froth, slowly add the apple sauce and continue the beating for
½ hour; heap it on a glass dish, set lady fingers divided in two all
around the dish with bits of currant jelly between and serve with
the following sauce:--Stir the yolks with 4 tablespoonfuls sugar and
1 teaspoonful vanilla extract to a cream; add slowly 1 pint cold
milk and serve with the above dish. This is a pretty supper dish and
a nice dessert. This dish may be made of peaches or cranberries the
same way.

617. +Apple Sauce.+-- Pare, core and cut into small pieces 12 good
sized tart apples, put them into a saucepan with ½ pint water and
cover and stew till tender; add 1 cup sugar, press it through a
sieve or colander, pour into a glass dish and serve either warm or
cold.

618. +Apple Sauce (economical).+-- Wash 1 dozen tart apples and cut
them into pieces; put them over the fire in a porcelain-lined or
agate saucepan, add 1 cup water, cover tightly and stew till tender;
when done press them through a sieve or colander (the former is
best), sweeten with sugar and serve. Apple sauce made in this way
needs only half the apples, and is equally as nice when made right
as if the apples were peeled. Apples should never be stewed in rusty
tins or iron pots, as they will spoil the appearance of the sauce.
Take either a porcelain-lined saucepan, an agate kettle, a new tin
kettle or pan or a stone saucepan. Either of these are good for
stewing fruit in.

619. +Apples Stewed with Lemons.+-- Pare, core and quarter 12 good
sized tart apples; put a kettle over the fire with 1 quart water, 1
cup sugar, 1 large lemon cut into thin slices and freed from the
pits and boil for a few minutes; then put in the apples and boil
until a straw will pierce through them easily; then remove from
fire, put the apples into a dish and pour the strained syrup over
them; serve either warm or cold.

620. +Apples Stewed Whole with Currants.+-- Pare and core 1 dozen
medium sized tart apples without breaking them; boil 1 cup sugar
with 1 pint water to a syrup, put in the apples and boil till a
straw will pierce through them easily; then take out the apples
carefully; put ½ cup well washed and dried currants into the syrup
and boil 5 minutes; pour it over the apples and serve when cold.
Finely cut citron or seedless raisins may be used instead of
currants, or use all three together.

621. +Stewed Dried Apples.+-- Wash and soak the apples for 1 hour,
put them in a saucepan, cover with cold water (or put them on with
the water they were soaked in), cover, boil slowly till tender and
sweeten them with sugar; serve either hot or cold.

622. +Stewed Evaporated Apples.+-- Wash ½ pound evaporated apples in
several waters, put them in a saucepan, cover with cold water and
boil till tender; add ½ cup sugar and boil for a few minutes;
transfer them to a dish and serve either hot or cold; or press the
apples when done through a sieve and serve in a glass dish.

623. +Peaches Stewed Whole.+-- Pare 1 quart small peaches; boil 1 cup
sugar with 1 cup water for a few minutes, put in the peaches and
boil till the fruit shows signs of baking; then remove and when
nearly cold pour them into a glass dish and serve cold. Apricots are
stewed the same way.

624. +Stewed Dried Peaches.+-- Wash and soak ½ pound dried peaches
for several hours in cold water, put them with the water they were
soaked in over the fire and boil slowly till tender; add sufficient
sugar to sweeten and let them boil for 2 minutes longer; transfer
the fruit to a dish and serve cold.

625. +Stewed Cherries.+-- Remove the pits from 2 pounds cherries;
boil 1 cup sugar with 1 pint water to a syrup, put in the cherries
and boil 3 minutes; pour them into a dish and serve when cold. If
the cherries are tasteless add the juice of 1 lemon or use 1 cup
water, 1 cup red wine and a stick of cinnamon. If the cherries are
small stew them with the pits.

626. +Stewed Quinces.+-- Pare and cut the quinces into quarters and
lay them in cold water; put the peels and cores over the fire, cover
with water and boil till tender; strain them through a coarse bag
made of double cheesecloth; put the liquor over the fire and when it
boils add the quinces and boil till they are soft; then add
sufficient sugar to sweeten, boil for a few minutes, pour them into
a dish and set aside to cool till wanted.

627. +Stewed Dried Apricots.+-- Wash and soak ½ pound dried apricots
for 2 hours in cold water, put them with the water they were soaked
in over the fire and boil till done; if the water boils away add
more; add lastly sufficient sugar to sweeten and serve when cold.
Dried cherries are stewed the same way.

628. +Baked Pears.+-- Remove the eyes from 1 dozen nice, ripe pears,
put them in a pan with 1 cup water, sprinkle over a little sugar and
bake till done; remove them to a glass dish, pour over the syrup
from pan, sprinkle with sugar and serve cold.

629. +Stewed Pears.+-- Pare 2 dozen stewing pears (if they are large
cut them in halves or quarters, if small leave them whole); put a
kettle with 1 cup sugar and 2 cups water over the fire and boil a
few minutes; put in the pears and stew till done; pour them into a
dish and serve cold. If the syrup should be too thin a teaspoonful
cornstarch wet with cold water may be added and boiled with them for
a few minutes. A little claret, cinnamon, lemon juice and rind may
also be added if liked.

630. +Stewed Dried Pears.+-- Wash and soak 1 pound dried pears for 2
hours; put them over the fire, covered with cold water, add a small
stick of cinnamon, a little lemon juice and peel and boil until
nearly done; then add 5 tablespoonfuls sugar and boil till done.

631. +Stewed Dried Prunes.+-- Wash 1 pound dried prunes in several
waters, put them in a saucepan, cover with cold water, add the juice
and rind of 1 lemon and stew till tender; if the water boils away
add more; when done add 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, pour them into a
glass dish and serve cold. If the liquor of the prunes should be too
much or too thin dissolve a little cornstarch in cold water, add it
to the prunes and let them boil for a minute; but care must be taken
not to get them too thick.

632. +Prunelles.+-- Wash ½ pound prunelles in several waters and soak
them for 2 hours in cold water; then put them over the fire with the
same water they were soaked in to boil slowly till tender; when
nearly done add 1 cup sugar and boil till done; pour them into a
dish and serve when cold. If not sweet enough add more sugar.

633. +Stewed Cranberries.+-- 1 quart cranberries, 2 cups sugar and 1
cup water; wash and pick over the cranberries carefully, put them in
a saucepan with 1 cup water, cover and stew till tender; then strain
them through a sieve; return the pulp to saucepan and boil for a few
minutes; add the sugar and stir and boil just long enough to melt
the sugar; rinse out a mould with cold water and sprinkle with
granulated sugar; pour the cranberries when nearly cold into the
mould and set it in a cool place to get firm.

634. +Stewed Huckleberries.+-- Pick over 1 quart huckleberries, put
them in a colander and rinse with cold water; put a saucepan with ½
cup sugar and ½ cup water over the fire and add the juice of 1
lemon; when it boils add the huckleberries, cover and stew slowly 10
minutes; add 1 teaspoonful cornstarch wet with cold water and boil
for 1 minute; remove the berries from the fire, add ½ cup port wine,
pour them into a dish and serve when cold. They are excellent when
eaten with German pancake, fried bread or French toast. Or put the
huckleberries with ½ cup water, a little lemon juice (or 1
tablespoonful vinegar) and a small stick of cinnamon in a saucepan
over the fire, boil 8 or 10 minutes and sweeten them to taste; break
2 or 3 zwiebacks into small pieces, put them in a dish and pour the
huckleberries over them; remove the cinnamon and serve when cold. ½
cup claret added to the huckleberries adds greatly to the flavor.

635. +Stewed Rhubarb.+-- Pare and cut 2 bunches rhubarb into small
pieces and put over the fire in a porcelain-lined or agate saucepan;
add ½ cup water and boil till soft; add 1½ cups sugar or sweeten to
taste; boil until the sugar is dissolved, pour into a dish and serve
cold.

636. +Stewed Rhubarb (with Eggs).+-- Stew the rhubarb the same as in
foregoing recipe and take it from the fire; beat 3 eggs to a froth
and add 2 tablespoonfuls cold water; then stir in the rhubarb a
little at a time; mix well together and serve cold. If stewed
rhubarb is too thin add 1 teaspoonful cornstarch wet with cold water
and let it boil 1 or 2 minutes.

637. +Compote of Gooseberries.+-- Select 1 quart large gooseberries,
remove heads and stems and wash and drain them; put them in a
kettle, cover with boiling water and boil 5 minutes; pour in a
colander to drain; boil 1 cup sugar with ¼ pound water to a syrup
and add ¾ cup white wine; put the gooseberries in a porcelain or
glass dish and pour the syrup over them; serve when cold.

638. +Compote of Strawberries.+-- Press out the juice from 1 pint
large, ripe strawberries and mix it with 6 tablespoonfuls sugar;
shortly before serving wash and drain 1½ quarts large, ripe
strawberries, put them into a glass dish, sprinkle over 3
tablespoonfuls sugar, pour in half of the cold syrup, shake them up,
pour over the other half and serve at once.

639. +Compote of Cherries.+-- Remove the pits from 2 pounds large
cherries; boil 1¼ cups sugar with ¾ cup water to a syrup, put in the
cherries and boil 2 minutes; pour them into a dish, cover with paper
and set in a cool place; when cool drain off the syrup and reduce it
to one-half by boiling it down; then set aside to cool; in serving
put the cherries into a glass or fine porcelain dish and pour the
cold syrup over them.

640. +Compote of Raspberries.+-- Pick over carefully 1½ quarts
raspberries, put them in a glass dish and set on ice; shortly before
serving sprinkle over 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; press out the juice of
1 pint raspberries, put the liquid with the same quantity of sugar
over the fire and boil 10 minutes; let it get cold and pour the
syrup just before serving over the raspberries. Currant juice may be
used instead of raspberry juice. A compote may also be prepared with
half currants and half raspberries.

641. +Compote of Greengages (or large Egg Plums).+-- Select 3 dozen
ripe plums, either greengages or the large egg plums, prick them
with a needle all around the stem, put them in a kettle with boiling
water and let them boil 30 minutes; drain them on a sieve; boil 1½
cups sugar with 1 cup water to a syrup; put the plums in a dish,
pour the boiling syrup over, cover with paper and set them in a cool
place for 2 hours; then drain off the syrup and reduce to one-half
by boiling it down; arrange the plums nicely in a dish and pour the
cold syrup over them.

642. +Compote of Plums.+-- Choose 3 dozen large blue plums, cut them
open on side, remove the pits and pare off the skins; boil 1 cup
sugar with 1 cup water, put in the plums and boil a few minutes;
pour them into a dish, cover with paper and let them cool; when cold
pour the plums onto a sieve and drain off all the liquid; put the
syrup over the fire and boil 10 minutes; when cold put the plums
into a glass dish and pour the cold syrup over them.

643. +Compote of Oranges.+-- Pare and cut 10 large oranges into
slices, remove the pits and sprinkle 6 tablespoonfuls sugar over
them; let them stand 1 hour; drain off the syrup, put it over the
fire, add the juice of 1 lemon and boil slowly 8 minutes; then set
aside to cool; just before serving pour the syrup over the oranges
and send to table in a glass dish.

644. +Compote of Prunes.+-- Wash 1 pound French prunes in several
waters, put them in a saucepan, add sufficient red wine to cover,
add a small piece of whole cinnamon and the peel of 1 lemon and boil
slowly for 2 hours, or until they are soft; when done add 4
tablespoonfuls sugar and as soon as melted remove them from the
fire; serve when cold in a glass dish.

645. +Compote of Raisins.+-- Remove the pits from 1 pound large
raisins, put them in a saucepan with ½ pint water, ½ pint Madeira
wine and 1 cup sugar and boil them slowly for 1 hour; serve in a
glass dish when cold.

646. +Compote of Dates.+-- Cut 1 pound dates open at the side and
remove the pits; put the dates with a little Malaga wine, ½ cup
water and 4 tablespoonfuls sugar over the fire and boil slowly
nearly 1 hour; then serve when cold.

647. +Compote de Marrons.+-- Remove the shell from 2 dozen large
Italian chestnuts and boil the nuts for a few minutes in water; take
them out one at a time and remove the brown skin; boil ½ pound sugar
with ½ cup water, put in the chestnuts, pour them together with the
syrup into a stone dish, cover and set them in a cool place; next
day pour off the syrup, boil it up, add 1 teaspoonful vanilla
extract and pour it over the nuts; repeat this once more and serve
when cold.

648. +Compote Chaude de Marrons.+-- Shortly before serving roast 2 or
3 dozen large Italian chestnuts in the oven, remove the shells and
lay the nuts into a hot dish; put 1 gill rum in a small saucepan
with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; let it get hot, pour over the
chestnuts, light the rum and bring it burning to table.

649. +Compote of Pineapple.+-- Cut a large, ripe pineapple into thin
slices, pare them carefully and remove the core in center; boil 1
cup sugar with ½ cup water; lay the pineapple slices into a dish and
pour the syrup over them boiling hot; cover and let them stand 2
hours; shortly before serving lay the slices in a glass dish and
pour the syrup through a fine sieve over them.

650. +Compote of Quinces.+-- Chose ½ dozen large apple quinces, pare
and cut them into quarters, remove the cores and lay the quinces in
cold water; put the peels and cores in a kettle, cover with water
and boil till soft; strain them first through a coarse bag, then
through a flannel bag; return the liquor to kettle, add 1 cup sugar,
boil for a few minutes, put in the quinces and boil till tender; put
them into a dish and strain the syrup over them.

651. +Compote of Peaches.+-- Cut into halves 20 large, sound peaches,
pare them carefully and remove the pits; crack the pits open, take
out the kernels, scald them in boiling water and remove the brown
skins; place a porcelain-lined or agate kettle with 1 cup sugar and
1 cup water over the fire and boil a few minutes; put in the peaches
and kernels and boil from 6-8 minutes; pour them into a deep
porcelain dish, cover with paper and set aside; when cold put them
in a sieve or colander over the kettle the peaches were boiled in;
drain off all the liquid and boil it down to one-half; shortly
before serving pile the peaches up high in a glass dish and pour the
syrup over them cold.

652. +Compote of Apricots+ is made the same as Compote of Peaches.

653. +Compote of Pears.+-- Pare and cut 2 dozen medium sized ripe
pears into halves, remove the cores and put the pears in cold water
with the juice of 1 lemon or 2 tablespoonfuls white vinegar; place a
kettle over the fire with 1 pint water, 10 tablespoonfuls sugar, the
juice of 1 lemon, half the rind and boil 3 minutes; remove the scum,
put in the pears and boil till a straw will pierce through them
easily; then pour them in a deep stone bowl, cover with paper and
set aside; when cold drain off the liquor and boil it down to
one-half; then set aside to cool; shortly before serving pile the
pears up high in a glass dish and pour the syrup over them cold. If
large pears are taken use a smaller quantity; if small pears are
chosen use a larger quantity, leave them whole, cut the stems off
half way and pare them.

654. +Compote de Melons.+-- Select 1 large muskmelon (not too ripe),
cut it in half, remove the seeds with a tablespoon, cut the melon
into large pieces, pare off the skin and cut each long piece in two;
put the melon pieces in a saucepan, cover with boiling water and
boil 5 minutes; take them out with a skimmer and lay the melon
pieces on a dish to cool; put a kettle over the fire with 1 pound
sugar and 1 pint water and boil a few minutes; put in the melon and
boil 20 minutes; pour it into a dish, cover with paper and set in a
cool place; when cold drain off the syrup, return it to kettle and
boil slowly 10 minutes; then set aside to cool; pile the melon up
high in a glass dish and pour the cold syrup over it. A piece of
green ginger root or the juice of 1 lemon may be boiled with the
melon.

655. +Compote of Watermelon.+-- Select a nice, ripe watermelon, cut
it in half, then into slices, remove the black pits and cut the red
part into small pieces; take for 1 quart of such pieces 2 cups
sugar, 1 pint water, a piece of green ginger and the juice of 1
lemon; put sugar, ginger and lemon juice over the fire and boil 5
minutes; put in the melon pieces and boil slowly about 20 minutes;
pour into a dish and cover with paper; when cold drain off the
syrup, return it to kettle and boil 10 to 15 minutes; arrange the
melon nicely in a glass dish and pour the cold syrup over it; remove
the ginger before sending to table. The white part of the melon may
be used for preserving. If the melon is a large one part of it may
be used for compote and the other part cut up into slices and
served. A third part may be used as a fruit salad. (See Fruit
Salad.)

656. +Compote of Apples.+-- Choose medium sized tart apples, pare and
cut them into halves, take out the cores, round the edges and lay
them in cold water with lemon juice; boil 1 pound sugar with 1 pint
water and the rind and juice of 1 lemon in a wide, low saucepan; put
in the apples and let them boil 3 minutes; then turn the apples
around, cover the pan and set it on side of stove, where they will
stop boiling; let them stand 10 minutes; then thrust a straw through
them; if it goes through easily they are done; if not, boil them for
a minute longer; remove them from fire and set aside; when cold take
the apples out of the syrup and lay them on a sieve; boil the syrup
down until it thickens; pile the apples up in a glass dish and pour
the syrup over when cold.

657. +Compote de Strélity.+-- Pare, core, cut into quarters and then
into fine slices 12 large pippin apples; boil 1 cup sugar with 1 cup
Rhine wine, 1 cup water, the juice of 1 lemon and 3 ounces finely
sliced citron; put in the apples and boil them for a few minutes;
then set aside to cool; soak 1 ounce gelatine in 1 cup water 20
minutes; add 1 cup boiling water and stir until dissolved; add it to
the apples and boil for 1 minute; then remove from fire; when cold
and beginning to thicken rinse out some small cups or forms with
cold water, sprinkle each one with granulated sugar, fill them ¾
full of apples and set on ice; boil ¾ cup sugar with ½ cup Rhine
wine and a little lemon juice to a syrup and set it in a cool place
until wanted; in serving turn the apples out of the cups, put them
on a round or oval-shaped dish and pour the syrup over them; or
serve the apples with whipped cream.




PIES.


658. +Directions for Making Pies.+-- To succeed in making good pastry
the following rules should be observed:--Flour should be of the best
quality, dry and sifted before using. Butter, unless fresh, should
be washed several times in cold water and dried in a napkin. Lard
should be sweet, and is best when tried out from leaf lard. If suet
is used it should be fresh, chopped fine and freed from all skin.
During the process of chopping it should be dredged with flour. Beef
dripping should be clarified, and if the dripping has any odor or
by-taste a very disagreeable flavor will be imparted to the paste.
Strict cleanliness must be observed. All utensils used for pastry
making should be clean and kept exclusively for that purpose.
Prepare the crust as quickly as possible and do not touch it with
your hands any more than necessary. When the crust is ready take a
pie plate (agate pie plates are the best) and dust it with flour; do
not grease it with butter or lard. Cut off a portion of the crust,
roll it out thin, lay it over the plate, press it down lightly with
the hand, set the plate in front of you, press with the palms of
both hands against the edge of plate and cut the paste which hangs
over the edge off with your fingers. The plate is then ready to
receive the ingredients of which the pie is to be made. If pumpkin,
cocoanut or custard pie is to be made, brush the surface of crust
over with beaten egg and sprinkle over 2 tablespoonfuls finely
sifted bread or cracker crumbs; then fill in the mixture. This keeps
the crust dry and prevents it from being heavy. Pies that are made
of stewed or preserved fruit should also be treated the same way.
For fine meringue pies the crust should be baked before the mixture
is put in. This is done in the following manner:--Line the pie plate
with crust and brush the edge over with beaten egg; then roll some
pie crust very thin, cut it into strips 1 inch wide and cut one side
of the strips into scallops with a knife; wet the edge of crust on
the pie plate with beaten egg or water; then lay the strip around
the edge of plate so the scallops stand a little above the edge;
next lay some thin, buttered brown paper into the plate all over the
crust, fill the plate with dry peas and bake it in a medium hot oven
till crust is done; then take it from the oven, remove paper and
peas, fill in the mixture and bake again till pie is done; draw the
pie to front of oven, spread over the meringue and let it remain in
oven for a few minutes; then transfer it to a cool place and serve
cold. 1 or 2 quarts of dry peas should be kept for this purpose
only. They may be put away in a box or glass jar and can then be
used several times. If the peas should at any time become rancid
from the butter or lard of which the pie crust is made, pour boiling
water over them and drain and rub thoroughly with a dry towel; then
spread them apart on shallow tins and when dry put away until wanted
again. Instead of peas the pie plate may be filled with pieces of
stale bread, which can then be used for bread crumbs; but peas are
best for this purpose.

659. +Pie Crust (quick and good).+-- 2 cups flour, ½ teaspoonful
salt, ½ cup ice water and 1 cup lard; sift flour and salt in a bowl,
add the lard and chop it fine with a knife in the flour; add the
water and mix it with the same knife into a stiff paste; put the
paste on a floured board and work it for a few minutes with the
knife; take a portion from it and roll it out thin; line a pie plate
with it and fill the plate with the ingredients the pie is to be
made of; roll out another portion of paste and spread over the top ½
tablespoonful lard; lay this over the pie with the lard side up,
press the paste off which hangs over the edge of plate with your
hands and place the pie in oven to bake. This crust is excellent,
inexpensive and quickly made; sufficient for 2 large pies.

660. +Rich Pie Crust.+-- ½ pound flour, ½ teaspoonful salt, ½ pound
lard and ½ cup ice water; sift flour and salt into a bowl, add the
water and mix it into a paste; put the paste on a floured board and
work it thoroughly for 5 minutes, or until it does not stick to the
hands; then roll it out into a square about an inch in thickness;
also shape the lard into a square, but 1 inch smaller than the
paste; lay it in center of paste, fold the paste over and place it
for ½ hour on ice; then put it on the board again, dust it under and
over with flour, roll it out 3 times as long as wide with a rolling
pin, fold over one-third to the center, roll over it once, fold the
other end over that, so the paste is three double, roll over it once
with the rolling pin, turn the paste around, roll it out again 3
times as long as wide, fold it up the same way as before and set the
paste again for ½ hour on ice; repeat the folding and rolling twice
more and let it rest each time for ½ hour; when ready to make the
pie roll a portion of the paste out very thin, line pie plate as
directed with it and fill the plate with the ingredients the pie is
to be made of; roll out another portion of the paste, spread the top
thickly with lard, lay the paste over the pie with the lard side up
and remove the paste which hangs over the edge of plate by pressing
against the edge with the palm of your hand; sufficient for 2 large
pies.

661. +Fine Pie Crust.+-- 1 pound flour, 1 teaspoonful salt, ½ pint
ice water, ½ pound lard, 6 ounces butter and the yolk of 1 egg; sift
flour and salt in a bowl, add ½ the lard and chop it fine in the
flour with a knife; put the yolk in the ice water and beat it with
an egg beater till it foams; then add it to the flour and mix it
with the same knife into a stiff paste; turn the paste onto a
floured board and roll it into a square piece about an inch in
thickness; form the remaining lard and the butter also into a square
piece, but 1½ inches smaller on all sides; lay it in center of
paste, fold it over the lard and butter together, first from right
and left, then from and towards you; lay the paste onto a plate and
let it rest for ½ hour on ice; then put it on a board, dust under
and over with flour and roll it out 3 times as long as wide, rolling
always from you; fold over one-third to the center, roll over it
once with the rolling pin, fold the other end over that, so the
paste is 3 double, roll over it once with a rolling pin, turn the
paste around, roll it out again 3 times as long as wide, fold it up
the same as above and set the paste again for ½ hour on ice or in a
cool place; repeat the rolling out and folding up twice more and let
it rest each time ½ hour; after the last rolling let it rest 10
minutes and then use as directed; sufficient for 4 large pies.

662. +Family Pie Crust.+-- ½ pound butter, 6 ounces lard, 1 pound
flour, 1 cup ice water and ½ teaspoonful salt; sift flour and salt
into a bowl, add the lard and chop it up with a broad-bladed knife
into the flour until it is very fine; next pour in the ice water and
mix it with the same knife into a smooth paste; turn it onto a
floured board, dust under and over with flour and roll it out 1 inch
in thickness; divide the butter into 3 parts; put 1 part in small
bits in regular rows all over the paste; then fold it up, first the
right side towards the left, then the left side towards the right,
so the paste has 3 thicknesses; turn it around, roll it out again
the same way, put over the second part of butter, fold it up and
roll out again the same way; put over the third part of butter, fold
it up and roll it out twice more; let it rest for 1 hour on ice or
in a cool place; then use; while the rolling and folding is going on
flour must be sprinkled under and over the paste; the rolling pin
must be kept floured, to keep the paste from sticking to it. This
paste may be made the day before it is to be used, and if it stands
for 2 or 3 days it will not hurt it as long as the paste is kept in
a cool place; sufficient for 4 large pies.

663. +Fine Paste for Meat Pies, Patties and Baked Apple
Dumplings.+-- Put 1 pound sifted flour on a paste board, make a
hollow in center and put in the yolks of 3 eggs and ½ pound butter;
work this quickly with your hands into a stiff paste, adding by
degrees a little ice water; then roll it out 1 inch in thickness and
fold the right and left side to the center, so they meet together;
then fold the other two sides over to the center the same way and
set it for 1 hour on ice or in a cool place; when that time has
expired lay the paste onto a floured board, roll it out 3 times as
long as wide, fold one-third over to the center, roll over it once
with the rolling pin, fold the other third over that, so the paste
has 3 layers, roll out again 3 times as long as wide, fold it up the
same way, let it rest for ½ hour and roll and fold it up once more;
then use. This paste is excellent for chicken, oyster, pigeon or
beefsteak pie; also for baked apple dumplings and fine patties;
sufficient for 1 large pie or for 9 apple dumplings.

664. +Puff Paste.+-- 1 pound flour, a pinch of salt, 1 cup ice water
and 1 pound butter; sift flour in a bowl, add salt and ice water and
mix it into a smooth paste; work it thoroughly on the board with
your hands for 5 minutes, cover and set it for 20 minutes on ice;
knead the butter well in ice water, to remove the salt, and dry it
in a napkin; put the paste onto a floured board and roll it out into
a square about 1½ inches in thickness; press the butter flat, also
into a square, but smaller than the paste; lay the butter in center
of paste and fold the paste first from the right and left side; then
from you and towards you over the butter together; turn the paste
over with the folded side towards the board; dust under and over a
little flour and roll the paste out 3 times as long as wide; fold
the lower third over the center and roll over it once with the
rolling pin; then fold over that the upper third, so the paste is
three double; roll over it once with the rolling pin; turn the paste
around, roll it out again 3 times as long as wide, fold it again 3
double, lay it on a plate and set the paste for 1 hour on ice; then
roll it out again and fold the same way twice; let it rest for ½
hour on ice; roll and fold it twice more, so the paste has been
rolled out and folded up 6 times; after the last rolling let it rest
for 20 minutes and then use. The rolling out and folding together
must be done with the greatest care, so the layers fit exactly over
one another, as the whole success depends upon this. The paste has
attained its greatest lightness when rolled and folded together 6
times; if it is rolled out oftener it will loose in lightness; and
if it is to be used where lightness is not wanted it must be rolled
and folded together from 8 to 10 times. Puff paste is best made in a
cool place, and if handy on a marble slab.

665. +Short Paste (Mürber Teig--German art).+-- ½ pound sifted flour,
6 ounces butter, the yolks of 4 eggs, a pinch of salt, 1
tablespoonful sugar and the grated rind of ½ lemon; knead the butter
in ice water, to remove the salt, and dry it in a napkin; put the
flour on a board, make a hollow in center, put in the yolks, lemon,
sugar, salt and butter and work it quickly into a smooth dough with
your hands; set it on ice for 1 hour before using. Another way:--½
cup butter, the yolks of 3 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls cream, ½
tablespoonful sugar, a pinch of salt and ½ pound flour; mix these
ingredients together the same as above. Short paste (or Mürber Teig)
is used a great deal in Germany the same as pie crust in America,
and is excellent when made right. A very nice pie is made as
follows:--Roll the paste out very thin, cover a pie plate with it
(one which is not very deep), cut off what hangs over the edge of
plate, spread a thick layer of any kind of fruit marmalade over it,
cover with a thin layer of the paste and bake in a quick oven; or
bake thin layers of the paste the same as Jelly Cake, and when done
lay 2 together with jelly, fruit marmalade or whipped cream between
them. Another way to use it is:--Roll the paste out ⅛ of an inch in
thickness, cut it into rounds with a cake cutter, brush them over
with beaten egg and sprinkle chopped nuts and sugar over them; bake
in a medium hot oven and serve with wine.

666. +Neapolitan Paste.+-- Scald 5 ounces almonds in boiling water
and let them lay for a few minutes; then remove the brown skins and
pound the almonds fine in a wedgewood mortar with the yolks of 4
eggs and 1 tablespoonful powdered sugar; sift 1 pound flour on a
pastry board, make a hollow in center, put in ¾ pound butter, ½
pound powdered sugar, the almonds, 1 whole egg and 1 yolk and the
finely chopped peel of 1 lemon; work this into a stiff paste and set
it for 1 hour on ice before using.

667. +Florentinian Paste.+-- Sift 1 pound flour on a pastry board,
make a hollow in center, put in 1 cup butter, 1 cup sugar, 5 ounces
grated chocolate, 2 whole eggs and the yolks of 5 hard boiled eggs
rubbed through a sieve; add a little cinnamon and vanilla; knead
this into a smooth paste and let it stand for 1 hour in a cool place
before using.

668. +Almond Paste.+-- Pour boiling water over ½ pound almonds,
remove the brown skins, let the almonds lay in cold water for 24
hours and change the water 2 or 3 times; then pound the almonds in a
wedgewood mortar with 2 tablespoonfuls water and the juice of ½
lemon; press them through a sieve and mix with ½ pound powdered
sugar into a stiff paste; put the paste into a porcelain-lined
saucepan and stir over the fire until it loosens itself from bottom
of saucepan; remove the paste from the fire and when cold put some
powdered sugar on a pastry board, lay the paste on the sugar and
work it into a round ball; then set it in a cool place 1 hour before
using.

669. +Boiled Paste (Paté à choux).+-- Place a saucepan with 1 pint
water or milk over the fire and add 1 cup butter, 1½ tablespoonfuls
sugar, ¼ teaspoonful salt and the peel of 1 lemon; as soon as it
boils sprinkle in slowly, stirring constantly, 1 pint sifted flour;
continue stirring until it has formed into a smooth paste and
loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; transfer the paste to a dish
and let it cool; then mix it by degrees with 8 whole eggs and use
for cream cakes, chocolate eclairs and other small cakes.

670. +Nudels.+-- Sift 1 cup flour in a bowl and add a pinch of salt,
a piece of butter the size of a hazel nut, 1 egg and 1 tablespoonful
water; mix this into a stiff paste and work it well on a board so it
does not stick to the hands; then divide it into 4 equal parts; roll
each part out as thin as paper and let them lay on a board to dry
for 10 minutes; then cut them into strips 1 inch wide; lay 4 strips
over one another and cut them as fine as possible, like fine straws;
when all are cut scatter the nudels all over the board and let them
lay till dry; then use or put them away in a box; they will keep for
some time. The yolks of 2 eggs may be used instead of 1 whole egg.
Nudels are used for puddings or souflées and serve as a dessert;
they are also largely used in soup. They should always be put into
boiling water, soup or milk and boiled 10 minutes when wanted for
use.

671. +Mince Pie.+-- 1 pound finely chopped boiled beef, ½ pound
finely chopped suet, 1 pound well washed and dried currants, 1 pound
stoned raisins, 1 pound finely cut citron, 1 pound sugar, ½
teaspoonful salt, the juice and a little grated rind of 2 oranges,
the juice and grated rind of 1 lemon, 1 pint cider, ½ pint brandy, ½
pint sherry wine, 1 teaspoonful ground cloves, 1 teaspoonful
cinnamon, 1 teaspoonful mace, 1 grated nutmeg and 3 pounds finely
chopped apples; mix all the ingredients well together and use;
sufficient for 6 good sized pies. If this mince meat, is to be kept
for any length of time omit the apples and fill the mince meat into
glass jars; close tightly and keep them in a cool place. It will
then keep all winter. When wanted to make pies of take 1 jar at a
time and mix the mince meat with an equal portion of chopped apples;
line 2 pie plates with rich pie crust, fill them with the mince
meat, cover with same crust as directed (see Directions for Pies),
cut a small opening in center and one on each side of upper crust
and place the pie in a medium hot oven to bake; when done remove it
from oven and pour a little good brandy in center, sides and
openings and serve warm. Mince pies will keep in a cool place for
two weeks, but they should always be put for 10 or 15 minutes in the
oven to heat through before serving. For a large quantity of mince
meat put 8 pounds beef off the round in a kettle of boiling water,
add 1 tablespoonful salt and boil till tender; when done remove the
kettle from the fire and set aside to cool; then take out the meat,
remove all skin, fat and hard part and chop the meat as fine as
possible; then weigh the chopped meat and take for each pound the
same ingredients as in above recipe; put it away in well closed jars
without the apples.

672. +Mock Mince Pie.+-- 3 finely rolled soda crackers, 1 cup well
washed currants, ½ cup stoned raisins, ½ cup finely cut citron, ½
teaspoonful ground cloves, 1 teaspoonful cinnamon, ½ grated nutmeg,
½ teaspoonful salt, 1 tablespoonful butter, ½ cup sugar, ½ cup
molasses, ½ cup brandy or wine, the juice of 1 orange and a little
grated rind, the juice and grated rind of ½ lemon and ¼ pound dried
apples; wash and stew the dried apples till tender; add the ½ cup
sugar and sufficient boiling water to make 3 cupfuls stewed apples;
set aside to cool; then mix them first with the rolled soda
crackers, by degrees with all the other ingredients and use as
directed for pies; sufficient for 3 medium sized pies or 2 large
ones. A good plan is to leave a small opening in center of upper
crust and when the pies are done pour a little brandy into it.

673. +Apple Pie, No. 1.+-- Line a pie plate with crust as directed
(see Directions for Pies); pare, quarter and cut greening or pippin
apples into fine slices; fill the plate with apples, sprinkle over
some sugar (about 2 tablespoonfuls for a medium sized pie), cover
with crust and bake till apples are done and the crust has attained
a delicate light brown color. If the flavor is liked a pinch of
cinnamon and nutmeg may be added. In the spring of the year the
juice of ½ lemon squeezed over the apples of each pie is a great
improvement, as the apples have lost a great part of their flavor.
Apple pies are best when eaten the same day they are baked. If they
stand over till next day they should be put in the oven for about 10
minutes 1 hour before serving. They will then be as good as fresh
pies; otherwise the crust is apt to be tough.

674. +Apple Pie, No. 2.+-- Make an apple pie the same as in foregoing
recipe; put ½ tablespoonful butter in small bits over the apples,
grate over a very little nutmeg and a pinch of cinnamon, add no
sugar, leave a small opening in center of upper crust and bake until
done; in the meantime boil 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water 5 minutes;
when the pie is done put a small funnel in the opening in center of
upper crust and pour the syrup carefully through it into the pie;
set the pie aside and serve when cold. The pie plate should be deep
and large for this pie.

675. +Apple Pie, No. 3.+-- Line a large, deep pie plate with fine pie
crust, fill the plate with finely cut tart apples, sprinkle over ½
cup sugar, dust over a little flour and cover with crust; leave a
small opening in center of upper crust and bake till done; 10
minutes before the pie is taken from the oven put a small funnel in
the opening in the center of upper crust and pour carefully ½ cup
sweet hot cider through the funnel into the pie; when done remove
the pie from oven and serve when cold. Another way is:--Stew the
apple peels and cores in water till tender; then strain them through
a coarse bag, return the liquid to saucepan and boil 10 minutes;
then add for 1 cup liquid 1 cup sugar, boil 10 minutes longer and
pour the hot syrup into the pie in place of cider.

676. +Apple-Citron Pie.+-- Line a deep pie plate with rich pie crust,
fill it with finely cut tart apples, lay small pieces of butter
between the apples, sprinkle over each pie ½ cup sugar and ½ cup
finely cut citron, add 2 tablespoonfuls currant or apple jelly,
cover with crust and bake till done.

677. +Apple Meringue Pie.+-- Press 1 pint stewed apples through a
sieve, sweeten to taste and add the juice of ½ lemon, a little
grated nutmeg and the yolks of 4 eggs; line a pie plate with crust,
cover with buttered paper, fill the plate with dried peas and bake
till crust is a light brown; remove paper and peas, fill in the
mixture, return pie to oven and bake till done; in the meantime beat
the 4 whites to a stiff froth and add 1 tablespoonful powdered sugar
and a little essence of lemon; when pie is done draw it to front of
oven, spread over the meringue and let it remain for a few minutes
longer in oven; then take it out and serve when cold.

678. +Dried Apple Pie.+-- Wash ½ pound dried apples, put them in a
saucepan with plenty of cold water, cover and place saucepan over
the fire and stew till done; then add 1 cup sugar; pour the apples
into a dish and set aside; when cold line 2 pie plates with fine pie
crust, brush the surface of crust over with beaten egg and sprinkle
over some bread or zwieback crumbs; fill in the stewed apples, cover
with crust and bake till done. Dried peaches or apricots can be used
the same way.

679. +Tutti Frutti Pie.+-- Pare and cut fine 10 large tart apples,
put them with 2 tablespoonfuls butter in a saucepan over the fire
and add 6 tablespoonfuls sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls finely cut citron,
½ cup seedless raisins, the same quantity of well washed currants
and the grated rind of ½ orange or lemon; stir this over the fire
till apples are soft and add ½ cup currant or apple jelly; line a
pie plate with fine pie crust, fill the plate full with the apples,
cover with crust, in which a small opening should be cut in center,
and bake till done; boil the peels and cores of apples with a little
water till tender; strain them through a jelly bag, return the
liquid to saucepan and boil 10 minutes; add to 1 cup liquid 1 cup
sugar and boil 5 minutes longer; when pie is done take it from the
oven, put a small funnel into the opening in center, pour carefully
some of the apple syrup through the funnel into the pie and serve
when cold.

680. +Cherry Pie.+-- Line a pie plate with crust and remove the pits
from 1 quart nice, ripe cherries; fill the fruit into the plate,
sprinkle over some sugar and dust over a little flour; cover with
top crust, with a small opening in center, and bake in a medium hot
oven; in the meantime stew 1 cup cherries in a little water till
tender; strain them, return the liquid to saucepan and boil 5
minutes; add to 1 cup liquid 1 cup sugar and continue the boiling
for 5 minutes; remove from fire, add a little brandy or wine and
pour this syrup, when pie is done, through a funnel into the pie.
Another way is:--Do not stone the cherries; after the plate is lined
with crust fill it full with cherries, dust over some flour,
sprinkle them with sugar and add 3 tablespoonfuls water to each pie;
cover with crust and bake till done. Another way is:--Boil ½ cup
currant juice with ½ cup sugar for 5 minutes and when the pie (made
like the first one) is done pour the currant syrup through a small
funnel into the pie. This is an excellent way to give cherries which
have not much flavor a nice taste.

681. +Banana Pie.+-- 4 large bananas, 1 cup milk, 4 eggs, ½ cup
sugar, ½ tablespoonful melted butter and 1 teaspoonful essence of
vanilla; remove the skins and press the bananas through a sieve; mix
them with the 4 yolks, sugar, milk, melted butter and vanilla; line
a deep pie plate with crust, ornament the edge, lay in a piece of
buttered brown paper, fill the plate with dry peas or with pieces of
stale bread and bake till done; remove it from oven, free the plate
from paper and peas, return the plate for a few minutes to oven
again, fill in the banana mixture and bake till done; in the
meantime beat the whites to a stiff froth and add 1 tablespoonful
powdered sugar; draw the pie to front of oven, spread over the
meringue, let it remain for a few minutes longer in oven, take it
out, set it in a cool place and serve ice cold.

682. +Pineapple Pie.+-- Pare 1 ripe pineapple, remove the eyes and
hard core in center and chop it fine; line a deep pie plate with
fine pie crust, fill it with the finely chopped pineapple, sprinkle
over 1 small cup sugar and dust a little flour over; cover the pie
with crust and bake a light brown and well done; put the eyes and
cores of the pineapple with 6 greening apples cut into pieces in a
saucepan, nearly cover them with water and boil till tender; then
strain through a bag, return the liquid to saucepan and boil 20
minutes; then add for 1 cup liquid 1 cup sugar, boil 5 minutes and
fill the jelly into tumblers. This makes an excellent pineapple
jelly.

683. +Pineapple Pie (with Meringue).+-- 1 large, ripe pineapple, ½
cup milk, 1 cup sugar, the yolks of 4 eggs, 1 whole egg and ½
tablespoonful butter; pare and grate the pineapple; then mix it with
the sugar and other ingredients; melt the butter before adding it;
line a deep pie plate with fine pie crust, cover with buttered
paper, fill it with dry peas and bake till done; take it from the
oven, remove the paper and peas, fill in the pineapple mixture and
bake till done; in the meantime make the meringue, as follows:--

Beat the 4 whites to a stiff froth and mix it with 1 tablespoonful
powdered sugar; when pie is done draw it to front of oven, spread
over the meringue and return the pie for a few minutes to oven again
till the meringue is a light brown; serve ice cold. This will make 1
large pie, sufficient for a family of 8 persons.

684. +Prune Pie.+-- Wash and soak 1 pound prunes for 4 hours in cold
water, drain them in a colander, remove the stones, put the prunes
in a dish, pour over 1 cup cold water and let them stand over night;
next morning line 2 pie plates with crust, put in the prunes with
the liquor, sprinkle over some sugar and a little flour, cover with
top crust and bake till light brown and well done. Another way
is:--Stew the prunes in a little water, remove the stones, sweeten
the prunes with sugar, add the juice of ½ lemon and finish as above.

685. +Peach Pie.+-- Pare and slice some large, ripe peaches; line a
pie plate with crust, fill it with the peaches, sprinkle over some
sugar and bake with an upper crust.

686. +Peach Meringue Pie.+-- Line a large, deep pie plate with a rich
pie crust, brush the surface of crust over with the beaten white of
egg and sprinkle over 2 tablespoonfuls finely sifted bread or
cracker crumbs; take 1 can preserved peaches, drain off the liquor,
put them in the pie plate (with the hollow side up), sprinkle over a
little flour, a few spoonfuls sugar, pour over some of the liquor
and bake in a medium hot oven till done; in the meantime make the
meringue, as follows:--Beat the whites of 5 eggs to a froth, mix
them with 2 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar and flavor with a little
essence of vanilla; when pie is done draw it to front of oven,
spread over the meringue and bake for a few minutes longer; remove
it from the oven and set the pie in a cool place; serve cold;
sufficient for 10 persons.

687. +Peach Mountain Pie.+-- Pare 1 dozen medium sized peaches; line
a large deep pie plate with pie crust, fill the plate with the whole
peaches, sprinkle over ¾ cup sugar, cover with a thin crust and bake
in a medium hot oven.

688. +Plum Pie.+-- Remove the pits from some ripe plums, sprinkle the
fruit thickly with sugar and let them stand for ½ hour; line a pie
plate with crust, put in the plums, cover with crust and bake till
done.

689. +Cranberry Pie.+-- Wash and stew 1 quart cranberries with 1 cup
water; when done press them through a colander or coarse sieve,
return the cranberries to saucepan, add 2 cups sugar and boil and
stir for 5 minutes; then set aside to cool; line a pie plate with
fine crust, brush the surface of crust over with the beaten white of
egg and sprinkle over 2 tablespoonfuls finely sifted bread crumbs;
put in some of the cranberries, about ½ inch thick, and cover with
crossbars of crust (lattice-like); bake a light brown and well done;
serve cold.

690. +Gooseberry Pie.+-- Top, tail and wash the berries, put them
into a pie plate lined with crust, sprinkle plenty of sugar among
them, cover with crust and bake till done.

691. +Blackberry Pie.+-- Line a deep pie plate with crust; have some
ripe blackberries washed and drained; fill the plate with the
berries, sprinkle over some sugar, pour into each pie 1
tablespoonful vinegar, dust over a little flour, cover with crust
and bake a light brown and well done.

692. +Huckleberry Pie.+-- Wash and drain some ripe huckleberries;
line a pie plate with crust and cover the bottom of crust with 2
tablespoonfuls finely rolled zwieback; next fill the plate with the
berries, sprinkle sugar between and over the fruit, add a little
more zwieback, cover with crust and bake in a medium hot oven to a
light brown and well done; serve cold dusted with sugar.

693. +Currant Pie.+-- Wash and strip some ripe currants and mix them
with the same quantity of sugar; line a pie plate with fine pie
crust, fill it with the fruit, dust over some flour, cover with top
crust, press the edges firmly together and bake till done and to a
light brown. Raspberries and currants may be used together for this
pie.

694. +Rhubarb Custard Pie.+-- Stew 2 cups finely cut rhubarb with 2
cups sugar and ½ cup water; when done strain the rhubarb through a
sieve and mix it with 2 well beaten eggs; have a deep pie plate
lined with rich pie crust, fill in the mixture, lay fine strips of
pie crust across the pie (lattice-like), place the pie in a hot oven
and bake till the custard is firm and the crust a light brown.

695. +Rhubarb Pie.+-- Line a pie plate with some rich pie crust;
remove the skin from some fresh rhubarb and cut it into fine pieces;
take for every cup rhubarb 1 cup sugar, fill it into the plate and
dust over a little flour; cover with crust and bake till done, which
requires about ½ hour; serve cold dusted with powdered sugar.

696. +Rhubarb Meringue Pie.+-- Place a saucepan with 2 cups finely
cut rhubarb, 2 cups sugar and ½ cup water over the fire and stew 20
minutes; when done press the rhubarb through a sieve, add the beaten
yolks of 4 eggs and set aside; line a deep pie plate with crust,
ornament the edge, cover with buttered paper, fill the plate with
dry peas and bake till crust is a light brown; then remove paper and
peas, fill the plate with the rhubarb mixture and bake about 15
minutes; beat the 4 whites to a stiff froth and mix them with 1
tablespoonful powdered sugar; draw the pie to front of oven, spread
over the meringue, bake for a few minutes longer and serve when
cold.

697. +Sweet Potato Pie.+-- 3 medium sized sweet potatoes, 3 eggs, 1
pint milk, ½ cup sugar, 1 tablespoonful butter, 1 teaspoonful
ginger, ½ teaspoonful cinnamon, ½ grated nutmeg and ¼ teaspoonful
salt; boil the potatoes until done; scrape off the skin and press
the potatoes through a sieve or colander; mix them first with the
eggs and salt, then add the melted butter, sugar and spice and
lastly the milk; line a large, deep pie plate with rich pie crust,
fill in the mixture and bake till done; serve when cold.

698. +Pumpkin Pie.+-- Pare and cut a medium sized pumpkin into
pieces, remove the pits, put the pumpkin in a kettle, cover with
boiling water, add ½ tablespoonful salt and boil till tender; when
done put the pumpkin into a colander and drain off all the water;
then press it through the colander; measure the strained pumpkin and
take for every quart of it 1 pint milk, ½ tablespoonful melted
butter, 1½ cups sugar, 3 eggs, 2 teaspoonfuls cornstarch mixed with
the milk and 1 teaspoonful ground ginger; mix all the ingredients
together; dust some deep pie plates with flour, line them with pie
crust and brush the surface of crust all over with beaten egg; roll
out some pie crust and cut it into strips 1 inch wide; cut one side
of the strips into scallops and lay it around the edge of plate so
the scallops stand a little above the edge of plate; brush the strip
over with beaten egg and sprinkle 2 tablespoonfuls fine bread or
cracker crumbs over the crust (this keeps the pumpkin from sogging
into the crust); fill the plate with the pumpkin mixture, grate over
the top some nutmeg and bake till done; when the pumpkin is firm to
the touch of your finger and a little brown on top the pie is done;
remove it from oven, set in a cool place and serve when cold.
A medium sized pumpkin will make 4 medium sized pies. A good plan if
the family is small is to fill some of the boiled pumpkin as soon as
done, boiling hot, into glass jars. Close the jars at once and set
them in a cool place. When wanted for use open the jar, turn the
pumpkin into a colander, drain off all the water, press the pumpkin
through a colander and finish the same as above.

699. +Custard Pie.+-- Stir 5 eggs with 5 tablespoonfuls sugar to a
cream and add 2 tablespoonfuls essence of vanilla or lemon and 1
quart milk; line a large, deep pie plate with crust, brush the
surface of crust all over with the beaten white of egg and sprinkle
over 2 tablespoonfuls finely sifted bread or cracker crumbs; pour in
the custard, grate over the top some nutmeg and bake in a hot oven
till custard is firm. Care must be taken to remove the pie as soon
as done, otherwise it will curdle. To ascertain when pie is done
stick the handle of a teaspoon into center of custard. If no milk is
to be seen and the custard is thick the pie is baked. Remove at once
and serve ice cold.

700. +Cocoanut Pie.+-- To make 2 large pies take 3 pints milk, 6
eggs, 3 cups freshly grated cocoanut, a pinch of salt, 1½ cups sugar
and 1½ teaspoonfuls essence of vanilla; stir sugar and eggs to a
cream and add the milk, salt and flavoring; take a large cocoanut,
remove the shell without breaking the cocoanut, pare off the brown
skin and grate the cocoanut; add 3 cups of the grated cocoanut to
the other ingredients; line 2 large, deep pie plates with crust,
brush the surface of crust over with the beaten white of egg and
sprinkle over 2 tablespoonfuls fine bread or cracker crumbs; fill
the plates with the cocoanut mixture and bake in a hot oven till
firm and a light brown on top; when done remove it from oven and
serve cold.

701. +Lemon Cocoanut Pie.+-- 1 pint milk, 4 large eggs, 1½ cups
sugar, the grated rind and juice of 1 large lemon, 2 cups freshly
grated cocoanut and ½ tablespoonful butter; put milk and butter in a
saucepan to boil; stir the 4 yolks and sugar to a cream and add the
grated rind and juice of lemon; when this is well mixed add
gradually, stirring constantly, the boiling milk; when cold add the
grated cocoanut; in the meantime line a large, deep pie plate with
pie crust, ornament the edge with a strip of crust cut into
scallops, brush the surface of crust all over with beaten egg and
sprinkle over 2 tablespoonfuls fine bread or cracker crumbs; pour in
the cocoanut mixture and bake in a hot oven. While the pie is baking
prepare the following meringue:--Beat the 4 whites to a stiff froth
and add 1 tablespoonful powdered sugar and a little essence of
lemon; as soon as the pie is done take it from the oven, spread over
the meringue, make it smooth with a broad-bladed knife dipped in
water and return the pie to the oven for 2 minutes; then set it in a
cool place and serve very cold.

702. +Chocolate Cream Pie.+-- Place a saucepan with 2 tablespoonfuls
grated chocolate, 1 pint milk and ½ cup sugar over the fire; add 2
tablespoonfuls cornstarch and stir and boil for a few minutes;
remove from the fire and add 1 teaspoonful essence of vanilla, when
cold mix it with the yolks of 4 eggs and finish the same as Vanilla
Cream Pie.

703. +Vanilla Cream Pie.+-- Line a large, deep pie plate with crust,
lay over it a piece of buttered paper, fill the plate with dry peas
or pieces of stale bread and bake till crust is a light brown; in
the meantime boil 1 cup milk with 1 tablespoonful butter and a pinch
of salt; mix 2 tablespoonfuls sifted flour with 1 cup cold milk to a
smooth batter and stir it into the boiling milk; continue stirring
and boiling for a few minutes; remove it from fire and let it cool a
little; stir the yolks of 4 eggs to a cream with 3½ tablespoonfuls
sugar; stir this into the above mixture and flavor with 1½
teaspoonfuls essence of vanilla; when the crust is done remove paper
and peas, fill in the mixture and bake 10 minutes; in the meantime
beat the 4 whites to a stiff froth and mix it with 1 tablespoonful
powdered sugar; draw the pie to front of oven and spread over the
meringue; set the pie for a few minutes in the oven and serve when
cold.

704. +Orange Cream Pie.+-- 1½ cups milk, ¾ cup sugar, 1½
tablespoonfuls cornstarch, ½ tablespoonful butter, 4 eggs, the juice
of 3 oranges, the grated rind of 1 and a pinch of salt; put
cornstarch, butter, milk and salt in a small saucepan, set it in a
vessel of boiling water and stir over the fire till the contents of
saucepan thicken; then remove it from fire and set aside; stir the
yolks of 4 eggs with the ¾ cup sugar to a cream, add it to the
boiled cornstarch and lastly stir in gradually the juice and grated
rind of oranges; line a deep pie plate with fine pie crust, lay over
it a piece of buttered brown paper, fill the plate with dry peas or
pieces of stale bread and bake till crust is a light brown; remove
the paper and peas, fill in the cream and bake till’ done; in the
meantime beat the 4 whites to a stiff froth and add 1 tablespoonful
powdered sugar and a little essence of vanilla; when pie is done
draw it to front of oven and spread over the meringue; return it for
a few minutes to oven; then set the pie in a cool place and serve
ice cold.

705. +Lemon Cream Pie.+-- Boil 1 cup milk with ½ tablespoonful butter
and a pinch of salt; mix 1½ tablespoonfuls cornstarch with ½ cup
cold milk and stir it into the boiling milk; continue stirring and
boil for a few minutes; remove it from fire and set aside to cool;
stir the yolks of 4 eggs with 1 cup sugar to a cream and add the
grated rind of 1 lemon and the juice of 2; stir this into the cold
cream; line a deep pie plate with fine pie crust, ornament the edge
with a border, cover it with buttered brown paper, fill the plate
with dry peas or pieces of stale bread and bake till crust is a
light brown; remove the paper and peas, put in the cream mixture and
bake about 10 minutes; in the meantime beat the 4 whites to a stiff
froth and add 1 tablespoonful powdered sugar and a little essence of
lemon; when the pie is done draw it to front of oven and spread over
the meringue; return the pie for a few minutes to oven; then set it
in a cool place and serve cold.

706. +Fine Lemon Pie (with an Upper Crust).+-- The yolks of 3 eggs, 1
whole egg, 1 cup sugar, the juice and grated rind of 1 large lemon
and ½ tablespoonful butter; stir the 3 yolks to a cream and add the
grated peel and juice of lemon; put the butter in a small saucepan
over the fire; as soon as melted add the yolks and stir the whole
over the fire to a creamy thickness; then remove from fire; when
cold mix it with the sugar and the whole egg; line a pie plate (one
which is not very deep) with fine pie crust, brush the surface of
crust over with the beaten white of egg, sprinkle over 2
tablespoonfuls fine bread crumbs and put in the lemon mixture; cover
with a thin crust and bake in a medium hot oven to a light brown;
serve when cold.

707. +Lemon Pie (plain).+-- Mix 1 tablespoonful cornstarch with ½ cup
cold water, add ½ cup boiling water, ¾ cup sugar and boil for a few
minutes; remove from fire, add the juice of 1 lemon, ½ the grated
rind, 1 egg and set aside to cool; line a pie plate with crust, put
in the mixture, cover with a thin, rich crust and bake a light
brown; serve cold dusted with sugar.

708. +Lemon Meringue Pie.+-- 5 large eggs, ½ tablespoonful butter, 1
cup sugar and the juice and grated rind of 1 large lemon; beat 4
yolks to a cream and add the grated rind and juice of lemon; put the
butter in a small saucepan over the fire; as soon as melted add the
beaten yolks and stir over the fire to a creamy thickness; remove it
from fire and when cold mix with 1 cup sugar and 1 whole egg; next
line a large (not too deep) pie plate with fine pie crust, ornament
the edge either with the pastry wheel or lay strips of paste around
the edge cut on one side into scallops, brush the surface of crust
all over with beaten egg and sprinkle over a little finely sifted
bread or cracker crumbs; put in the lemon mixture, put the pie into
a medium hot oven and bake till done; in the meantime beat the 4
remaining whites to a stiff froth and add 2 tablespoonfuls sifted
powdered sugar and a little grated lemon peel; when the pie is done
take it from the oven just long enough to spread over the meringue;
return it again to oven for a few minutes and serve when cold.

709. +D’Artois (or Pie of Marmalade).+-- Divide ½ pound puff paste
into 2 parts; roll one part out into a thin square piece and spread
over it, ½ inch thick, apple marmalade ½ inch from the edge; roll
out the remaining half into a piece of same size, hold it on the
rolling pin and lay over the marmalade; wet the edge of first paste
and press the 2 edges together; cut the top paste with a sharp knife
into strips, first lengthwise, then crosswise, like lattice work;
put in a tin pan and bake in a medium hot oven to a delicate brown;
when done dust powdered sugar over and let it remain for a few
minutes in the oven to glaze; then remove and serve when cold. Any
kind of marmalade or cream may be used.

710. +Allnumettes.+-- Roll out 1 pound puff paste 16 inches long and
5 inches wide and spread over a clear icing made as follows:--Beat
the white of 1 egg to a froth, add 4 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar,
2 drops lemon juice and beat it for 5 minutes; spread this over the
rolled out paste, let it lay for a few minutes, cut it into 8 pieces
and bake in a quick oven from 45 to 50 minutes.

711. +Jelly Tarts.+-- Roll the puff paste 1 inch in thickness and cut
it into rounds with a biscuit cutter; brush a long tin pan over with
water, so as just to dampen the pan, and then lay the rounds in the
pan with the side which was rolled towards the pan and not too close
together; brush the top over with beaten egg, being careful not to
let any of the egg run down the sides: then dip a smaller cake
cutter into hot water, press it on each round ⅛ of an inch deep to
form the cover; the cake cutter must be dipped in the hot water each
time for each round; then bake them in a hot oven to a golden color;
when the tarts are done take them out, cut the cover loose with a
pointed knife and lift it off; hollow the tarts out a little with
your finger; when ready to serve fill them with jelly. These tarts
may be filled with stewed oysters or clams. They are then called
Oyster or Clam Patties.

712. +Tarts.+-- Line some small patty pans with rich pie crust or
puff paste and fill them with either fruit marmalade of peaches,
apricots, cherries or any kind of preserved or stewed fruit; roll
the paste which is left out thin and cut it into strips ¼ inch in
width; lay them over the tarts like lattice work, brush over with
beaten egg and bake in a hot oven.

713. +Peach Tarts.+-- Pare and cut some nice, ripe peaches into
halves and boil them for 5 minutes in sugar syrup; take them out and
set aside to cool; boil the syrup 5 minutes longer; line some patty
pans with rich puff paste or pie crust, put into each a piece of
buttered paper, fill them with dry peas and bake in a hot oven till
nearly done; remove the paper and peas and fill each one with the
peaches and a little syrup; return them to the oven again and bake
till done; serve when cold.

714. +Apple Tarts.+-- Pare and cut into fine slices ½ dozen large
tart apples and put them in a small saucepan with 1 tablespoonful
butter, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, ½ cup seedless raisins, currants and
finely cut citron; mix, cover and let it simmer over the fire till
apples are soft, but not broken; remove them from fire; add 2
tablespoonfuls currant or apple jelly, mix it with the apples and
finish the same as Cranberry Tarts.

715. +Rice Tarts.+-- Line 12 small forms with rich pie crust or puff
paste; put ½ pound rice with cold water over the fire and boil a few
minutes; drain the rice in a colander and rinse with cold water;
return the rice to saucepan; cover with sweet cream or milk, add 1
tablespoonful butter and boil till tender; remove it from the fire
and mix the rice with the yolks of 4 eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1
teaspoonful vanilla extract and lastly the 4 whites beaten to a
stiff froth; fill the rice into the small forms and bake in a medium
hot oven 20 minutes; when done take them out of the forms, arrange
on a long dish with a napkin, dust over with powdered sugar and
serve either hot or cold.

716. +Tartelettes of Cherries.+-- Roll out 1 pound short paste ¼ inch
in thickness and cut out with a tumbler or round cake cutter 20
rounds about 2 inches in diameter; roll out the remaining paste and
cut it into long strips ½ inch wide and ⅛ inch thick; lay these
strips around the top edge of each round and ornament them with the
pastry wheel by pressing small dents in it with the wheel; lay
around each a strip of white paper, fasten the two ends with the
white of egg (to keep it in its place) and set them in shallow tins;
remove the pits from 2 pounds cherries, mix the fruit with sugar and
fill them into the tartelettes; then bake in a hot oven; in the
meantime crack the pits of cherries, put them over the fire with a
little water and boil 5 minutes; then strain; mix in a bowl 1 cup
sour cream with 2 rolled zwiebacks, the yolks of 2 eggs, 2
tablespoonfuls sugar and 2 tablespoonfuls of the strained water from
the pits; when the tartelettes are nearly done fill 1 spoonful of
the above mixture into each one and return them to oven again until
the cream is firm; take them from oven, remove the paper and serve
when cold dusted with sugar.

717. +Tartelettes+ of peaches, plums or apricots are made the same
as cherries, but without the cream.

718. +Tartelettes d’apricots.+-- Line ½ dozen small patty pans with
puff paste or fine pie crust and fill them half full with apricot
marmalade; cut 9 apricots in halves, peel them and remove the pits;
boil the apricots for 2 minutes in sugar syrup, lay a half apricot
into each tartelette and bake in hot oven; in the meantime boil the
syrup until thick; crack the pits, take out the kernels, scald them
in boiling water, remove the brown skins and divide them into
halves; when the tartelettes are done take them out of the form, lay
onto each one 2 halves of the kernels and pour a little of the cold
syrup into each one; serve when cold.

719. +Tartelettes+ of peaches, plums, apples, cherries, currants,
raspberries or gooseberries are made the same way as apricots.

720. +Tartelettes of Strawberries.+-- Roll out ½ pound puff paste
about ⅛ inch in thickness and cut out with a round cake cutter 10
rounds; lay them into 10 small buttered patty pans and press the
paste in evenly; let the paste stand a little higher than the pan;
mix flour and water to a stiff dough, divide it into 10 equal parts
the size of a walnut, roll it out into balls and put into each form
a ball; press them in firmly and bake in a hot oven; when done draw
them to front of oven, dust over with sugar and return them to oven
again so they obtain a glaze; then remove the inside water dough and
set the tarts aside to cool; roll out thin the remaining puff paste
and cut out small rings; lay them on shallow buttered tins, dust
them with sugar and bake in a slow oven; press ½ pint strawberries
through a sieve and mix them with 3 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar;
wash and drain ½ quart strawberries, put them in a dish, pour the
mashed strawberries over the whole fruit and fill them into the
tartelettes; lay onto each one 2 rings and serve them on a napkin.
Raspberries and currants stewed together may be used instead of
strawberries. Stewed cherries, peaches, apricots, plums or any kind
of preserved fruit may also be used.

721. +Fleurons of Puff Paste.+-- Roll the puff paste out ⅛ inch in
thickness, cut it with a cake cutter into shapes of half moons, lay
them on tins, brush over with beaten egg and bake in a quick oven.
Fleurons are used for garnishing dishes.

722. +Fanchonnettes de creme.+-- Line 12 small patty forms with short
paste (Mürber Teig) and put into each one a thin layer of fruit
marmalade; put 4 whole eggs into a saucepan and beat them to a
froth; add 1 pint sweet cream or milk, 3 tablespoonfuls sifted
flour, a pinch of salt, 1 heaping tablespoonful butter and 4
tablespoonfuls sugar; stir this over the fire till it boils; then
add 10 macaroons rolled fine; fill the patty forms ½ full with the
boiled cream when cold and bake in a medium hot oven; when done take
them out of the form and fill them full with the remaining cream;
when cold spread over some marmalade, squirt over the top a little
meringue and serve on a napkin.

723. +D’Artois Meringues.+-- Prepare ½ pound puff paste, roll out and
fold over 10 times; line a large pie plate with it, spread over a
thick layer of pineapple marmalade and bake in a medium hot oven;
when done draw it to front of oven and spread over a thick meringue;
cut the pie into pieces, move them a little apart, lay on each one a
few strips of blanched almonds, dust over some sugar and set for 15
minutes into a cool oven to dry.

724. +Condés.+-- Chop fine 6 ounces blanched almonds and mix them
with 3 tablespoonfuls powdered sugar and the beaten whites of 1 or 2
eggs; roll out some rich puff paste very thin, spread over the
almond mixture and dust over some powdered sugar; cut them into
finger lengths 2 inches wide and bake in a slow oven.

725. +Small Royal Cakes.+-- Prepare a puff paste and roll it out thin
about ¼ of an inch in thickness; mix 6 ounces powdered sugar with
the beaten whites of 2 eggs; spread this over the rolled out paste,
cut it into strips of 1½ inches wide and 3½ inches long, lay them
in shallow tin pans and bake in a slow oven to a delicate brown.

726. +Paté à choux.+-- Place a saucepan over the fire with 1 pint
water or milk, ½ pound butter, 1½ tablespoonfuls sugar, the grated
rind of 1 lemon and a pinch of salt; as soon as it boils add slowly
½ pound sifted flour, stirring constantly; stir until it forms into
a smooth paste and loosens itself from bottom of saucepan; transfer
the paste to a dish and when cooled off a little mix it by degrees
with 6 or 8 eggs. This paste should be soft, but must not run apart
when dropped on a tin.

727. +Chocolate Eclairs.+-- Prepare a pâté à choux, put it into a
pastry bag or paper funnel and squirt it upon buttered tins in long
narrow cakes 4 inches long and 1 inch wide; brush over with beaten
egg and bake in a medium hot oven; when done brush them over with
boiled chocolate glaze and set for a few minutes in oven again; then
set them aside in a cool place; shortly before serving cut each one
open on the side and fill with vanilla cream. For cream cakes drop
this mixture (by tablespoonfuls) onto buttered tins, not too close
together and in the form of round cake; when cold slit them open on
one side and fill with vanilla cream.

728. +Canapes.+-- Prepare a puff paste and roll it out ½ inch in
thickness; cut it out into square pieces of 2 inches wide, cut these
again into strips of ½ inch wide, lay them with the cut side in a
shallow tin pan, not too close together, and bake in a hot oven;
when done draw them to front of oven, dust with sugar and let them
remain in oven a few minutes longer to glaze; put two and two
together with jelly between; or they may be served single.

729. +Cannelous.+-- Prepare 1 pound puff paste and roll it out 8
times, instead of 6; then take about 18 connelonghölzer (they
consist of round pieces of wood about 5 inches long and a finger
thick, and can be bought at wholesale confectioneries) and rub each
piece of wood over with butter; roll the paste out very thin and cut
it into strips of about 1 inch wide and 9 inches long; wind a strip
of the paste around each piece of wood, snake-like, brush them over
with beaten egg, lay them in shallow tins and bake in a quick oven;
when done remove the pieces of wood and when cold fill the cannelous
with whipped cream flavored with vanilla and sweetened with sugar.

730. +Vole-au-vent.+-- Carefully prepare 1 pound puff paste and roll
and fold it 6 times; great care must be taken in doing this, as the
whole result depends upon it; after the last rolling let it lay in
summer ½ hour on ice, in winter in a cold place; when ready to use
roll the paste out 1 inch in thickness, place the dish on which the
vol-au-veut is to be served upside down onto the paste and cut off
the paste from the dish; turn the paste around and lay it on a tin
which has been dampened with water; make with the back of a knife a
few dents in it around the edge, brush the top over with beaten egg
and make with the point of a knife a slight incision in the paste
all round the top about 1½ inches from the edge; this forms the
cover; bake in a very hot oven; do not open the oven for 10 minutes;
then open and if the vol-au-veut is a light brown cover with paper
and bake from ¾ to 1 hour; when done remove the cover, put the
vol-au-veut onto the dish it was made to fit and set it for a few
minutes in the oven to dry; then fill with either ragouts or
fricasseed chickens, birds, rabbits or pigeons, put on the cover and
serve; or fill it with fresh or preserved fruit and serve as a
dessert.

731. +Vole-au-vent (with Strawberries and Whipped Cream).+-- Roll out
some carefully made puff paste ¾ inch in thickness and cut it out
with a fluted cutter the desired shape, either round or oval; make a
slight incision in the paste 1 inch from the edge and bake in a very
hot oven; when nearly done brush it over with white of egg, dust
with sugar and put it back in the oven to glaze; when done remove
the interior, or soft crumbs, and fill the vol-au-veut shortly
before serving with fresh strawberries sweetened with sugar and
cover them with whipped cream.

732. +Vole-au-vent (with Currants and Raspberries.)+--Prepare a
vol-au-veut the same as in foregoing recipe; strip some large, ripe,
cherry currants from their stems, put them in a colander with the
same quantity of raspberries, let cold water run over and drain them
well; put the fruit into a dish with plenty of sugar, mix them up
with 2 silver forks and let it stand in a cool place for several
hours; shortly before serving put the fruit into the vol-au-veut,
put over the cover, again dust with sugar and serve.

733. +Vole-au-vent (with Peaches and Cream)+ is made the same as
strawberries. Preserved pineapples, apricots, cherries or plums may
be used in the same manner; also oranges peeled and cut into slices,
freed from their pits and well sugared. Put into the vol-au-veut and
serve either covered with its own cover or whipped cream. Makes an
excellent dish for dessert.

734. +Neapolitan Breads.+-- Mix a finely chopped orange peel (only
the yellow part) with ½ pound neapolitan paste; divide it into small
pieces the size of a walnut, roll these lengthwise about ½ finger
thick, bread 3 together, brush them over with beaten egg and bake in
a medium hot oven; or the paste may be rolled into long, thin rolls,
breaded together and then cut into lengths 2½ inches long.

735. +Viennoises.+-- Stir ½ cup butter with ½ cup powdered sugar to a
cream and add the yolks of 5 eggs, 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract, 1½
cups sifted flour, ¼ cup cornstarch and lastly the beaten whites of
2 eggs; spread this over a sheet of buttered paper ½ inch in
thickness, lay the paper in a shallow tin and bake in a slow oven;
when done cut the cake into 2 pieces; cover one piece with pineapple
or peach marmalade and lay the other piece over it; also cover the
top with marmalade and glaze the whole with wine glaze; then cut the
cake at once into small, long pieces and set them in the oven again
for a few minutes.

736. +Almond Tartelettes.+-- Pound ¼ pound blanched almonds with ¼
cup water in a mortar to a paste and press it through a sieve; mix
it with ¼ pound powdered sugar; next add the beaten whites of 4 eggs
and the juice of ¼ orange; have ½ pound puff paste prepared, rolled
out and folded 10 times; line 8 or 10 small tin patty forms with the
paste, fill them ¾ full with the above almond mixture and bake in a
medium hot oven; when nearly done draw them to front of oven, dust
over some fine sugar and bake till done.

737. +Puites d’amour.+-- Prepare 10 ounces puff paste and roll it out
½ inch in thickness; cut out into 20 rounds, about 2 inches in
diameter, with a scalloped tin cake cutter; cut a round piece out of
the center of each one, so that only a ring remains; roll out the
remaining paste the same way, cut out 20 rounds, lay them in a tin
pan and brush over with the white of egg; put on the rings, brush
the top over with beaten egg and bake in a hot oven; when done dust
them over with sugar and let them remain for a few minutes longer in
oven to glaze; remove and shortly before serving fill them either
with whipped cream sweetened and flavored with vanilla or some
preserved fruit. NOTE.--Care must be taken not to get any egg on the
outside of tart, as this will prevent the rising.

738. +Neapolitans.+-- Take neapolitan paste, roll it out thin, brush
over with egg and bake in buttered tins to a light brown color; when
done cut the cake into two pieces; spread one piece with fruit
marmalade or jelly and lay the other over it; cut the whole into
small pieces, pour over a wine or maraschino glaze and set them for
a few minutes in the oven.

739. +D’Artois Grilles.+-- Prepare ½ pound puff paste, roll it out
and fold over 10 times; roll out one-half into a thin, square piece;
put this into a square, shallow tin pan, wet the edge with beaten
white of egg, spread over a thick layer of apricot or peach
marmalade and over this a thick layer of apple marmalade 1 inch from
edge; roll out the remaining paste, cut into strips, lay it over the
marmalade like lattice work, brush over with beaten egg and bake;
when done dust over some sugar, let it remain for a few minutes
longer in the oven and cut into pieces when cold. Another way is to
line a pie plate with puff paste, spread over a layer of apple
marmalade flavored with vanilla and bake; when done spread over a
thin layer of apricot marmalade and pour over this a sugar glaze;
make it smooth with a knife and cut into pieces before the glaze
becomes hard.

740. +Cream Tarts.+-- Line small patty forms with short paste (Mürber
Teig), fill them with vanilla cream (see Cream) and bake in a hot
oven; when done spread a thin layer of peach marmalade over the
cream, pour over the marmalade a little lemon glaze and let them dry
for a few minutes in front of oven; mix the beaten white of 1 egg
with ¾ cup sugar and 3 drops lemon juice; put this into a paper
funnel, squirt a wreath over the glaze and put ½ teaspoonful apple
jelly in the center.

741. +Fine Pineapple Tarts.+-- Line some small patty forms with
neapolitan paste and bake in a quick oven to a delicate brown; when
done squirt round the edge a rim of meringue, sprinkle finely
chopped almonds or pistachio nuts over and let them dry for a few
minutes in oven; shortly before serving fill the tarts with finely
cut preserved pineapple and pour a little pineapple syrup over them.

742. +Gooseberry Tarts.+-- Remove the tops and ends of 1 quart
gooseberries, put them in a saucepan, cover with boiling water and
let them boil 3 minutes; pour them into a colander, drain off the
water and put them into a dish; sprinkle over 1 cup sugar, add a
little white wine and let them stand till cold; then finish the same
as Cranberry Tarts.

743. +Grape Tarts+ are made the same as Cranberry Tarts.

744. +Cranberry Tarts.+-- Boil 1 quart cranberries with 1 cup water
till they are soft; then press them through a coarse sieve, put the
pulp into a saucepan and boil 5 minutes, stirring constantly; then
add 1 pound brown sugar and stir until it is dissolved; line 1½
dozen patty pans with puff paste, put into each one a small piece of
buttered paper, fill them with dry peas and bake in a hot oven till
nearly done; then take them from the oven, remove paper and peas,
fill each tart with the stewed cranberries, return them to the oven
again and bake till done; serve cold.

745. +Fanchonnettes de pommes.+-- Line 12 patty forms with short
paste (Mürber Teig), fill them half full with apricot marmalade
mixed with apple marmalade and bake in a medium hot oven till done;
when done take them out of the form, fill evenly with marmalade and
put over the top a meringue; set them in a long, shallow pan and
return for a few minutes longer to oven; arrange them on a long dish
with napkin and just before serving put a little currant jelly on
top of each; serve cold.

746. +Darioles à la vanille.+-- Line 10 small patty forms with puff
paste which has been rolled out 10 times; mix 1 tablespoonful flour
and 1 tablespoonful cornstarch with 1½ cups milk or cream and add 1
whole egg, the yolks of 3, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar and 1 teaspoonful
vanilla extract; when this is well mixed press it through a sieve
and add 6 macaroons broken into small pieces; 20 minutes before
serving fill the forms ¾ full with this cream and bake in a hot
oven; as soon as the cream is firm draw them to front of oven and
dust with sugar; let them remain a minute longer in oven; then
remove, take them out of the form and serve at once on a napkin.
Grated orange peel may be substituted for vanilla, lemon or almond
flavor.

747. +Flan de fruits printaniers.+-- Roll out ½ pound short paste
(Mürber Teig) ⅛ of an inch thick and lay over it a large pie plate
or round tin cover 12 inches in diameter; cut the paste off close to
the edge of plate, lift off the plate and put the round piece of
paste onto a large buttered tin or thick brown paper; next prepare a
warm paste (pâté à choux), put it into a paper funnel and squirt a
border 1 inch high on the surface on top of the round close to the
edge; then squirt small rills towards the center of round, so that
the flau can be cut by these rills and each piece has a border of
the paste; then squirt into each compartment 2 rills, so that each
piece has 2 compartments; brush the whole over with beaten egg and
bake a light brown; take an equal quantity of currants, raspberries
and strawberries, sprinkle them thickly with sugar and set in a cool
place; then cut some preserved peaches into pieces and add finely
cut preserved pineapple and preserved pitted cherries; reduce the
liquor of the 3 preserves by boiling it down; then set it aside to
cool; when the flau is done remove it from oven and set aside to
cool; shortly before serving cut the flau into pieces, lay them on a
large, round plate on a napkin (or take a round teatray) and arrange
the pieces so that the flau has its original form again; next put
into each compartment the fruit; arrange it tastily, pour a little
syrup over each one, brush the border over with syrup and serve.

748. +Flan de Cerises à la creme.+-- Line a deep jelly cake tin or
pie plate with short paste and fill it with pitted red cherries;
sprinkle over some sugar and set the flau in a medium hot oven to
bake; in the meantime mix together the yolks of 3 eggs, ½ cup sour
cream, 6 finely chopped almonds and 2 tablespoonfuls finely rolled
zwieback; when the flau is nearly done pour the mixture over and let
it bake till done; serve cold dusted with fine sugar.

749. +Flan de frangipane.+-- Line a large, deep pie plate with fine
pie crust or short paste, fill it half full of cream frangipane
flavored with a little grated rind and juice of orange and bake in a
medium hot oven; when done slip the flau onto a large plate; remove
the brown crust on top of cream and spread over a layer of marmalade
or jelly; fill up the plate with cream, spread over this a thin
layer of marmalade and pour over the top a maraschino or wine jelly
glaze.

750. +Flan de pommes à l’anglaise.+-- Line a deep pie plate with
short paste (Mürber Teig), spread over a thick layer of apricot
marmalade, fill up the plate with finely cut tart apples, sprinkle
over some sugar and bake in a medium hot oven; when done remove from
oven, spread over the top another layer of apricot marmalade and
serve cold.

751. +Flan de pommes.+-- Line a deep pie plate or jelly cake tin with
short paste (Mürber Teig) and ornament the edge with a pastry wheel;
the paste should be about ¼ inch in thickness; pound 6 ounces
blanched almonds with the yolks of 3 eggs, put the almonds in a dish
and add 4 more yolks, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, ¼ pound finely rolled
macaroons, 1½ tablespoonfuls melted butter and ¼ pound finely cut
citron and orange peel mixed; stir this to a cream and add the
beaten whites of 6 eggs; fill this mixture into the lined plate and
bake 30 minutes in a medium hot oven; as soon as it begins to brown
a little on top cover with buttered paper; in the meantime pare,
core and cut into quarters 1 dozen pippin or greening apples; place
a kettle with ¼ pound sugar, ½ bottle Malaga wine and 1½ cups
cherry syrup over the fire; as soon as it boils put in the apples and
continue the boiling until they are soft, but not broken; take out
the apples carefully and boil the syrup a little longer; when the
flau is done take from the oven and when cold lay the apples over
it; arrange them nicely, pour the syrup, half warm, over the apples
and serve. Flau of Bartlett pears or quinces are made the same way.

752. +Flan d’apricots à la creme meringue.+-- Line a large, deep
jelly cake tin with short paste (Mürber Teig), ornament the edge
with a pastry wheel, fill it half full of cream frangipane flavored
with vanilla and bake in a medium hot oven; when done carefully take
it out of the pan, lay it on a flat tin and put a layer of preserved
apricots over; cover them with cream frangipane, so the flau is
evenly full, spread over a thin layer of apricot marmalade and over
this a thin meringue; take some meringue in a paper funnel and
squirt rills in small squares over the top like lattice work; dust
over some fine sugar and place in a slow oven to bake till a light
brown; when cold put a little currant jelly into each small square
and serve on a napkin.

753. +Flan de peches.+-- Line a large, deep jelly cake tin with short
paste (Mürber Teig); roll some paste out and cut it into strips of
about 1 inch wide and ¼ inch thick; set this around the inside
against the rim of tin and ornament it with a pastry wheel; or cut
and scallop the strips before putting into the tin so the points of
scallops stand a little over the tin.

754. +Flan de peches.+-- Roll out ½ pound short paste ⅛ of an inch in
thickness, lay a deep jelly cake tin upside down onto the crust and
cut the paste off close to the tin with a knife; remove the tin and
lay the round piece of paste into the bottom of tin; roll out the
remaining paste and cut it into strips a little wider than the rim
of the jelly tins, ornament them with a pastry wheel or scallop one
side of the strips; fit the strips in neatly inside the rim so the
points of scallops stand a little above the edge of tin; fill the
tin half full of apricot marmalade mixed with apple marmalade and
also spread some of the marmalade on the sides; put the flau in a
hot oven and bake till done; in the meantime pare and cut into
halves 12 large, ripe peaches and boil them 5 minutes in sugar
syrup; remove the peaches and boil the syrup till it begins to
thicken; lay the peaches into the syrup again, add 1 teaspoonful
vanilla extract and boil them for a few minutes; when the flau is
done take it from the oven; remove the brown crust of marmalade and
spread over a little fresh marmalade; take the flau out of the jelly
tin, slip it onto a large plate and put in the peaches; have the
peach kernels blanched and freed from the brown skins, divide in
halves and lay them over the peaches; put little bits of currant
jelly over the peaches; boil the peach syrup down a little more and
pour when cold, just before serving, over the peaches. This may be
made of apples, cherries, apricots, plums, pears or any kind of
preserved fruit.




STRUDEL, STRAWBERRY SHORT CAKES, BABA, SOLEIL, ETC.


754a. +Strudel Paste.+-- Put ½ teaspoonful butter with ½ cup warm
milk, a little salt and the yolk of 1 egg into a bowl and mix it
with sufficient sifted flour to make a soft dough; put the dough on
to a floured board and work it with the hands for 10 minutes; it
should be soft, but not stick to the hands; brush the paste over
with a little warm water; rinse out a bowl with boiling water and
put it over the paste; let it lay ½ hour; after that time has
elapsed cover a kitchen table with a white cloth, dust with flour,
put the dough in center of table and pull it out as thin as
possible, like paper; when one side is pulled out lay a rolling pin
on it while you pull out the other side; then pull out the edges all
around, brush it over with melted butter and spread over a filling
of stewed preserved or fresh fruit or fruit marmalade; rice, farina,
chocolate or creams may also be used; after the filling is put on
lift the cloth up at one end and roll the strudel up like a music
roll; butter a large, round pan (not too deep) thickly with butter,
put one end of the strudel in the center of pan and turn the other
end around it so as to give it the shape of a snake curled up; brush
the strudel over with melted butter and bake till a light brown and
well done in a medium hot oven; when ready slip the strudel into a
dish, sprinkle thickly with sugar and serve. It may be eaten hot or
cold, with or without sauce. If 2 small strudels are to be made of
this quantity the paste should be divided into 2 parts before
pulling it apart. It may also be baked in the pan straight.

755. +Rice Strudel.+-- Put ½ cup rice with cold water over the fire,
boil 5 minutes, drain in a colander and rinse with cold water;
return rice to saucepan again with a little salt and 1 cup milk and
boil till soft; when done mix it with 1 ounce butter, the yolks of 2
eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, ¼ teaspoonful cinnamon and 3 ounces
seedless raisins; have the strudel paste pulled out on table as
directed, brush over with melted butter, spread over the rice, roll
it up and finish as directed in foregoing recipe. Serve with the
following sauce:--Boil ½ cup sugar with a little water until it
begins to turn yellow; remove from the fire and mix it slowly with
the whites of 2 eggs, previously beaten to a stiff froth, and add 1
tablespoonful wine and a little vanilla.

756. +Small Rice Strudels.+-- Prepare a dough from 1 tablespoonful
butter, 3 eggs, a little salt and sufficient flour to make a stiff
dough; roll it out very thin and cut into rounds the size of a tea
plate; parboil ½ cup rice in water, drain in a colander and rinse
with cold water; return the rice to saucepan again, add 1 pint cream
or milk, a little salt, sugar to taste and boil till tender; stir 1
tablespoonful butter to a cream and add the yolks of 3 eggs, the
grated rind of 1 lemon, the cooled off rice and lastly the whites
beaten to a stiff froth; spread a layer of rice over each of the
rounds of dough, roll them up like omelets, lay them into a buttered
pan or dish, pour 1 cup of boiling cream or milk over and bake the
strudels in a medium hot oven to a light brown; serve them sprinkled
with sugar as a dessert.

757. +Rice Strudel (with Jelly).+-- Put little pieces of apple or
currant jelly over the rice before rolling it up, otherwise the same
as in foregoing recipe.

758. +Farina Strudel.+-- Boil 1 pint milk with a little salt,
sprinkle in slowly ½ cup farina and continue boiling for 10 minutes;
when nearly cold stir 1 tablespoonful butter to a cream, add 2
tablespoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 4 eggs, the farina and lastly the
whites beaten to a stiff froth; finish the same as Rice Strudel;
serve with snow sauce. These quantities will make 2 medium sized
strudels, sufficient for 12 persons; serve as dessert.

759. +Farina Strudel (with Cocoanut).+-- Prepare the farina the same
as in foregoing recipe; spread the farina over the prepared strudel
paste and sprinkle over some grated cocoanut; roll up as directed
and bake in a buttered pan; serve with cocoanut snow sauce made as
follows:--Boil 1 cup sugar with 1 cup water until it begins to turn
yellow; remove from fire, add a little boiling water and mix it
slowly with the whites of 4 eggs previously beaten to a stiff froth;
add 1 teaspoonful vanilla, ½ cup white wine and 1 cup grated
cocoanut.

760. +Citron Strudel.+-- Stir the yolks of 6 eggs with 4
tablespoonfuls sugar to a cream and add the beaten whites of 3 eggs;
have the prepared strudel paste pulled out on a table, brush over
first with butter and then spread over the mixture of eggs and
sugar; over this spread the remaining 3 whites beaten to a stiff
froth; next sprinkle over ¼ pound well washed and dried currants, ¼
pound finely cut citron and roll the strudel up; have ready a
buttered pan, put one end of strudel in center of pan and turn the
other end around it as directed; brush over with beaten white of
egg, sprinkle with sugar and bake till done; serve either with or
without wine cream sauce.

761. +Lemon Strudel.+-- Mix 6 ounces finely cut citron with ½ pound
finely chopped almonds and add 1 cup of sugar, the juice of 3 lemons
and the grated rind of 1; let this stand for 1 hour; prepare a
strudel paste as directed, pull it out on a table over floured board
or tablecloth, brush over with butter, put on the lemon mixture and
roll it up; lay the strudel in a buttered pan, twist it around,
brush over with water and sprinkle as much sugar over till it lays
dry on top; then bake. This strudel is eaten cold and will keep for
weeks.

762. +Almond Strudel.+-- Stir 2 eggs with ½ cup sugar and the grated
rind of ½ lemon to a cream; pull out the strudel paste over a
tablecloth, brush over with melted butter, spread over the egg
mixture and sprinkle over this ¼ pound grated almonds and ½ cup
currants and seedless raisins; roll it up, put into a buttered pan,
brush over with melted butter, sprinkle with sugar, pour ½ cup milk
or cream into the pan and bake a light brown; serve with wine cream
sauce.

763. +Chocolate Almond Strudel.+-- Prepare a strudel paste as
directed; stir the yolks of 3 eggs with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar to a
cream and add the whites beaten to a stiff froth; brush the pulled
out strudel paste over with melted butter and then spread over the
egg mixture; next sprinkle over 3 ounces finely grated chocolate and
2 ounces finely cut almonds; roll it up and lay into a buttered pan,
brush over with beaten egg and bake in a medium hot oven to a light
brown; when done sprinkle over some grated chocolate and sugar;
serve cold with cream sweetened with sugar.

764. +Chocolate Cream Strudel.+-- Boil 2 tablespoonfuls sugar in ½
cup water and add 2 tablespoonfuls grated chocolate which has been
melted in oven; stir this over the fire until chocolate is well
dissolved and add ½ pint cream and the yolks of 4 eggs; beat this
with an egg beater until nearly boiling; remove and set aside to
cool; then mix it with the beaten whites; pull out a strudel paste,
brush over with melted butter, spread over the chocolate cream and
sprinkle over ½ cup finely cut almonds and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar;
roll it up, brush over with melted butter and sprinkle with sugar;
then bake in a buttered pan. This strudel is best eaten cold. 1
tablespoonful cocoa may be used instead of chocolate.

765. +Apple Strudel.+-- Pare, quarter and cut into fine slices ½
dozen greenings, put them in a saucepan with 1 tablespoonful butter,
3 tablespoonfuls sugar and cover and let them stew for a few minutes
till apples begin to get soft; then add 2 tablespoonfuls currants,
the same quantity of seedless raisins and finely cut citron,
a little grated orange peel and 1 tablespoonful apple or any other
kind of fruit jelly; mix all together and set aside; when cold have
the strudel paste pulled out over a tablecloth, brush over with
melted butter, spread the apples all over it, roll up and finish as
directed.

766. +Cherry Strudel.+-- Remove the pits from 1 pound ripe cherries,
put them over the prepared strudel paste, sprinkle over some sugar,
a little finely rolled zwieback and finish the same as directed;
serve dusted with sugar.

767. +Plum Strudel.+-- Remove the pits from 1 pound ripe plums, cut
them fine, put them over the strudel paste, sprinkle thickly with
sugar, dust over a little flour and finish as directed; serve
without sauce and dusted thickly with sugar. Peach strudel is made
the same way.

768. +Plain Strawberry Shortcake.+-- 1 quart flour, ½ teaspoonful
salt, ½ cup butter, 2 cups milk and 2 teaspoonfuls baking powder;
sift flour, powder and salt into a bowl, add the butter and chop it
very fine with a chopper in the flour; then mix it with the milk
into a soft dough; divide it into two equal parts and roll them out
to the size of a jelly plate; butter a deep jelly tin, put in 1
layer and brush it over with melted butter, put on the other layer
and bake in a quick oven; when done remove it from oven, separate
the 2 layers with a broad-bladed knife and spread them with butter;
mash some fresh strawberries with a silver spoon, cover the bottom
layer with the mashed strawberries and sprinkle thickly with
powdered sugar; lay on the other layer with the crust side downward,
cover with a thick layer of strawberries, sprinkle with sugar and
serve with vanilla sauce, sweet cream or the following sauce:--Beat
2 eggs until they foam, add 2 small cups milk, stirring constantly,
sweeten to taste and flavor with vanilla extract.

769. +Strawberry Shortcake, No. 1.+-- ½ cup butter, 1 cup sugar, 2
eggs, ¾ cup milk and 2 cups prepared flour; stir butter and sugar to
a cream and add the eggs 1 at a time; next add the sifted flour and
milk alternately; bake in two well buttered jelly tins in a medium
hot oven; when done remove and lay them on a napkin which has been
dusted with sugar; when cold put a layer onto a plate and cover the
cake with fresh strawberries; sprinkle over some sugar, lay over the
other layer, cover the top with strawberries, dust with sugar and
serve with cold cream or vanilla sauce.

770. +Strawberry Shortcake, No. 2.+-- 1 cup powdered sugar, 3 eggs
and 1 cup sifted flour mixed with 1 teaspoonful baking powder and 2
tablespoonfuls water; stir the yolks and sugar to a cream, add water
and flour and lastly the beaten whites; bake in 3 layers; when done
lay them over one another with strawberries between, sprinkle top
well with sugar and serve with cream or vanilla sauce.

771. +Peach Shortcake+ is made the same as Strawberry Shortcake. In
place of berries take peaches pared and cut into slices. Or this
cake may be made of all kinds of preserved fruit and served either
with sweet cream or vanilla sauce.

772. +Vienna Bröselcake.+-- 4 eggs, 5 tablespoonfuls sugar, 3 cups
flour, 1 cup warm milk, ½ cup butter, the grated rind of ½ lemon, 1
yeast cake, ¼ teaspoonful salt and a little vanilla; dissolve the
yeast in 1 cup milk, add 1 cup sifted flour and mix it into a
batter; set it in a warm place to rise; as soon as the sponge is
very light stir butter and sugar to a cream and add by degrees the
eggs, 1 at a time, stirring a few minutes between each addition;
next add salt, lemon or vanilla and lastly the remaining 2 cups
sifted flour and the sponge alternately; beat the whole thoroughly
with a wooden spoon and set it aside to rise; when light beat it
again with a spoon and fill it into a cake mould with tube in
center, which should be well buttered and dusted with fine bread,
cracker or zwieback crumbs; let it rise again to double its height;
in the meantime cut 1 handful almonds into small pieces without
removing the brown skin and mix them with 1 handful sugar, a little
cinnamon, a little grated lemon peel and some melted butter; work
this with a fork briskly into the dough; when the cake is ready to
bake press little dents in it with the handle of a silver spoon,
brush over with beaten egg, spread the almond mixture over the top
and bake in a medium hot oven 1 hour.

773. +Brioche Cake.+-- ¾ pound sifted flour, ½ pound butter, 4 eggs,
2 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 yeast cake dissolved in ½ cup warm milk
and ½ teaspoonful salt; mix ½ cup flour with the salt, yeast and
milk into a batter and set it in a warm place to rise until very
light; then stir the butter to a cream and add the sugar, the eggs,
1 at a time, stirring a few minutes between each addition; as soon
as the batter is light add it gradually to the butter and egg
mixture, add the flour and work it with your hands on a floured
board into a soft dough; cover and let it rise to double its height;
work it thoroughly and let it rise again; when the dough has
attained double its size butter a deep, round cake mould and cover
the bottom with a round piece of buttered paper; take one-sixth of
the dough off and lay it aside; shape the remaining dough into a
round loaf and put it into the buttered pan; make a hollow in
center; form the small piece of dough into the shape of a pear and
put the pointed end into the center of cake; set it to rise to
double its size; brush over with the yolk of 1 egg mixed with 1
tablespoonful water and bake in a medium hot oven.

774. +Small Brioche.+-- Take the same dough as in foregoing recipe
and roll it into small round balls the size of an egg; make a small
opening in center of each with a wet finger; put a small ball of
dough the size of a hazel nut into each one and set the brioche into
a buttered pan; let them rise to double their size; brush over with
the yolk of egg diluted with a little cold water and bake in a hot
oven; when done brush them over with melted butter.

775. +Baba.+-- ¾ pound flour, ½ pound butter, 5 eggs, 2 ounces sugar,
the finely chopped peel of ½ lemon, ¼ teaspoonful salt, 1 yeast cake
dissolved in ¼ cup warm milk, 2 ounces well washed and dried
currants, 1½ ounces seedless raisins, 1½ ounces finely cut citron
and a little finely cut candied orange peel; mix yeast, milk and ½
cup flour together and set it in a warm place to rise; stir the
butter to a cream, add the sugar and next the eggs, 1 at a time,
stirring a few minutes between each addition; next add the yeast
which was set in a warm place to rise, then the flour and fruit;
beat the whole thoroughly with the right hand for 15 minutes; cover
with a clean cloth and let it rise to double its size; press it down
and let it rise again; then put it into a well buttered form with a
tube in center, which should be ¾ full; let it rise till form is
full; paste with the white of egg a strip of buttered paper around
the top edge of form and bake the cake about 1 hour; when done turn
the cake out of form and set it for a few minutes in the oven to
dry; in the meantime put ½ cup sugar with ¾ cup Madeira wine over
the fire; let it get hot and pour all over the baba; serve either
hot or cold on a napkin. Small babas are made of the same dough and
baked in small deep forms, otherwise treated the same as above.
Instead of Madeira any other kind of wine may be used; also vanilla
or pineapple syrup.

776. +Savarin Cake.+-- 1 cup lukewarm cream or milk, 2 yeast cake, 3
ounces butter, 4 eggs, ¼ teaspoonful salt, ½ gill Cognac, 2
tablespoonfuls powdered sugar and 10 ounces sifted flour; dissolve
the yeast in half the milk and mix it with half the sifted flour
into a smooth batter; cover and set it in a warm place to rise,
which will take about ½ hour; in the meantime stir butter and sugar
to a cream and add the eggs, 1 at a time, stirring a few minutes
between each addition; next add alternately the remaining milk,
brandy, flour and lastly the batter which has been set in a warm
place to rise; beat the whole with the right hand for 15 minutes;
then cover with a napkin and let it rise in a warm place; butter a
round mould which holds about 1½ to 2 quarts and dust with flour;
turn the mould upside down, so the loose flour may fall out; when
the dough is very light mix it with 2 ounces finely cut almonds and
carefully fill it into the mould; set again in a warm place to rise
to double its size; bake in a medium hot oven for ½ hour; to
ascertain whether the cake is done or not thrust one end of a
knitting needle into center of cake; if the needle comes out clean
it is done; if any dough adheres to it the cake must be baked a few
minutes longer; as soon as the cake is done turn it onto a round
wire grate or sieve and prepare the following glaze:--Place a
saucepan with 1 cup sugar and ½ pint cold water over the fire and
boil 5 minutes; add 1 glass Jamaica rum, Cognac, sherry wine, kirsch
or any other kind of liquor; set the cake with the grate or sieve
onto a dish and pour the syrup evenly all over it; pour the syrup
which drops from the cake onto the dish back to saucepan again, boil
it up and pour over the cake; lift the grate on one side and slide
the cake onto a dessert dish; the top may be decorated with
preserved cherries or other fruit. The savarin is served as dessert,
either hot or cold. Small savarins are baked in small, deep forms
and dipped in hot syrup when done.

777. +Soleil.+-- 1 pound sifted flour, 10 ounces butter, 2 ounces
sugar, the grated rind of 1 lemon, ¼ pound sweet almonds, 2 yeast
cake, 8 eggs, a pinch of salt and ½ cup cream; dissolve the yeast in
a little warm milk; take 1 cup sifted flour and mix it with the
yeast into a soft dough; lay this in a bowl with a little warm cream
and set it in a warm place to rise to double its size; sift the
remaining flour, sugar and salt into a mixing bowl and make a hollow
in center; put in by degrees the well beaten eggs and butter and mix
and beat the whole with the hands for 15 minutes; pound the almonds
with 2 eggs and press them through a sieve; add them with the yeast
dough to the above mixture and mix the whole thoroughly together;
dust over some flour and set in a warm place to rise to double its
size; then fill it into a paper-lined form, which should be ½
filled, and set it to rise till form is nearly full; take a large
tin plate and cover the bottom with salt; onto this set the pan with
cake and bake in a medium hot oven about 40 minutes; try the cake
with a larding or knitting needle; when done remove it from the
oven, turn onto a sieve and pour hot vanilla syrup all over it; when
cold boil 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water till it forms a thread
between 2 fingers; remove from the fire, add 1 tablespoonful
raspberry syrup and stir till nearly cold; pour it over the cake and
set in oven for 2 minutes; remove instantly and lay a slice of
pineapple in center of cake; cut the pineapple into 4 parts without
altering its form and lay long strips of citron around it to imitate
the sun.

778. +Compiegne.+-- 1 pound sifted flour, 10 ounces butter, 4 whole
eggs, the yolks of 4, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, ½ cup cream, ¼
teaspoonful salt and 2 yeast cake; dissolve the yeast in ½ cup warm
milk, add a few spoonfuls of the flour and mix it into a batter; set
this in a warm place to rise; in the meantime stir the butter to a
cream and add the sugar, salt and eggs by degrees; next the yeast
and sifted flour; beat the whole with your hand for 15 minutes; then
add the cream, which should be whipped to a stiff froth; butter a
large, deep tin form and cover the bottom with a round piece of
buttered paper; fill in the cake mixture, which should fill the form
¾ full, paste a piece of paper around top edge of form and let it
rise till form is nearly full; bake in a moderate oven; serve either
hot or cold. Small compiegnes are baked in small forms and dipped in
sugar syrup mixed with wine or liquor.

779. +Damp Nudels.+-- 3 cups sifted flour, 1 tablespoonful sugar, ¼
teaspoonful salt, ½ tablespoonful butter, the yolks of 2 eggs, 2
yeast cake and 1 cup warm milk; put flour into a bowl and make a
hollow in the center; mix the yeast with ½ cup warm milk, put it
into the hollow of flour and mix with a little of the flour to a
thick batter; sprinkle a little of the flour over and cover and set
in a warm place to rise, which will take about ¾ hour; then add
salt, sugar, the yolks and butter, which has been melted in the
remaining ½ cup milk; mix the whole into a soft dough and set it in
a warm place; when it has risen to double its height cut pieces off
with a tablespoon and form them with your hands into round balls;
set these onto a floured board covered with a napkin and let them
rise to double their size; then brush them over with melted butter;
put 1 cup milk, ½ tablespoonful butter and 1 tablespoonful sugar in
a pan which is large enough to hold the nudels without touching each
other and can be covered tightly; put the pan on top of stove and as
soon as the milk boils put in the nudels, cover tightly and let them
boil slowly; when the milk has boiled away and the nudels begin to
fry in the butter (which can be heard and smelt) draw them to side
of stove and let them remain for a few minutes; transfer them to a
deep dish and serve with vanilla or snow sauce; the above will make
20 nudels and will take about ½ hour to cook. NOTE.--If the nudels
are not all wanted for dessert the remaining ones can be baked in
the oven and served for tea as a substitute for biscuits.




FRUIT DUMPLINGS.

(TO BE SERVED AS DESSERT.)


780. +Baked Apple Dumplings, No. 1.+-- 1 cup butter, 4 cups sifted
flour, ½ teaspoonful salt, the yolks of 3 eggs and ½ cup cold water;
put the flour and salt onto a paste board, make a hollow in center
and put in the yolks and butter; work this into a stiff paste,
adding the water by degrees; roll it out ½ inch in thickness and
then fold it up so that 3 layers lay on top of one another; lay the
paste onto a plate and let it stand in a cool place or on ice for 1
hour; pare 9 greening or pippin apples and remove the cores without
breaking the fruit; next roll out the paste very thin and cut it in
9 squares; put an apple in center of each square and put into each
apple 1 teaspoonful apple jelly; bring the corners of the square
together, brush the tips with a little white of egg and press them
lightly together; set the dumplings into a long tin pan and bake
until apples are done; if the oven is too hot cover them with paper;
in serving put 1 dumpling for each person onto a tea plate, pour a
few spoonfuls cherry wine or lemon sauce around it and put 1
spoonful hard sauce on top of each apple; or they may be served
without sauce and dusted with sugar. Baked apple dumplings may be
made of pie crust the same way.

781. +Baked Apple Dumplings, No. 2.+-- 2 cups sifted flour, ¼ pound
lard, 3 ounces butter, ½ teaspoonful salt, the yolk of 1 egg and ½
cup ice water; put the flour and ½ the lard and salt into a bowl and
chop the lard fine with a knife; beat the yolk and ice water till it
foams, add to the flour and mix it with the knife into a smooth,
stiff paste; roll it out on a board into a square, put the remaining
lard and butter in the center, inclose it with the paste and set for
½ hour on ice or in a cool place; then roll it out 3 times as long
as wide, fold together so that 3 layers lay over one another and let
it rest for 15 minutes; roll and fold it twice more; then roll it
out to ⅛ of an inch in thickness, cut into square pieces and set in
the center of each square a peeled and cored tart apple; bring the 4
corners of square together on top, brush the dumplings over with
beaten eggs and bake till a light brown and done; serve with hard
and wine or lemon sauce. These quantities will make 5 dumplings.

782. +Baked Apple Dumplings, No. 3.+-- 1 pint flour, ½ teaspoonful
salt, ½ cup cold water and ¾ cup lard; mix flour, salt and water to
a paste and work it for a little while on a board; roll it out into
a square piece 1 inch in thickness; also shape the lard into a
square piece, but smaller than the paste; fold the paste over the
lard and set it for a little while in a cool place; then roll it out
½ inch in thickness and fold together so that it is 3 double; roll
and fold it twice more; then roll it out ⅛ of an inch in thickness,
cut into squares and finish the same as in foregoing recipe.

783. +Baked Apple Dumplings+ (with Baking Powder).--2 cups flour, 1
teaspoonful baking powder, ½ cup water or milk, ½ cup butter or lard
and ¼ teaspoonful salt; sift flour, salt and baking powder into a
bowl, put in the butter and chop it fine; then mix the whole into a
soft dough; roll it out ⅛ of an inch in thickness and cut it into
squares; put a tart apple, pared and cored, onto each square and put
into each apple a small piece of butter and a little sugar; bring
the 4 corners of paste together on top of the apple, fasten them
with a little white of egg, put in a long, shallow pan and set in a
medium hot oven to bake till done; serve with hard or wine sauce; if
the oven is too hot cover them with paper. To ascertain when
dumplings are done thrust a knitting needle into them. If it
penetrates through the apples easily they are done; if not, the
baking must be continued until they are done.

784. +Apple Dumplings (bain-Marie).+-- 1 pound flour, 1 teaspoonful
baking powder, ½ teaspoonful salt, 1 cup cream or milk and ¾ cup
butter; sift flour, salt and powder into a bowl, add the milk and
mix it into a paste; roll it out on a floured board into a square
piece about 1½ inches in thickness; form the butter into a square
piece and lay it in the center of paste; fold the paste over it,
first from the right and left side, then from you and towards you;
put it on a tin plate and set in a cool place for ½ hour; next roll
it out 3 times as long as wide, fold it together and lay one end
over the middle; then the other end over that, so the paste is 3
double; roll and fold it twice more the same way; then roll it out
thin, butter and dust 8 cups with flour and line them with the
crust; fill them with finely sliced tart apples and sugar, cover
them with the same paste and set the cups in a pan of hot water; put
them in the oven to bake; when done turn them onto a dish, dust with
sugar and serve with 2 sauces--a wine or nutmeg sauce and a hard
sauce. These dumplings can be made with any kind of fruit.

785. +Steamed Apple Dumplings.+-- Prepare a fine puff paste, cut it
into squares and inclose in each square a nice peeled and cored,
juicy apple; lay the dumplings into a steamer, cover tightly, set
the steamer over boiling water and let them steam till done, which
will take from 1 to 1½ hours; serve with brandy, hard or sherry wine
sauce. Instead of puff paste a fine pie crust may be used.

786. +Boiled Apple Dumplings, No. 1.+-- 1 cup finely chopped suet, 2
cups prepared flour, 1 egg and ¾ cup water; mix this into a stiff
dough, roll it out ⅛ of an inch in thickness and cut into squares;
brush each square over with beaten egg and sprinkle over some finely
sifted bread crumbs; put in the center of each a nice pared and
cored juicy, tart apple; bring the 4 corners of the paste together
on top of apple and press them together; brush the dumplings over
with beaten egg and dust over them some fine bread crumbs; wring out
some small, square pieces of muslin in hot water and dust them with
flour; inclose each dumpling in a cloth, pin the 4 corners together,
drop them into slightly salted boiling water and boil ¾ hour; serve
with cherry wine or nutmeg sauce, or hard or brandy sauce. Dumplings
boiled in this way are dry and light. ½ cup of lard may be
substituted for the suet.

787. +Boiled Apple Dumplings, No. 2.+-- ½ pound lard, 1 pound sifted
flour, 1 teaspoonful salt and ½ cup cold water; put flour, lard and
salt in a bowl and chop the lard fine with a knife in the flour; add
the water and mix it with the knife into a stiff paste; put the
paste on a floured board and roll it out about ½ inch in thickness;
fold it up and roll it out again about ⅛ of an inch thick; cut into
squares and lay in the center of each a pared and cored juicy, tart
apple; bring the corners of the squares neatly together and press
them lightly; inclose each dumpling in a small square cloth, bring
the 4 corners together and fasten with a pin; each cloth should be
previously dipped in hot water, wrung out and dusted with flour on
the inside before the dumpling is put into it; drop them into
boiling water which is slightly salted, boil ½ hour and serve with
cherry wine sauce. NOTE.--A good pie crust can also be used for this
purpose. Peach, plum and cherry dumplings are made the same way. The
above ingredients will make about 8 dumplings. ½ pound finely
chopped suet may be used instead of lard.

788. +Lemon Dumplings.+-- Mix 2 cups prepared flour with 2 eggs, 1
tablespoonful butter or ½ cup finely chopped suet, 1½ tablespoonfuls
sugar, the juice and half the grated rind of 1 lemon and finish the
same as Orange Dumplings; serve with cherry wine sauce or prepare a
sauce the same as for Orange Dumplings and flavor with lemon instead
of oranges.

789. +Orange Dumplings.+-- 2 cups prepared flour, 2 eggs, 2
teaspoonfuls butter, 1 tablespoonful sugar and 1 cup water; mix this
into a thick batter; pare 3 nice oranges, cut them into small pieces
and remove the pits and all the skin, so that there is nothing left
but the meat of the oranges; stir this into the batter; have a
kettle of boiling water on the stove with a little salt; next drop
the mixture with a tablespoon into the boiling water, taking care
not to put too much in at once; cover the kettle and boil the
dumplings just 10 minutes; remove them with a skimmer to a warm dish
and serve at once with the following sauce:--Stir 2 tablespoonfuls
butter with 1 cup powdered sugar to a cream and add by degrees 1
egg, 2 tablespoonfuls brandy or wine, the juice of 1 orange and a
little grated rind. These dumplings should be removed from the water
as soon as done, otherwise they will become heavy.

790. +Fruit Dumplings.+-- Stir 1 ounce butter to a cream and add by
degrees 3 eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls finely
chopped almonds, a little grated lemon peel, 4 large apples peeled
and cut into small slices and ¼ pound bread that has been previously
soaked in water and pressed out in a napkin; add cup of bread
crumbs, mix all together, drop with a spoon dumplings from this
mixture into slightly salted boiling water, boil until done and
serve with wine sauce. Cherries, peaches, pears, plums, blackberries
or huckleberries may be used instead of apples.

791. +Strawberry Dumplings.+-- 1 cup beef suet freed from strings and
chopped fine, 3 cups sifted prepared flour, 1 tablespoonful sugar
and 2 eggs; mix with ¾ cup cold water to a soft dough; shape into
large balls with floured hands, put into a dumpling cloth that is
buttered and floured on the inside and fasten the 4 corners of the
cloth together with a pin; drop into slightly salted boiling water
and boil till done, which will take about ½ hour. The best way to
ascertain if dumplings are done is to thrust a knitting needle into
them. If no dough clings to it and the needle comes out clean they
are done and must be instantly removed from fire, taken from the
cloth, laid on a warm dish and served at once; serve with the same
sauce as the following recipe.

792. +Strawberry Dumplings (another way).+-- 2 cups prepared flour, 2
eggs, 1 tablespoonful butter, 1 tablespoonful sugar and 1 cup milk
or water; mix this into a stiff batter and stir in lastly 1 cup well
washed and drained berries and finish the same as Orange Dumplings;
serve with the following sauce:--Stir 2 tablespoonfuls butter with 1
cup powdered sugar to a cream and add the yolks of 2 eggs and 3
tablespoonfuls white wine; when this is well mixed stir 1 cup nice,
ripe strawberries into it; put sauce into a glass dish; have the
whites beaten to a stiff froth, spread it over the top of sauce and
set nice, large strawberries around the edge of dish. These
dumplings may be made of all kinds of fruit--peaches, cherries,
plums, pears or apricots.

793. +Fine Fruit Dumplings.+-- Pare and quarter some peaches, apples
or pears and boil them in sugar syrup until done, but in such a way
that the pieces stay whole; then take them out with a skimmer and
lay on a long dish; in the meantime prepare some dumplings as
follows:--Place 1 cup milk with 1 tablespoonful butter over the
fire; as soon as it boils stir in 1 cup sifted flour and stir
constantly until it has formed into a smooth dough and loosens
itself from the bottom of saucepan; after the dough has cooled stir
1 tablespoonful butter to a cream and add by degrees the yolks of 3
eggs, the dough, 1 tablespoonful dry farina and lastly the whites
beaten to a stiff froth; form the mixture with a tablespoon into
dumplings and drop them into the boiling syrup in which the fruit
was boiled; when done take them out with a skimmer and lay in a
circle around the fruit; pour the syrup over them and serve. These
dumplings may also be made with dried fruit.

794. +Plain Suet Dumplings.+-- 1 pint bread crumbs soaked in 1 cup
milk, ½ pound suet freed from strings and chopped fine, 4 eggs
(whites and yolks beaten separately), 1 tablespoonful sugar, 1
teaspoonful salt and 1 cup prepared flour or flour with ½
teaspoonful Royal baking powder; work into a smooth dough and shape
with floured hands into dumplings; boil them inclosed in little,
square pieces of muslin or dumpling cloths that have been previously
dipped in hot water, wrung out and floured on the inside; boil 40
minutes and serve with strawberry, cherry or wine sauce; or stir any
kind of fresh fruit into ½ pint hard sauce and serve it with the
dumplings.

795. +Plain Dumplings (with stewed Apples).+-- Pare, core and cut
into quarters 6 tart apples; boil 1 cup sugar with 2 cups water to a
syrup, put in the apples and boil till tender, but do not allow them
to break; when done take the apples out with a skimmer and lay them
on a dish; mix 1 cup prepared flour with 1 egg, 1 teaspoonful butter
and a little water into a thick batter, drop a small portion of the
mixture with a teaspoon into the boiling apple syrup and boil 5
minutes; remove them, lay in a circle around the apples and pour the
syrup over them. A few slices of lemon may be boiled with the syrup.
This dish can also be made of pears, dried apples or apricots.

796. +Apple Dumplings (with Rice).+-- Place ½ pound rice in a
saucepan over the fire with cold water, boil 3 minutes and drain in
a colander, rinsing with cold water; then put it back on the fire in
the same saucepan with 1 pint milk, ½ teaspoonful salt, ½
teaspoonful sugar and a little piece of butter; boil until thick;
remove from the fire and mix it with 2 well beaten eggs; dip the
dumpling cloths in hot water, wring them out and flour well inside;
put 2 spoonfuls of the boiled rice upon each cloth, spread it out
smooth and lay in the center of each a peeled and cored apple; fill
the opening left by the removal of the core with currant jelly or
sugar; draw the 4 corners of the cloth together, bring them to the
top of the apple and fasten with pins; drop them into boiling water
and boil ½ hour; serve with sweet cream or vanilla, fruit or claret
sauces.




CAKES.


797. +Plain Cake.+-- 1 cup butter, 1 cup milk, 2 cups sugar, 3 cups
prepared flour, 4 eggs and the grated rind of 1 lemon; stir butter
and sugar to a light white cream with your right hand; then stir
with a silver spoon, add the eggs, 1 at a time, stirring a few
minutes between each addition; next add the sifted flour and milk
alternately; butter a large, round cake pan and line it with
buttered paper; pour in the cake mixture and bake in a medium hot
oven for 1 hour; to ascertain if cake is done thrust a knitting
needle into center of cake; if it comes out clean the cake is done;
if not, the baking must be continued; when done remove the cake from
oven and let it stand 10 minutes; then turn it out of pan, remove
the paper and set the cake in a cool place or put it when cold in a
tin cake box. If plain flour is used take 1½ teaspoonfuls baking
powder and sift it with the flour. Measure with a cup which holds
half a pint.

798. +Marble Cake.+-- Take the same mixture as for Plain Cake and
divide it into 3 equal parts; add to one part some red sugar or a
little prepared cochineal, to give it a fine pink tint; stir into
another part 3 tablespoonfuls grated chocolate and leave the third
part plain; butter a large cake pan and line it with buttered paper;
fill the pan about ½ inch deep with the plain batter and drop upon
this in 3 or 4 places 1 spoonful of the dark and pink batters; pour
in more plain batter; then drop in the pink and brown the same way;
continue until all is used; the pink may be omitted if the coloring
is not handy; bake the same as Plain Cake; when done ice the cake
with boiled chocolate glaze.

799. +Nut Cake.+-- Prepare a cake batter the same as for Plain Cake,
stir in 1 pint shelled walnuts broken into pieces and finish the
same as Plain Cake; or stir 3 cups freshly grated cocoanut into the
plain cake batter; or stir 1 pint shelled hickory nuts into the
plain cake batter; or almonds cut into strips; Brazil nuts may also
be used.

800. +Citron Cake.+-- Cut ½ pound citron into fine slices and prepare
a cake batter the same as for Plain Cake; butter a large, round pan
and line it with buttered paper; pour in a layer of cake batter;
then a layer of sliced citron; then batter and citron again;
continue until all is used; bake in a medium hot oven till done,
which will take about 1¼ hours; if the oven should be too hot cover
the cake with buttered paper.

801. +Lady Cake.+-- 1 cup butter, 2 cups sugar, 1 cup milk, 3 cups
prepared flour, the whites of 8 eggs and the grated rind and juice
of 1 lemon; stir butter and sugar with your hand to a light white
cream and beat the whites to a stiff froth; take a silver spoon and
stir the whites, the lemon, sifted flour and milk alternately into
the creamed butter and sugar; butter a large mould and line it with
buttered paper; pour in the mixture and bake 1 hour. NOTE.--½ pound
blanched almonds cut into strips may be stirred into the cake
mixture and flavored with vanilla; or 1 pint shelled walnuts broken
into pieces or ½ pound finely cut citron can be stirred into the
batter and flavored with essence of almonds; ice with clear icing.

802. +Dutchess Cake.+-- 1 cup butter, 1 cup milk, 2 cups sugar, 3
cups prepared flour, the yolks of 8 eggs and 2 teaspoonfuls peach
extract; stir butter and sugar with the right hand to a light white
cream; then stir with a spoon and add the yolks, 2 at a time,
stirring a few minutes between each addition; next add the
flavoring, the sifted flour and milk alternately; butter a large,
round cake pan and line it with buttered paper; pour in the cake
mixture and bake in a medium hot oven 1 hour. NOTE.--1 pint shelled
walnuts broken into pieces may be stirred into this cake mixture or
Brazil nuts may be used; also peanuts broken into pieces.

803. +Fruit Cake.+-- Prepare a cake batter the same as for Plain
Cake; remove the stones from ½ pound raisins; cut ¼ pound citron
into fine slices and mix the raisins and citron with ½ pound well
washed and dried currants; dust the fruit with flour, stir it into
the cake mixture and finish the same as Plain Cake.

804. +Rich Fruit Cake.+-- 2 pounds stoned raisins, 2 pounds seedless
raisins, 2 pounds well washed and dried currants, 1 pound finely
sliced citron, 1 pound butter, ½ pint good brandy, 1 pint molasses,
1 pound brown sugar, 2 teaspoonfuls grated nutmeg, 2 teaspoonfuls
ground cinnamon, cloves and mace, 12 eggs and 1 pound flour sifted
with 2 teaspoonfuls baking powder; dredge the fruit with flour; stir
butter and sugar with the hand to a light white cream; then stir
with a wooden spoon and add the eggs, 1 at a time, stirring a few
minutes between each addition; next add the molasses, brandy, spice
and sifted flour and lastly stir in the fruit; butter 2 large, round
cake pans and line them with brown paper; fill in the mixture and
bake in a medium hot oven from 3 to 4 hours. Great care must be
taken that the oven is just right, as the cake burns very easily.

805. +Orange Layer Cake.+-- ½ cup butter, 1 cup sugar, ½ cup milk,
the whites of 3 eggs, 1½ cups prepared flour and the grated rind of
½ orange; stir butter and sugar with your right hand to a light
white cream and add the grated orange rind; beat the whites to a
stiff froth; then add them alternately with the sifted flour and
milk to the above mixture; butter 2 large jelly cake tins and line
them with buttered tissue paper; put an equal portion of the cake
batter into each pan; spread it evenly with a broad-bladed knife
dipped in water and bake the cakes in a medium hot oven till a light
brown and done, which will take from 15 to 20 minutes; to ascertain
when cakes are done thrust a knitting needle into the center of
them; if it comes out clean the cakes are done; if any dough adheres
to it the baking must be continued; as soon as the cakes are done
remove them from the oven; lay a clean cloth or paper on the kitchen
table and dust over it some powdered sugar; turn the cakes out of
pans upside down onto the cloth and let them lay till cold; in the
meantime prepare the filling, as follows: Put in a small saucepan
the juice of 1 orange, 1 teaspoonful lemon juice, a little grated
orange peel, 1 teaspoonful butter and the yolks of 3 eggs; set the
saucepan in a vessel of boiling water and stir the contents till
they thicken; remove from the fire and when cold add ½ cup sugar;
lay one layer of cake, bottom side up, on a jelly cake dish and
spread over it the orange mixture; lay over the remaining layer,
right side up, and dust with powdered sugar; or ice the cake with
clear icing; or cover the top of cake with an orange glaze.

806. +Lemon Layer Cake.+-- 1 cup butter, 1 cup milk, 2 cups sugar, 3
cups prepared flour and the whites of 6 eggs; stir butter and sugar
with the right hand to a light white cream, then stir it with a
spoon; beat the whites to a stiff froth; add by degrees the sifted
flour, the beaten whites and milk alternately to the above mixture;
butter 4 good sized jelly tins and line them with buttered paper;
then fill in a thin layer of the cake mixture, spread it smooth with
a knife and bake in a medium hot oven to a light brown and well
done; in the meantime prepare a filling as follows:--Put in a small
saucepan the grated rind and juice of 1 lemon, the yolks of 6 eggs,
1 tablespoonful butter and 2 tablespoonfuls water; set the saucepan
in a vessel of boiling water and stir till contents thicken; remove
from fire when cold, add 1 cup sugar; when cake is done remove it
from oven, lay a clean cloth on a table, dust over some powdered
sugar and turn the cake out of pan onto the cloth; when cold put 1
layer on a jelly cake dish, bottom side up, and spread over ⅓ of the
lemon mixture; put on another layer, upside down, and spread it with
the mixture; then treat the third layer the same way; then put on
the last layer, right side up, and cover the top with a lemon glaze
or dust it with powdered sugar. NOTE.--If this cake is not wanted so
large it may be divided into 2 cakes, taking 2 layers for each cake;
or use half the quantities. Cream or jelly may be used instead of
lemon filling.

807. +Chocolate Layer Cake.+-- 4 eggs, 1 cup butter, 2 cups sugar, 1
cup milk, 3 cups prepared flour and 1 teaspoonful vanilla; stir
butter and sugar to a light white cream and add the eggs, 1 at a
time, stirring a few minutes between each addition; next add
vanilla, the sifted flour and milk alternately; bake in paper lined
jelly tins in a quick oven; make 4 layers; in the meantime prepare
the following filling:--Beat the whites of 3 eggs to a stiff froth
and add 1½ cups powdered sugar, 4 tablespoonfuls Baker’s grated
chocolate and 1 teaspoonful vanilla; mix all well together and put
it between the layers and on top; or put boiled chocolate glaze
between the layers and over the top (see Boiled Chocolate Glaze).
The top of cake may be ornamented with blanched almonds laid in a
circle around the top and some in the center.

808. +Chocolate Cream Cake.+-- 1 cup sugar, ½ cup milk, 1½ cups
prepared flour, 1 tablespoonful butter, 2 eggs and mix the same as
in foregoing recipe; bake in 2 layers in jelly tins; for the
cream:--Boil ¾ cup milk and add ½ tablespoonful butter, 2
tablespoonfuls grated chocolate, ½ cup sugar and 1 tablespoonful
cornstarch wet with a little cold water; stir and boil for a few
minutes; remove from fire and mix with 1 beaten egg and ½
teaspoonful vanilla extract; when cold lay one of the cake layers on
a flat dish and spread half the chocolate mixture over it; put on
the other layer, spread over the top the remaining chocolate cream
and decorate the top with shelled walnuts.

809. +Cocoanut Layer Cake.+-- ¾ cup sugar, ½ cup butter, 1½ cups
prepared flour, the grated rind and juice of ½ lemon, the whites of
3 eggs and ½ cup milk; stir butter and sugar to a light white cream;
beat the whites to a stiff froth and add them by degrees alternately
with the sifted flour and milk to the creamed butter and sugar;
butter 2 good sized jelly cake tins and line them with buttered
paper; put an equal portion in each tin, spread it evenly with a
broad-bladed knife dipped in water and bake them in a medium hot
oven to a delicate brown color; when done remove them from oven and
let them stand for a few minutes; then turn the cakes onto buttered
paper to cool; in the meantime grate 1 cocoanut and beat the white
of 1 egg to a stiff froth; add ¾ cup powdered sugar and the juice of
½ lemon; lay one cake layer, bottom side up, on a jelly cake dish,
spread over half the white icing and sprinkle over a thick layer of
the freshly grated cocoanut; put on the remaining layer, right side
up, spread over the rest of icing, cover with a thick layer of the
cocoanut and sift over some powdered sugar. This cake may be served
as a dessert with vanilla sauce.

810. +Lemon Cream Cake.+-- ½ cup butter, 1 cup sugar, the whites of 3
eggs, ½ cup milk, 1½ cups prepared flour and the grated rind and
juice of ½ lemon; stir butter and sugar to a cream; beat the whites
to a stiff froth and add them alternately with the sifted flour and
milk to the creamed butter and sugar; add lastly the lemon; butter 2
jelly tins and dust them with cracker dust; put in the mixture,
spread it evenly with a knife and bake a light brown; when done put
a napkin or clean cloth on the kitchen table and dust with powdered
sugar; turn the cakes upside down onto the napkin and let them lay
till cold; cream for filling:--Boil ¾ cup milk with 2 tablespoonfuls
sugar; dissolve 1 tablespoonful cornstarch in ¼ cup cold milk, stir
it into the boiling milk and boil a few minutes; add 1 teaspoonful
butter, a pinch of salt and remove it from fire; beat up the yolks
of 3 eggs with 1 tablespoonful cold milk, stir them into the
cornstarch and add 1 teaspoonful essence of lemon; when cold put 1
layer of cake, upside down, onto a plate and spread over the cream;
put the other layer over it, right side up, and dust the top with
powdered sugar.

811. +Vanilla Cream Cake+ is made the same as Lemon Cream Cake,
using vanilla flavoring instead of lemon.

812. +Jelly Cake, No. 1.+-- 3 eggs, 1 cup powdered sugar,
1 cup sifted flour mixed with 1 teaspoonful baking powder, 2
tablespoonfuls water and the grated rind of ½ lemon; stir sugar
and eggs to a cream and add alternately the sifted flour, water and
lemon; butter 3 medium sized jelly tins and dust them with finely
sifted bread crumbs; put an equal portion of the cake mixture into
each tin, spread it evenly and bake in a medium hot oven to a
delicate brown; when done remove the cakes from oven.

813. +Jelly Cake, No. 2.+-- ¾ cup butter, 2 cups sugar, 1 cup milk, 3
cups flour, 1½ teaspoonfuls baking powder, 4 eggs and 1 teaspoonful
essence of lemon; stir butter and sugar with the right hand to a
light white cream; then stir with a spoon and add the eggs, 1 at a
time, stirring a few minutes between each addition; next add the
lemon and then alternately the milk and flour; bake in 3 jelly cake
tins in a medium hot oven to a delicate brown color; the tins should
be lined with buttered paper; when cold lay the layers over one
another with jelly between and dust the top with powdered sugar or
ice it with fruit icing.

814. +Jelly Cake, No. 3.+-- Stir ¼ pound butter with ½ pound powdered
sugar to a light cream and add alternately 1½ cups prepared flour
(sifted), the whites of 4 eggs beaten to a stiff froth and 10 drops
extract of bitter almonds; butter 2 good sized jelly cake tins and
line them with buttered paper; put an equal portion of the cake
mixture into each one, spread it evenly with a knife dipped in water
and bake to a delicate brown color; when cold arrange in layers with
jelly between and sift fine sugar over the top.

815. +Wine Glazed Cake.+-- 4 eggs, 1 cup flour, ½ cup sugar, 1
teaspoonful baking powder and the grated rind and juice of ½ lemon;
stir eggs and sugar to a cream; sift the flour and baking powder
together and add them with the lemon to the above mixture; butter a
round cake pan and dust it with fine bread crumbs; pour in the
mixture and bake about ½ hour in a moderate oven; for glazing
dissolve ½ cup sugar in ½ cup cold water and put it over the fire to
boil until the sugar forms a thread between 2 fingers; then add 1
tablespoonful sherry wine, remove it from the fire and stir until a
skin forms on top; then slowly pour it over the cake.

816. +Wine Glazed Cream Cake.+-- Stir 4 eggs with ½ cup granulated
sugar to a cream and add ¾ cup sifted flour in which 1 teaspoonful
baking powder has been mixed; bake in a round pan; when done pour
over a wine glaze the same as in foregoing recipe and decorate the
top with blanched almonds, hazel or walnuts; when cold cut the cake
in half with a sharp knife; spread the under half thickly with
whipped cream, put the other layer over it and cover the top with
whipped cream. NOTE.--This mixture may be baked in a long, shallow
pan and before putting it into the oven sprinkle 2 tablespoonfuls
granulated sugar over the top. When done cut into squares; or omit
the sugar and when done glaze with boiled sugar glaze and cut into
squares.

817. +Pineapple Cake.+-- ½ pound butter, 1 pound powdered sugar, ¾
pound flour, 1 heaping teaspoonful baking powder, ½ pint pineapple
syrup, 2 whole eggs, the yolks of 4 and 1 teaspoonful essence of
vanilla; wash the butter several times in cold water and dry it in a
napkin; put butter and sugar in a mixing bowl and stir with the
right hand to a light white cream; then stir with a spoon and add
the 2 whole eggs, 1 at a time, stirring a few minutes between each
addition; next add the yolks, 1 at a time; sift flour and baking
powder together; add the flour and pineapple syrup alternately to
the above mixture; butter 3 large, deep jelly cake tins and dust
them with flour; put an equal portion of the cake batter into each
pan, spread it evenly with a broad-bladed knife dipped in water and
bake the cakes in a medium hot oven to a delicate brown; when done
remove the cakes from the oven; lay a napkin on a pastry board and
dust over some powdered sugar; turn the cake out, upside down, onto
the napkin; when cold put one cake, bottom side up, on a cake dish
and spread over a layer of pineapple marmalade; put on the last
layer, right side up, and cover the top with pineapple glaze made as
follows:--Stir ½ pound powdered sugar with 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls
pineapple syrup and a few drops of prepared saffron to a stiff
sauce; set it for a few minutes over the fire, stirring constantly
until lukewarm; then pour it by spoonfuls over the cake and lay some
preserved pineapple slices in a circle around the cake; or use
candied pineapple.

818. +Wild Rose Cake.+-- 1 pound powdered sugar, ¾ pound flour, ½
pound butter, 1 teaspoonful baking powder, the whites of 8 eggs and
1 cup white brandy; sift flour and baking powder together; wash the
butter in cold water, to remove the salt, and dry it in a napkin;
put butter and sugar in a mixing bowl and stir it with the right
hand to a light white cream; beat the whites to a stiff froth and
stir them with a spoon in small portions alternately with the flour
and brandy into the creamed butter; divide the mixture into 4 equal
parts; add to one part a little prepared cochineal, to color it a
delicate pink, and flavor with 2 teaspoonfuls rose water; stir into
the second part 2 tablespoonfuls cocoa and 1 teaspoonful vanilla
sugar; add to the third part the yolks of 2 eggs and ½ teaspoonful
essence of bitter almonds; leave the fourth part white and flavor it
with 1 teaspoonful essence of lemon; take some large, deep jelly
cake tins, rub them well inside with butter and dust with flour; put
each part of cake mixture into a separate pan and spread the batter
smooth with a broad-bladed knife; then bake in a medium hot oven to
a delicate brown and well done; lay some clean brown paper or a
napkin on a table and dust over some powdered sugar; as soon as one
cake is done remove from the oven and let it stand 3 minutes; then
turn the pan upside down onto the paper; treat the remaining cakes
the same way; as soon as the cakes are cooled off prepare a meringue
as follows:--Beat the whites of 5 eggs to a stiff froth and mix them
with ½ pound powdered sugar; have ready ½ pound blanched almonds, ½
pound blanched walnuts and ½ pound blanched Brazil nuts; chop the
nuts fine; when all is prepared put the cakes together and put the
white layer upside down on a jelly dish; spread over the layer ⅓ the
meringue and sprinkle over ⅓ the chopped nuts; then put on the dark
layer; spread again with meringue and sprinkle with nuts; next put
on the yellow layer; spread over the remaining meringue and sprinkle
over the nuts; lay the pink layer on top, with the right side up,
and cover with the following glaze:--Mix ½ pound powdered sugar with
a few spoonfuls red fruit juice or fruit syrup, such as red cherry,
raspberry or strawberry syrup; stir the sugar to a thick sauce, set
it over the fire and stir constantly until the sugar is lukewarm;
then pour it by spoonfuls over the cake; lay blanched almonds and
blanched walnuts in a circle around the edge of cake and a few in
the center.

819. +Biscuit au beurre.+-- ½ pound powdered sugar, ¼ pound sifted
flour, ¼ pound cornstarch, ½ pound melted butter, 7 eggs and the
grated rind of 1 lemon; beat the 7 whites to a stiff froth and add
by degrees the yolks and sugar; set this on a hot stove and beat
till it is warm; then remove it and continue the beating until
nearly cold; strain the melted butter into a cup and continue the
beating with the right hand; hold the cup with the melted butter in
the left hand; pour butter into the mixture gradually; next stir in
the sifted flour and cornstarch; butter a round cake pan and line it
with buttered tissue or waxed paper; pour in the mixture; cover the
bottom of a pie plate with salt, set the pan with cake onto this and
bake ¾ hour in an oven not too hot; if it browns too much put paper
over it.

820. +Fine Sponge Cake.+-- 1 pound powdered sugar, 12 eggs and not
quite 1 pound (about 2 tablespoonfuls less) of flour; then add the
grated rind and juice of 1 lemon; put the flour into a tin pan and
set it in front of oven to get warm; put the eggs, sugar and lemon
into a deep stone mixing bowl; set the bowl into a large dishpan of
hot water in such a way that the bowl is half covered with water;
beat the contents of bowl with an egg beater for ¾ hour; then slowly
add the flour, continue the beating for a few minutes longer and
pour the mixture into a large round pan or 2 medium sized ones; the
pan should be previously well buttered and lined with fine brown
buttered or waxed paper; bake 1 hour in a slow oven. Sponge cake
made according to this recipe is elegant, but care must be taken to
follow the instructions exactly. Half these quantities will make a
good sized cake. If the oven should be rather hot at the bottom put
in a large pie plate with salt, set the pan with cake onto it and
bake.

821. +Delicate Sponge Cake.+-- 9 eggs, 1½ small cups granulated
sugar, 1½ small cups flour (sifted 3 times) and the grated rind and
juice of 1 lemon; put the 9 yolks in a bowl and the whites into a
deep dish; add to the yolks ½ the sugar and stir them to a cream;
beat the whites to a stiff froth and add the remaining sugar,
beating constantly; then add slowly, in small portions, the creamed
yolks; next the lemon; continue the beating with an egg beater until
all is well mixed; then stir in lightly the sifted flour; butter a
long, shallow pan and line it with buttered paper; pour in the
mixture and bake in a slow oven ¾ hour to a delicate brown; when
done carefully remove the cake from oven and let it stand for a few
minutes before taking out of the pan. This cake may be iced either
with clear icing or wine or fruit glaze.

822. +Marguerites.+-- ¼ pound flour, ¼ teaspoonful salt, ¼ pound
sugar, 1 whole egg, the yolk of 1 egg, 1 heaping teaspoonful anise
seed, the grated rind of ½ lemon, ½ cup lukewarm water and 2
tablespoonfuls melted butter; measure after the butter is melted;
sift the flour in a bowl, add salt, sugar, grated lemon peel, the
eggs and mix the whole with the water into a batter; lastly add the
butter and anise seed; put a wafer iron over the fire; when hot
brush it over with melted lard; put 1 teaspoonful of the batter in
the center of wafer iron, close it and bake the cake a light brown
on both sides; as soon as one is done take it from the iron and roll
up like a tube; continue to bake the remaining batter the same way;
these quantities will make 50 cakes. 2 teaspoonfuls of vanilla sugar
may be used instead of anise seed. These cakes may be served either
with ice cream, wine or coffee.

823. +Macaroons.+-- Scald ½ pound sweet almonds with a few bitter
ones, remove the brown skins and spread the nuts out on paper to
dry; then pound them in a wedgewood mortar to a paste with the
whites of 2 eggs and add 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla sugar or the grated
rind of 1 lemon; mix it with ½ pound powdered sugar and 2
tablespoonfuls clear icing made as follows:--Take ½ the white of 1
egg, mix it with 2 tablespoonfuls sifted powdered sugar and stir for
a few minutes; then add it to the almonds; mix the whole into a firm
paste and form with the hands into small round balls the size of a
hickory nut; line some shallow tin pans with brown paper (such as is
used for wrapping paper), but do not butter it; set the balls in
even rows, one inch apart, on the paper, flatten each one a little
with a wet finger and bake them in a medium hot oven to a golden
color; when done wet a pastry board with cold water and lay the
macaroons on the wet board with the paper side towards the board;
after 5 minutes the macaroons may be lifted from the paper, as the
dampness loosens them; the above quantities will make 50 macaroons.
Great care should be taken to use the exact amount of ingredients
here stated.

824. +Cookies.+-- 1 cup butter, 2 cups sugar, 2 eggs, the grated rind
of 1 lemon and 1 teaspoonful baking powder; stir the butter and
sugar to a light white cream and add the eggs 1 at a time; sift the
powder with 2 cups flour, add it to the mixture and work the whole
with sufficient flour into a stiff dough; roll it out ⅛ inch in
thickness, cut with a cake cutter into rounds and bake them a light
brown in well buttered shallow tin pans.

825. +Butter Cakes.+-- 1 yeast cake 1 quart sifted flour, 1½ pints
warm milk or water and 1 teaspoonful salt; dissolve the yeast in a
little warm water; sift the flour and salt into a mixing bowl, make
a hollow in center, pour in the yeast and water, mix into a batter
and let it stand over night (this is called setting a sponge); next
morning stir 1 cup sugar with ½ cup lard and ½ cup butter to a cream
and add 2 eggs, 1 at a time, stirring a few minutes between each
addition; then add the grated rind of 1 lemon and a very little
powdered cardamon; mix this thoroughly with the sponge, add
sufficient sifted flour to make a soft dough, cover it with a clean
cloth and set in a warm place to rise to double its height; then
butter 4 long, shallow tin pans (12 inches long, 8 inches wide and 1
inch deep) and dust each one with flour; when the dough has attained
the desired lightness divide it into 4 equal parts; roll each part
out on the pastry board, put it into the pan, press evenly all over
and again set it to rise to top of pan; when ready to bake brush
each cake over with melted butter, sprinkle over 2 tablespoonfuls
granulated sugar mixed with a little cinnamon and bake in a quick
oven to a light brown; as soon as done remove the cakes from the
pans and lay them on a long platter, one over the other, with the
sugared sides together; when cold serve with coffee.

826. +Butter Cakes (with Baking Powder).+-- 2 cups sifted flour, 2
eggs, 1½ teaspoonfuls baking powder, 1 tablespoonful melted butter,
1 cup milk, ½ teaspoonful salt, the grated rind of 1 lemon and ½ cup
well washed currants; sift flour, salt and baking powder into a
mixing bowl, make a hollow in center, put in the 2 whites and 1 yolk
of eggs well beaten, add the lemon, the melted butter and mix it
with the milk into a thick batter; lastly stir in the currants;
spread the mixture into 2 well greased, shallow tin pans; first
brush them over with the remaining yolk, then with 2 tablespoonfuls
melted butter; mix 3 tablespoonfuls granulated sugar, 2
tablespoonfuls finely cut citron, ½ cup finely chopped almonds
together, sprinkle this over the 2 cakes and bake immediately in a
quick oven till done and a light brown. Prepared flour may be
substituted for baking powder.

827. +Apple Cake.+-- Prepare a dough the same as for Butter Cakes and
divide it into 6 parts, as the dough for Apple Cake has to be
thinner than for Butter Cakes; line 6 shallow tin pans with the
dough and set it to rise to double its height; in the meantime pare,
core and cut into eighths some large, tart apples and lay them
together closely in long rows over the cake; drop 1 tablespoonful
melted butter over each cake, sprinkle over some granulated sugar
and bake in a hot oven; when done dust with powdered sugar.

828. +Cheese Cake.+-- Dissolve ½ yeast cake in ½ pint warm milk and
add 1 pound sifted flour, 2 eggs, ½ teaspoonful salt, 2
tablespoonfuls butter and ½ tablespoonful sugar; work this into a
soft dough and set it in a warm place to rise to double its height;
then roll it out ⅛ of an inch in thickness; butter 2 large cheese or
pie plates, cover them with the dough, ornament the edge and let it
rise again until light; mix 1 pound fresh pot cheese with 1½ cups
thick sweet or sour cream, ¾ cup sugar (or sweeten to taste), 3 eggs
and ½ cup currants; when this is well mixed together brush the dough
over with melted butter and fill the plate with the cheese mixture;
bake in a medium hot oven.

829. +Chrysanthemum Cake.+-- ½ pint butter, 1 pint sugar, 1½ pints
flour sifted with 1½ teaspoonfuls baking powder, the grated rind of
1 orange, ½ pint milk and the whites of 8 eggs; stir butter and
sugar with your right hand to a light white cream; beat the whites
to a stiff froth, add them to the creamed butter and mix well
together with a spoon; add alternately the flour and milk; then add
the grated orange peel and a few drops of cochineal, to color the
mixture a delicate pink; butter 3 large jelly tins, dust them with
fine bread crumbs, fill in the mixture in equal parts and bake in a
medium hot oven; when done remove the cakes from the pans and lay
them aside to cool; mix ½ cup powdered sugar with the beaten whites
of 2 eggs; spread this icing over the layers and sprinkle them
thickly with freshly grated cocoanut; lay the layers over one
another, cover the top with pink icing and sprinkle over some
cocoanut.

830. +Snowflake Cake.+-- 2 cups sugar, 1 cup butter, 1 cup milk, 3
cups prepared flour, the grated rind of 1 lemon and the whites of 6
eggs; stir the butter and sugar to a light white cream; beat the
whites to a stiff froth, add them to the creamed butter and add the
lemon; then add alternately the milk and sifted flour; bake in 3
layers in large jelly tins; when done remove the cakes from the tins
and set aside to cool; beat the whites of 2 eggs to a froth and add
½ cup powdered sugar; spread this over each layer and sprinkle them
thickly with freshly grated cocoanut; lay the layers over one
another, spread the top layer with the icing, cover it thickly with
cocoanut and dust over some powdered sugar.




ROLLS AND BREAD.


831. +Parkerhouse Rolls.+-- 2 cups warm milk, 1 yeast cake, 2 cups
sifted flour, 1 teaspoonful salt, 2 teaspoonfuls sugar, 2
tablespoonfuls melted butter and 1 egg; dissolve the yeast in a
little warm milk; sift the flour into a bowl, add sugar and salt,
make a hollow in center and put in the yeast and some of the milk;
commence mixing it with the right hand; next add the egg, butter and
the remaining milk; set it in a warm place till very light; then
work with sufficient sifted flour into a soft dough and let it rise
again till very light; then roll it out 1 inch in thickness and cut
into rounds with a cake cutter; brush the rounds with melted butter,
double them over and set in buttered pans 1 inch apart; let them
rise to double their size and bake to a fine golden color; while hot
brush them over with melted butter.

832. +Bread.+-- 2 quarts flour, 1 teaspoonful salt, 2 teaspoonfuls
sugar, small tablespoonful lard or butter, 1½ pints lukewarm water,
1 of Fleischmann’s yeast cakes. Break the yeast cake into a cup, add
1 teaspoonful sugar and sufficient lukewarm water to fill the cup,
set it in a warm place till the yeast rises to the surface. Sift
flour, sugar and salt into a bowl, add the lard or butter and rub it
fine in the flour; then make a hollow in centre of flour, pour in
the yeast and the remaining water, stir it with a spoon into a stiff
dough, turn it on to a floured board and work it with the hands and
some flour until it does not stick to the hands; return the dough to
the bowl, cover and let it stand in a warm place to rise. When the
dough has risen to double its size, butter 2 brick-shaped pans or
use the crusty bread pans, dust them with flour, divide the dough
into 2 equal parts, mould them into loaves on the board, put them
into the buttered pans, cover and let stand till the dough is to top
of pan, place it in medium hot oven and bake 1 hour. If the bread is
to be mixed at night take only ½ yeast cake, otherwise proceed the
same as above.




COFFEE.


833. +How to Make Coffee.+-- Coffee should always be bought in the
bean and ground when wanted. It should never be allowed to boil, as
all the fine aroma is thereby lost. The finest, quickest and most
economical way to make coffee is by making it in a bag made as
follows:--Take a piece of coarse unbleached muslin, about ⅜ yard
long and ⅜ yard wide, costing about 5 cents per yard; fold on the
bias to a point, sew it together in such a way that the bag has the
shape of a funnel and hem it on the top; then place the bag in the
coffee pot; let the point hang so that it does not quite reach the
bottom; let the top of bag lay over the outside of the coffee pot;
then put in 1 cup freshly ground coffee, pour over ½ pint boiling
water and let it stand 1 minute; then add 1 quart boiling water and
let it stand about 3 minutes on side of stove; have ready the urn in
which the coffee is to be served, which should be well rinsed with
boiling water, pour in the coffee and serve at once; pour more
boiling water over the coffee grounds and let it stand on side of
stove for a short while; then serve the same way; the second coffee
will be found nearly as good as the first. If the coffee is too
strong add more water; if not strong enough add less water, as some
like it strong and others do not. Another way is to take 3 heaping
tablespoonfuls freshly ground coffee and 6 cups boiling water; grind
the coffee as fine as possible; rinse out the coffee pot with
boiling water, put in the coffee and pour on enough boiling water to
cover it well; let it stand in a warm place for 5 minutes, but do
not allow it to boil; then add the remaining boiling water, let it
stand for a few minutes and either serve in the same coffee pot in
which it was made or strain through a fine sieve into a hot silver
or china coffee urn and serve at once. This is also an easy and
economical way of making good coffee, but the first-named method is
the best.




FRUIT SALADS.


834. +Watermelon Salad.+-- Cut a watermelon in two, remove the seeds
and break the red part into pieces with a silver fork; put it in
layers in a glass dish, sprinkle each layer with sugar and place the
dish on ice for 2 hours; when ready to serve pour over ½ pint
claret. If objected to the wine may be omitted.

835. +How to Serve Watermelon.+-- Cut a watermelon in half
lengthwise; then cut each half first in two and then into long
pieces about 2 inches in thickness; arrange the pieces nicely on an
oblong plate and serve. The melon should lay for several hours on
ice before being cut, as it is not nice unless cold.

836. +Plum and Peach Salad.+-- Choose 1 dozen large egg plums, cut
them in two and remove the pits; pare and quarter ½ dozen large,
ripe peaches and put them in layers alternately with the plums in a
glass dish with 1 cup sugar sprinkled between; place the dish on ice
for ½ hour before serving.

837. +Orange and Cocoanut Salad.+-- Pare and cut some nice oranges
into pieces and remove the seeds; put a layer of the oranges
sprinkled with sugar into a glass dish, then a layer of freshly
grated cocoanut and next a layer of apple or currant jelly; then
oranges again; continue in this way until the dish is filled; place
the dish on ice for 1 or 2 hours and serve. If not handy the jelly
may be omitted.

838. +Peach and Pear Salad.+-- Pare and cut into fine slices 4 large,
ripe Bartlett pears; pare and cut into quarters ½ dozen large, ripe
peaches; put them with the pears into a glass dish with a layer of
whipped cream and sugar between and serve at once.

839. +Peach Salad.+-- Pare and cut 1 dozen peaches into quarters, put
them into a glass dish, sprinkle sugar between and over them and
place the dish on ice for ½ hour before serving.

840. +Banana Salad.+-- Cut the fruit into slices, put it into a glass
dish with sugar sprinkled between, squeeze over some lemon juice and
pour over 1 glass claret; place the dish on ice for 1 or 2 hours
before serving.

841. +Raspberry and Currant Salad.+-- Remove the stems from 1 pound
currants and wash and drain them; also wash and drain 1 quart
raspberries and put them into a glass dish with 1½ cups sugar; cover
and let them stand for 3 or 4 hours before serving.

842. +How to Serve Blackberries.+-- Put blackberries into a colander,
let cold water run over them and set colander for a few minutes into
a dishpan to drain; put the berries into a glass dish with powdered
sugar. Huckleberries are prepared the same way.

843. +Banana and Orange Salad.+-- Remove the skins from 4 bananas and
cut the fruit into slices; pare and cut ½ dozen oranges into small
pieces and remove the seeds; put oranges and bananas alternately
into a glass dish with sugar sprinkled between, set them on ice for
1 hour and then serve.

844. +Pineapple Salad.+-- Pare and quarter 1 ripe pineapple, remove
the hard part in center and cut each quarter into fine slices or
dice; pare and cut ½ dozen oranges into small slices and remove the
pits; put oranges into a glass dish in alternate layers with
pineapple with plenty of sugar sprinkled between and place them on
ice for 1 or 2 hours before serving. Strawberries with pineapple are
prepared the same way.

845. +Cherry Salad.+-- Remove the pits from 1 pound cherries,
sprinkle with sugar and let them stand for 1 hour; then put them
with 1 pint ripe strawberries and a little more sugar into a glass
dish, set them on ice for 10 minutes and serve.




SALADS.


846. +Fine Mayonaise, No. 1.+-- The yolks of 4 eggs, 8 tablespoonfuls
salad oil, 4 tablespoonfuls white vinegar, 1 teaspoonful salt, 2
teaspoonfuls sugar, from 1 to 2 tablespoonfuls French mustard and ½
pint whipped cream or 3 tablespoonfuls condensed milk which is not
sweet; put the yolks in a small saucepan and stir them to a cream;
then slowly add, stirring constantly, 4 tablespoonfuls oil; when
this is well mixed add the 4 spoonfuls vinegar, set the saucepan in
a vessel of boiling water and stir over the fire till contents of
saucepan begin to thicken; then instantly remove and continue the
stirring until cold; then slowly add the remaining 4 spoonfuls oil,
stirring constantly; next add the salt and sugar; then the mustard
and lastly the cream or condensed milk. This mayonaise is excellent
if made exactly according to recipe. These quantities will make a
mayonaise sufficient for 10 persons. If the mayonaise is not all
wanted at one time fill it into jelly glasses without the cream. It
will then keep for some time. The cream can be added when wanted for
use.

847. +Mayonaise, No. 2.+-- 2 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls oil, 2
tablespoonfuls vinegar, 1 teaspoonful sugar, ½ teaspoonful salt, 2
tablespoonfuls French mustard and 4 tablespoonfuls whipped cream or
1 tablespoonful condensed milk which is not sweet; put the yolks
into a small vessel and stir them to a cream; add by degrees the
oil, stirring constantly; then slowly add the vinegar, set the
vessel in a saucepan of boiling water and stir and boil till the
contents of saucepan begin to thicken; then remove from fire and
stir until cold; add the salt, mustard, sugar and vinegar; beat the
whites to a stiff froth and slowly add them to the above mixture;
stir in the cream or condensed milk just before the salad is to be
dressed. These quantities will make a salad sufficient for 8
persons. If it is not to be all used at one time put it into a small
glass or stone jar (without the cream or milk) and cover tightly to
exclude the air. If kept in a cool place it will keep for some time.
When wanted for use add the cream. This mayonaise is both cheap and
excellent.

848. +Plain Mayonaise.+-- Put some cracked ice into a dishpan and
place a bowl in the center of the ice; put the yolks of 4 eggs into
a bowl and stir them well with a wooden spoon for 5 minutes; then
slowly add ½ bottle best olive oil; add only a few drops at a time
and stir constantly; if too much oil is added at one time it will
not mix together; if the sauce gets too thick add a little vinegar
and lastly a few tablespoonfuls whipped cream, salt and vinegar to
taste. Another way is to rub the yolks of 2 hard boiled eggs fine
and mix them with 2 raw yolks; otherwise finish the same as
foregoing recipe.

849. +Sauce Tartare.+-- Mix 1 pint mayonaise made as in preceding
recipe with 1 tablespoonful French mustard and 1 teaspoonful English
mustard mixed, 3 anchovies freed from skins and bones and pressed
through a sieve, some finely chopped parsley, small, chopped onion,
4 tablespoonfuls chopped capers, some vinegar and pepper; this sauce
is mostly served with cold meat.

850. +Mayonaise without Eggs (economical).+-- 1 teaspoonful
cornstarch, ½ cup boiling water, 6 tablespoonfuls oil, 3
tablespoonfuls French mustard, 1 teaspoonful salt, 2 teaspoonfuls
sugar, 4 tablespoonfuls vinegar and 1 tablespoonful condensed milk
which is not sweet; mix the cornstarch with a little cold water, add
the ½ cup boiling water and stir and boil for a few minutes; then
set aside to cool; put the mustard into a bowl and gradually add the
oil, stirring constantly; next add the sugar, salt and vinegar; then
the cornstarch and lastly the milk.

851. +Salad Dressing without Oil, No. 1.+-- 2 ounces butter, 2 eggs,
2 tablespoonfuls vinegar, 1 teaspoonful sugar, ½ teaspoonful salt
and 2 tablespoonfuls French mustard; melt the butter in a cup by
setting it into hot water for a few minutes and then set it aside to
cool; stir the yolks in a small vessel with salt and sugar to a
cream and add the melted butter, a little at a time, stirring
constantly; next slowly add the vinegar, set the vessel in a
saucepan of hot water and stir until the contents begin to thicken;
then remove, stir until cold and slowly add the other ingredients;
beat the whites to a stiff froth and mix them with the sauce; if
handy add a few tablespoonfuls cream; if English mustard is used
take 1 teaspoonful mixed with cold water.

852. +Salad Dressing without Oil, No. 2.+-- 1 teaspoonful flour, ½
cup boiling water, 1 tablespoonful butter, 2 tablespoonfuls vinegar,
1 teaspoonful sugar, ½ teaspoonful salt and 2 tablespoonfuls French
mustard; mix the flour with a little cold water, add the boiling
water, boil 2 minutes and add the butter in small pieces; remove
from fire and mix by degrees with the vinegar, then the mustard and
the other ingredients; to this sauce the yolks of 2 eggs may be
added and also the 2 whites beaten to a stiff froth; or the yolks of
2 hard boiled eggs rubbed through a sieve and the whites chopped
fine and sprinkled over the salad.

853. +How to Prepare Lettuce for Salad and for Garnishing.+-- Cut off
the stalks from 3 or 4 heads of lettuce, pick off all the decayed
and withered leaves, break the tender green leaves apart one by one
and remove the thick veins; put the lettuce into cold water, rinse
well and let it lay in ice water for ½ hour or longer; shortly
before serving drain the lettuce in a colander; then put it in a
napkin, shake out well and use as directed.

854. +Lettuce Salad (plain).+-- Prepare the lettuce as in foregoing
recipe, lay it into a salad dish and pour over 2 or 3 tablespoonfuls
salad oil and a little pepper and salt; add to ½ cup white vinegar 4
tablespoonfuls water and pour it over the salad; mix it up well with
2 salad forks, sprinkle over a little cracked ice and serve at once.
If ice is not handy the salad will have to be prepared without it,
but it adds greatly to the crispness of the lettuce. If you rub a
piece of garlic over the salad dish just before putting in the
lettuce it will give the salad a fine flavor without really tasting
of garlic. A small spoonful of sugar may be sprinkled over the
lettuce if liked. Finely shaved onions may also be added.

855. +Lettuce Salad with Mayonaise.+-- Prepare the salad as directed,
put it into a salad dish and pour over a mayonaise dressing. Finely
shaved onions may be added if liked.

856. +Lettuce Salad with Sweet Egg Sauce.+-- Cut 2 ounces fat pork
into very small dice and fry them a light brown; beat 2 or 3 eggs
until very light and slowly add the pork, 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls
vinegar and 2 tablespoonfuls sugar; mix this well together and pour
it over the salad. This recipe will make a sufficient quantity to
dress 3 heads of lettuce. More vinegar diluted with a little water
may be added; also more or less sugar.

857. +Lettuce Salad with Syrup Sauce (North German art).+-- Mix 1
tablespoonful flour in a small saucepan with a little cold water
until all lumps are dissolved, add 1 cup boiling water and stir and
boil for a few minutes; add 1 tablespoonful butter and continue
boiling for a few minutes longer; then transfer it to a bowl and set
aside; when nearly cold add ½ cup syrup, a pinch of salt, 2
tablespoonfuls vinegar and 1 tablespoonful sugar; set this sauce on
ice or in a cool place for 5 minutes before serving; put the
prepared lettuce in a dish and pour the sauce over it; sufficient
for 4 large heads of lettuce. Salad prepared in this way is served
in North Germany with German pancakes instead of butter. Fat pork
cut fine and fried to a crisp may be used.

858. +Lettuce Salad with Cream Sauce (North German art).+-- Prepare
the lettuce as directed for 3 or 4 large heads of salad; take 1 pint
thick, sour cream and add 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, a pinch of
salt and 1 or 2 tablespoonfuls vinegar; mix this together and pour
over the salad; then serve at once.

859. +Lettuce Salad with Cream.+-- Put the prepared lettuce in a dish
and pour over some sweet cream to which a little sugar has been
added. Some people add a little vinegar and a pinch of salt. Salad
prepared with this sauce is often served with large German pancakes.

860. +Beet Salad.+-- Wash and put ½ dozen beets in a saucepan with
boiling water and cover and boil them till tender; when done put the
beets into cold water, remove the skins and cut them while still
warm into thin slices; also cut 1 medium sized onion into thin
slices; put the beets and onion in alternate layers into a dish and
sprinkle between 1 teaspoonful salt, ¼ teaspoonful pepper and 2
teaspoonfuls sugar; pour over an equal quantity of vinegar and water
(enough to nearly cover the beets) and let them stand 1 hour before
serving. Omit the onion if its flavor is not liked.

861. +Salad Macédoine.+-- Take equal quantities of boiled white
beans, boiled potatoes, celery roots, beets and string beans (the
last 4 boiled in salt water) and cut into fine slices; put into a
bowl 2 or 3 tablespoonfuls oil, vinegar and salt, pepper and some
sugar; put in all the ingredients, add some finely chopped parsley
and chervil and mix the whole together thoroughly; put the salad
into a dish and garnish with lettuce leaves. If the vinegar is too
sharp dilute it with water.

862. +Salad à la russe.+-- Boil 6 medium sized potatoes with the
skins on, 2 beets and 3 celery roots; when cold remove the skins and
cut them into small dice; also cut into dice 2 pickles and 1 dozen
anchovies or 3 herrings previously soaked in water, freed from skins
and bones and cut fine; add to this 2 tablespoonfuls capers, ½ cup
grated horseradish and mix the whole with a fine mayonaise; put the
salad on ice for 1 hour before serving; when ready to serve put the
salad onto a round dish, pile up high in center and garnish with
hard boiled eggs; chop fine the yolks and whites separate; also chop
beets and green pickles fine, lay them in small clusters all over
the salad and garnish the edge with green lettuce leaves or shaved
pink and white horseradish. Pink horseradish is made by pouring a
little cochineal over it and mixing well.

863. +Cucumber Salad.+-- Select 3 medium sized cucumbers with small
seeds, pare and cut a small piece from each end and lay the
cucumbers in strongly salted ice water for 1 hour or longer; 10
minutes before serving take them out of water, wipe dry and cut on a
board with a sharp knife into fine slices; put them into a salad
dish, sprinkle over a little salt and pepper, pour over 2
tablespoonfuls salad oil and mix it with the cucumbers; then pour
over ½ cup white vinegar to which a little water and a pinch of
sugar has been added; if onions are liked cut a medium sized one
into thin slices and put them between the cucumbers; some finely
chopped parsley may also be added if the flavor is liked.

864. +Salad de laitue romaine.+-- Take several heads of young, green
lettuce; do not wash them; put them into a dish, add some coarsely
cut chervil, tarragon and pimpernel and dress it either with salt,
pepper, oil and vinegar or with mayonaise.

865. +Salad of Oyster Plant.+-- Scrape and wash 2 bunches oyster
plant and drop as you clean it into cold water to which 1 cup
vinegar and 1 tablespoonful flour have been added; put a saucepan
over the fire with boiling water, add ½ cup vinegar, ½ tablespoonful
flour wet with a little cold water, put in the oyster plant and boil
till tender; when done drain in a colander and when cold cut it into
lengths 2 inches long; arrange it nicely in a dish and pour a
mayonaise over; or dress the oyster plant with oil, vinegar, pepper
and salt.

866. +Asparagus Salad.+-- Pare and cut into 2 inch lengths 1 bunch
asparagus and boil it in salt water till tender; when done drain in
a colander and when cold put the asparagus into a salad bowl; dress
it either with mayonaise or pepper, salt, oil and vinegar.

867. +Carrot Salad.+-- Scrape and wash ½ dozen medium sized carrots,
put them in a saucepan over the fire with boiling water, add 1
tablespoonful sugar and boil till tender; when done take them out of
water and set aside to cool; shortly before serving cut the carrots
into fine slices, put them into a salad dish and pour over a
mayonaise dressing; or dress the carrots with pepper, salt, oil and
vinegar. If very large carrots are used first cut them in quarters
and then into slices or dice.

868. +Carrot Salad with Asparagus.+-- Prepare ½ dozen medium sized
carrots the same as for Carrot Salad; when cold cut them into dice;
boil the heads of 1 bunch asparagus in salt water till done, but not
too soft; drain it in a colander and set with the carrots in the ice
box for 1 hour; shortly before serving put the carrots and asparagus
heads, in alternate layers, into a salad dish, pour over a mayonaise
and garnish the dish with hard boiled eggs cut into slices and young
lettuce leaves; sprinkle a few capers over the top.

869. +Carrot Salad with Onions.+-- Prepare the carrots the same way
as in foregoing recipe; cut 3 or 4 medium sized onions on a board
with a sharp knife into slices as thin as wafers, put them in
alternate layers with the carrots into a dish and pour over a
mayonaise dressing; or dress with oil, vinegar, pepper and salt; add
to vinegar a little water and sugar.

870. +Carrot Salad with Peas.+-- Boil the carrots the same as for
Carrot Salad and cut them into small dice; put 1 pint fresh green
peas in a saucepan, cover with boiling water and add 2 teaspoonfuls
sugar.

871. +Celery Root Salad.+-- Boil ½ dozen celery roots; when done take
them out of water and when cold pare and cut into quarters; cut each
quarter into thin slices, put them into a salad dish and season with
salt and pepper; add 2 or 3 tablespoonfuls salad oil and ½ cup
vinegar; mix this well together and pour over ½ cup boiling water;
or dress the salad with mayonaise and garnish with green lettuce.

872. +White Celery Salad.+-- Take the white part of 1 or 2 bunches of
celery and lay it for 1 hour in ice water; shortly before serving
cut the celery into small pieces ½ inch in length, put it in a salad
dish and pour over a mayonaise dressing; let it stand on ice for 15
minutes before serving. Some people use all of the celery except the
leaves, but the salad is finer when made of the white part only.

873. +Cabbage Salad.+-- Remove the outer leaves from a firm head of
cabbage, shave it as fine as possible and put in ice water for 1
hour; before serving drain the cabbage in a colander, put it in a
salad dish and mix with mayonaise; set it on ice until wanted; or
dress the cabbage with oil, pepper, salt and vinegar; add to the
latter before pouring it over the cabbage 1 spoonful sugar.

874. +Salad of Red Cabbage.+-- Cut the cabbage as fine as possible,
put it in a saucepan, pour over boiling water, cover and boil 3
minutes; drain in a colander and when cold dress it with oil,
pepper, salt, a small spoonful sugar and some vinegar; the latter
should be diluted with water.

875. +Hot Slaw.+-- Cut a small, firm head of cabbage as fine as
possible and put it in a large bowl; place a saucepan with 1 cup
vinegar, 1 tablespoonful butter and 1 teaspoonful sugar over the
fire and let it come to a boil; then pour it over the cabbage and
season with pepper and salt; at the same time put 1 egg with 1 cup
milk into another saucepan; beat these 2 ingredients together
thoroughly and stir them over the fire till just about to boil; pour
it over the cabbage and serve at once. Sweet cream may be used
instead of milk.

876. +Radish Salad.+-- Select 3 or 4 bunches nice, sound radishes,
trim them neatly and lay for 1 hour in ice water; 10 minutes before
serving wipe the radishes dry and cut them into fine slices; also
cut 2 medium sized onions into fine slices like wafers; put a layer
of radishes into a salad dish, sprinkle over a little salt and white
pepper and put over a layer of onions with very little salt and
white pepper; continue in this way in alternate layers until all is
used; then pour over the whole a mayonaise dressing and garnish with
green parsley leaves. The onions may be omitted if their flavor is
not liked, but the salad is much finer with them. Instead of
mayonaise the salad may be dressed with oil, pepper, salt and
vinegar; the latter should be diluted with ⅓ water and a small
spoonful sugar added to it before pouring over the salad.

877. +White Bean Salad.+-- Wash and pick over 1 pint dry beans, put
them over the fire in a saucepan, cover with cold water, add ½
teaspoonful carbonate of soda and boil 10 minutes; pour the beans
into a colander and rinse with cold water; return them to saucepan
again, cover with cold water, put a small piece of salt pork into
the beans and slowly boil till the beans are tender; remove them
from the fire and drain in a colander; when cold put them in a dish
and season with pepper and a little salt; add 2 tablespoonfuls oil
and 1 cup vinegar mixed with ½ cup water and a small spoonful sugar;
shake all well together; add 2 tablespoonfuls finely chopped parsley
and, if liked, a finely sliced onion; or dress the beans with
mayonaise.

878. +String Bean Salad.+-- Choose 1 quart young string beans, string
and cut them into halves and boil in salted water until tender; when
done drain them in a colander and when cold mix them with pepper, 2
or 3 tablespoonfuls oil, 1 cup vinegar mixed with a little sugar and
½ water and 1 finely cut onion; set the salad on ice 1 hour before
serving. Butter bean salad is made the same as String Bean Salad, or
dress with mayonaise.

879. +Crab Salad.+-- Take 1 pint crab meat, sprinkle the juice of 1
lemon and 2 tablespoonfuls oil over it, mix well and set aside;
shortly before serving put the crab meat on a salad dish with hard
boiled eggs cut into small pieces; have some lettuce laying in ice
water, drain it in a colander, shake dry in a napkin, cut through
with a knife once or twice, mix some with the crab meat and use some
for garnishing the dish; pour over the whole a mayonaise dressing
the same as for Lobster Salad and serve.

880. +Pike Salad.+-- Take a large sized fish, clean, wash, dry and
cut it into 4 pieces; put it in salted boiling water and vinegar and
add some onions and 1 bouquet; bring it to a boil quickly; then set
the kettle aside and let it simmer till the fish is done; as soon as
the fish is tender take it out and when cold remove skin and bones;
cut each piece into 9 small pieces, lay them in a dish and pour over
some sweet salad oil, tarragon, vinegar and sprinkle over a little
salt and pepper; after the fish has laid 2 hours pour into a salad
dish some mayonaise, lay in some fish pieces and pour over
mayonaise; lay in the rest of fish and pour over the remaining
mayonaise; garnish the dish with aspic or green lettuce and hard
boiled eggs.

881. +Tomato and Potato Salad.+-- Boil 6 large potatoes with the
skins on; when cold pare off the skins and cut the potatoes into
quarters; then cut each quarter into fine slices; lay 4 large, ripe
tomatoes for ½ hour on ice; then cut them into small slices; cut 2
onions into fine slices, put them in alternate layers with the
potatoes and tomatoes into a salad dish and sprinkle over each layer
some pepper, salt and ½ tablespoonful oil; mix ¾ cup vinegar with 1
tablespoonful sugar and ¾ cup cold water, pour it over the salad and
let it stand 15 minutes; then serve. The onions may be omitted and
green peppers used instead of them.

882. +Tomato Salad with Lettuce.+-- Lay 4 medium sized sound tomatoes
for ½ hour on ice or in ice water; also the leaves of 2 large heads
of lettuce; 10 minutes before serving wipe the tomatoes dry and cut
them on a board with a very sharp knife into thin slices; shake the
salad in a napkin; put into a salad dish first a layer of lettuce
leaves and then a layer of tomatoes; continue in this way in
alternate layers until all is used; pour over a mayonaise dressing
and serve. 2 hard boiled eggs chopped fine may be sprinkled over the
top.

883. +Tomato Salad.+-- Lay ½ dozen sound, ripe tomatoes for 1½ hours
on ice or in ice water; shortly before serving wipe the tomatoes dry
and cut them on a board with a sharp knife into thin slices; also
cut 2 medium sized onions into fine slices; put them in alternate
layers with the tomatoes into a salad dish and sprinkle over each
layer ¼ teaspoonful salt, ¼ teaspoonful sugar and half that quantity
of white pepper; mix ¾ cup vinegar with ¾ cup water, pour it over
the whole and serve at once. 2 tablespoonfuls oil may be added to
the salad if liked, but many people object to it on tomato salad.

884. +Tomato Salad with Mayonaise.+-- Lay 8 or 10 sound, ripe
tomatoes for 1½ hours on top of ice; shortly before serving wipe the
tomatoes dry and cut them on a board with a sharp knife into fine
slices; put them into a salad dish, pour over a mayonaise dressing
and sprinkle over the top 2 tablespoonfuls capers; serve as soon as
made.

885. +Tomato and Cucumber Salad.+-- Prepare the cucumbers the same as
for Cucumber Salad, put them in alternate layers with the sliced
tomatoes into a salad dish and dress with mayonaise.

886. +Tomato Pepper Salad.+-- Lay 6 sound, ripe tomatoes for 1 hour
on ice or in ice water; remove the seeds from 2 green peppers and
throw the seeds away; lay the peppers for 1 hour in ice water; 15
minutes before serving wipe the tomatoes and peppers dry, cut the
tomatoes into fine slices and cut the peppers into small pieces; put
a layer of tomatoes in a salad dish and sprinkle over some of the
finely cut peppers; then tomatoes again; continue in this way until
all is used; pour over a fine mayonaise and serve at once.

887. +Tomato Farce (à la Mayonaise).+-- Prepare 2 heads of lettuce as
directed and lay them in ice water; select 6 medium sized ripe
tomatoes and lay them for 1 hour on ice; shortly before serving cut
a thin slice off the blossom side of the tomatoes, scoop out the
insides, chop fine with some white celery and the whites of 2 hard
boiled eggs and mix with a few spoonfuls mayonaise; fill each tomato
with this mixture; take 6 small dessert plates and put 1 tomato on
each with 3 or 4 lettuce leaves around it; pour 1 tablespoonful
mayonaise over each one and serve 1 to each person.

888. +Potato Salad.+-- Wash and boil 12 medium sized potatoes with
the skins on; when done drain off the water and pare off the skins;
put into a deep bowl 2 finely cut onions, ½ cup white vinegar, 3 or
4 tablespoonfuls salad oil, 1 teaspoonful salt and ½ teaspoonful
pepper; cut the potatoes while hot into fine slices and put them
into the dish with the vinegar, oil and onions; pour over ½ cup
boiling water; shake up the salad well in the bowl (do not stir it)
and pour it into a salad dish; cover and let it stand for 1 hour;
when ready to serve garnish the dish with finely cut beets and
lettuce leaves. 2 tablespoonfuls finely chopped parsley may be mixed
with the salad. Potato salad dressed with mayonaise is very nice.

889. +Potato Salad (another way).+-- Wash and pare 12 medium sized
potatoes and boil them in salted water till done; drain off the
water and turn the potatoes into a dish; when cold cut them into
slices; cut 2 good sized onions into fine slices as thin as a wafer;
mix ¾ cup vinegar with ½ cup water and 1 teaspoonful sugar; put a
layer of potatoes into a dish, then a layer of onions; sprinkle over
some pepper and pour over 1 tablespoonful oil; put in another layer
of potatoes and onions; continue in this way in alternate layers
until all is used; pour the vinegar over the whole and cover and set
in a cool place for 2 hours before serving.

890. +Potato Salad without Oil.+-- Wash and boil the potatoes; when
done drain off the water, pare off the skins and cut potatoes into
slices; take for a soupplateful of sliced potatoes 2 finely cut
onions and ¼ pound fat salt pork cut into small dice and fried a
light brown; put potatoes, onions and pork into a deep bowl and
season with pepper and salt; mix ½ cup vinegar with ½ cup boiling
water and pour it over the potatoes; shake this well together and
pour it into a salad dish; let it stand 1 hour or more before
serving.

891. +Potato Salad without Onions.+-- Wash the potatoes in several
cold waters and boil them with the skins on; when done remove the
skins and cut potatoes into slices; season them with salt and
pepper, pour over an equal quantity of boiling water and vinegar and
let them stand till cold; then add some sweet oil; mix it well and
serve.

892. +Fine Potato Salad.+-- Boil 10 medium sized potatoes with their
skins on; when done remove the skins and set the potatoes aside to
cool; stir the yolks of 2 eggs to a cream and slowly add ½ cup salad
oil, 1 teaspoonful salt, ½ teaspoonful pepper, ½ cup white vinegar
and 2 white onions chopped very fine; cut the potatoes into fine
slices; put a layer of potatoes into a salad dish and pour over some
of the sauce; then put in another layer of potatoes and sauce;
continue in this way until all is used; then pour over ½ cup boiling
water, cover and let it stand for 2 hours and then serve. The dish
may be garnished with cresses or young lettuce leaves; or lettuce
leaves and boiled beets cut into fancy shapes.

893. +Salad Endive.+-- Take only young and fresh endive; remove the
outer leaves, cut the endive into 1 inch pieces and wash and drain
it; then dress it with oil, vinegar, pepper and salt, or with
mayonaise.

894. +Beet and Cabbage Salad.+-- Cut the white leaves of a savoy
cabbage into shreds; remove the skins from 4 boiled beets and cut
them into fine slices; chop a medium sized onion very fine; put the
cabbage and beets in alternate layers into a salad dish, sprinkle
between the onions, some pepper and salt, pour over ½ pint vinegar,
cover and let it stand 1 hour; then drain off the vinegar and add 4
tablespoonfuls sweet oil; mix it well with 2 salad forks, put in a
salad dish and serve.

895. +Vegetable Salad.+-- Cut with a tin tube some carrots and white
turnips into small pieces and boil them separately in salted water;
when done drain them in a colander; also boil small roses of
cauliflower, green peas, beets and potatoes cut into small dice and
some boiled string beans cut into small pieces; mix all the
ingredients together and add 1 onion chopped very fine, some chopped
parsley and chervil; add pepper, salt, oil and vinegar; put the
salad into a salad dish and set it on ice for 1 hour.

896. +Beet and Potato Salad.+-- Prepare a potato salad and mix it
with half the same quantity of boiled beets cut into fine slices.

897. +Green Pepper Salad.+-- Scoop out the insides of 2 green peppers
and lay them for 1 hour in cold water; in the meantime prepare a
mayonaise as follows:--Stir the yolks of 3 eggs to a cream and add
by degrees 3 tablespoonfuls oil, stirring constantly; when this is
well mixed add 3 tablespoonfuls vinegar; set this in a saucepan of
hot water and stir and boil till the contents begin to thicken; then
remove and stir until cold; slowly add 3 tablespoonfuls more oil, ¾
teaspoonful salt, 1½ teaspoonfuls sugar and 1 tablespoonful English
mustard; shortly before serving add 1 tablespoonful condensed milk
which is not sweet; chop fine 1 pound roast veal, lamb or boiled
tongue, or 2 kinds of meat, 3 hard boiled eggs and 1 large onion;
also chop the peppers very fine; mix all together, pour over the
mayonaise, mix it well and set the salad on ice for 1 hour; in
serving arrange it neatly on a salad dish, sprinkle over 1
tablespoonful capers and garnish with green lettuce leaves.

898. +Tripe Salad.+-- Boil 2 pounds honeycomb tripe in salt water
till tender; when done drain off the water, cut the tripe into 1
inch square pieces and mix it with mayonaise; put the salad into a
dish and let it stand in a cool place for 1 hour before serving.
A few hard boiled eggs cut into slices may be added to this salad;
also finely cut celery and lettuce leaves.

899. +Herring Salad.+-- Lay 6 herrings for 24 hours in cold water,
take them out, remove skins and bones, wipe dry with a towel and cut
them into small square pieces; cut in the same manner 3 boiled
beets, 2 white onions, 1 pound roasted veal, 3 sour apples and 5
small pickles; mix these ingredients together and prepare the
following sauce:--Stir the herring milk to a cream and slowly add 1
cup salad oil, 2 teaspoonfuls sugar, the yolks of 4 eggs, ½ cup
vinegar, 2 tablespoonfuls stewed cranberries, a pinch of cayenne
pepper and 4 tablespoonfuls French mustard; when all are well
blended together mix the sauce with the herring and other
ingredients and let it be ready 2 hours before serving; shortly
before serving put the salad into a dish and garnish with small
girkins, beets cut into fancy shapes, salted olives, hard boiled
eggs and capers or mixed pickles.

900. +Salad à L’italienne.+-- Soak 6 Dutch herrings for 12 hours in
cold water; then take them out, remove the skins and bones and cut
the meat into small long strips a little wider than a straw and ¾
inch in length; also cut 1 pound cold boiled beef tonge, 1 pound
cold roasted veal, 3 greening apples and 6 small pickles; after the
ingredients are all cut the same way mix them well together and mix
them with a fine mayonaise; set the salad on ice for several hours;
when ready to serve put the salad into a dish and garnish with
finely chopped hard boiled eggs and salted olives; sprinkle over a
few capers and serve.

901. +Chicken Salad.+-- Select a plump 1-year old chicken for this;
singe and draw it, wash in cold water and put the chicken in a
kettle; cover with boiling water, add ½ tablespoonful salt and 2
onions; cover and boil slowly till tender; when done remove the
kettle from the fire and let the chicken remain in the broth till
cold; then take it out, remove the skin and bones and cut the meat
into small pieces; take the white part of 1 nice bunch celery and
cut it very fine; add it to the finely cut chicken, pour over
Mayonaise No. 1 and set it on ice for 2 hours before serving; when
ready to serve put the salad into a salad dish and garnish with the
small celery tops, which should lay for 1 hour in ice water; stick
them all around in the salad and sprinkle ½ cup capers all over the
salad. Some freshly grated cocoanut sprinkled over this salad is a
great improvement; or garnish to taste.

902. +How to Boil Lobster.+-- Select a good sized lobster, put it
into a kettle of boiling water, head first, add a small handful salt
and boil till the lobster has attained a bright red color, which
will take from 20 to 30 minutes; when done take the lobster out and
plunge it into cold water; let it lay in the cold water for 5
minutes; then take it out and when cold put the lobster away in a
cool place till wanted.

903. +Lobster Salad.+-- Split open the body and tail of a boiled
lobster and crack the claws; pick out all the meat and cut it into
pieces about ¾ inch in size; put the meat into a salad dish and pour
over Mayonaise No. 1; let it stand in a cool place or on ice for ½
hour; then garnish the dish; lay a border of young lettuce leaves
around the dish; lay over them some hard boiled eggs cut into
quarters and sprinkle over the salad 1 spoonful capers. Canned
lobster may be used for this salad. Another way is to cut white
celery into small pieces, put it into a salad dish and mix well with
a fine mayonaise; then add the lobster meat cut into small pieces
and let the salad stand on ice or in a cool place for 1 hour before
it is served; chop coarsely a few hard boiled eggs and sprinkle them
over the salad.

904. +Salmon Salad.+-- Select a nice piece of salmon weighing about 2
pounds; place a saucepan with boiling water over the fire and add a
bunch of parsley with 2 bay leaves, 2 blades mace and a sprig of
thyme; add 1 onion with 4 cloves stuck in it, 1 tablespoonful salt
and ½ cup vinegar; when this boils put in the salmon and let it boil
3 minutes; then draw the kettle to side of stove and let it simmer
until tender; as soon as done remove the fish and set it in a cool
place; when cold remove the bones and break the meat into pieces;
put it into a salad dish, pile up high in the center, pour over a
fine Mayonaise No. 1 and garnish the dish with young lettuce leaves
or cresses; chop some hard boiled eggs and sprinkle them with a few
capers over the salad. It is best to let the salad stand on ice for
1 hour before it is garnished and served. Canned salmon can be used
instead of fresh salmon.

905. +Shrimp Salad.+-- Extract the meat from some freshly boiled
shrimp, put it into a dish, squeeze over some lemon juice, pour over
a few spoonfuls fine oil and let it stand in a cool place for 1
hour; 1 hour before serving put the shrimp into a salad bowl, pour
over a fine mayonaise (see Mayonaise) and garnish with cresses or
lettuce leaves and hard boiled eggs cut into quarters.

906. +How to Boil Shrimp.+-- Put the shrimp alive into the salted
boiling water, allowing ¼ pound salt to 1 gallon water; boil them
from 5 to 8 minutes; when they change color they are done; serve
them with vinegar and oil.

907. +Halibut Salad.+-- Put a piece of halibut into salted boiling
water with ½ pint vinegar and add 1 or 2 onions, a bunch of parsley,
a sprig of thyme, 1 bay leaf, 6 cloves and 2 blades mace tied
together; bring it to a boil quickly; draw the kettle to side of
stove and let the fish simmer until tender; when done take the fish
out of the water and when cold cut it into 1 inch pieces; put the
pieces into a dish high up in center and pour over it a mayonaise;
garnish with green lettuce and hard boiled eggs.

908. +Oyster Salad.+-- To make a salad for 6 persons take 2 dozen
large oysters, put them with their liquor over the fire and let them
boil 1 minute, but no longer; take them out with a skimmer and lay
in a dish; when cold squeeze over the juice of 2 lemons and place
the dish on ice for 1 hour; shortly before serving put the oysters
into a salad dish, lay some young lettuce leaves between them and
pour over Mayonaise No. 1; lay young lettuce leaves in a circle
around the dish, put some hard boiled eggs cut into slices between
the lettuce and serve at once. Another way is to mix the oysters
with finely cut white celery, dress them with the same mayonaise and
ornament the salad with the tops of young celery; hard boiled
chopped eggs may also be sprinkled over with 1 spoonful capers.

909. +Oyster and Chicken Salad.+-- Remove the skin and bones from 1
cold, roasted chicken and cut the meat into pieces 1 inch in size;
put it into a dish, sprinkle over a little salt, the juice of 2
lemons and pour over a few spoonfuls fine salad oil; then place the
dish on ice; in the meantime scald 1½ dozen large oysters in their
own liquor, take them out and put the oysters in a dish with some
cracked ice; have prepared 2 quarts sour jelly (aspic) and pour a
few spoonfuls of it onto a large, shallow tin pan; when firm trim
the oysters so that there is nothing left but the eye; lay them over
the jelly (not too close together), pour over a little more cold
jelly and when firm pour over sufficient cold jelly to entirely
cover the oysters; let it stand in a cool place till firm; 10
minutes before serving wipe the chicken meat dry with a napkin; pour
some fine mayonaise into a salad dish, lay over a layer of the
chicken meat and cover with mayonaise; continue in this way till all
is used; cover the whole with mayonaise in such a way that none of
the chicken is seen; then lay a border of cresses around it; cut the
oysters into rounds with a fluted cutter a little larger than the
oysters, lay them on the cresses and serve. Lettuce may be used
instead of cresses.

910. +Tomato Jelly.+-- Stew for ½ hour 1 can tomatoes with 1
teaspoonful salt, 1 teaspoonful sugar, as much cayenne pepper as you
can hold on the point of a knife and 2 tablespoonfuls vinegar; then
press them through a sieve; in the meantime soak 1 ounce gelatine in
½ cup cold water for 15 minutes, add it to the tomatoes, put over
the fire and stir till the gelatine is dissolved; then strain
through a flannel jelly bag; fill the jelly into small patty forms
and set them in a cool place till firm.

911. +Tomato Jelly Salad.+-- Prepare a tomato jelly the same as in
foregoing recipe; turn it out of the small forms, lay into a salad
dish, stick small pieces of white celery into each one, put a border
of young lettuce leaves around it, pour over a mayonaise and serve
at once. Tomato jelly may be made in one large form and when hard
chopped coarsely and used for garnishing dishes of cold meats or
salads.

912. +Egg Salad.+-- Put ½ dozen eggs in a saucepan, cover with cold
water and boil them 10 minutes; transfer the eggs to cold water and
let them lay till cooled off; when cold remove the shells and cut
the eggs into quarters; put them into a salad dish with young
lettuce leaves, pour over a mayonaise dressing and garnish with
lettuce leaves.

913. +Eggs with Mayonaise.+-- Boil ½ dozen eggs 10 minutes; then
transfer them to a pan of cold water and when cold remove the
shells; take 6 small plates, put 2 lettuce leaves on each plate and
put an egg in the center of the 2 leaves in such a way that the
leaves stand round the egg like a tulip; pour over each egg 1
tablespoonful mayonaise and sprinkle over a few capers; serve a
plate to each person.

914. +Onion Salad.+-- Take 2 large Bermuda or California onions, peel
and cut them with a sharp knife into fine slices, put a layer of the
slices into a salad dish and pour over some fine mayonaise; then put
over some cresses and pour over more mayonaise; continue in this way
until all is used; cover with mayonaise, lay some cresses in a
circle round the dish and let it stand on ice for 10 minutes; then
serve.

915. +Alligator Pear Salad.+-- Take 2 alligator pears, cut them into
slices and put them into a salad dish; remove the shells from 4 hard
boiled eggs, break the yolks into small pieces and sprinkle them
over the sliced pears; cut the whites into fine strips, lay them in
a circle round the dish close to the pears, pour over a fine
mayonaise and lay a border of tender lettuce leaves round the edge
of dish.

916. +Jerusalem Artichoke Salad.+-- Scrape the artichokes carefully
and drop them into vinegar and water; mix ½ tablespoonful flour with
a little cold water, stir it into a quart of boiling water and add 1
cup vinegar; as soon as this boils put in the artichokes and boil
them till done, but not too tender; when done remove them from the
water and set in a cool place; when cold cut the artichokes into
pieces, put them into a salad dish, pour over a mayonaise, set some
shrimp around the salad and set the dish on ice for 1 hour; when
ready to serve lay a border of lettuce leaves round the edge of
dish.

917. +Sour Jelly (Aspic).+-- Soak 2 ounces gelatine in ½ pint cold
water 15 minutes; then put it over the fire with 1 quart good meat
stock and sufficient vinegar to give it a nice sour taste; add a few
cloves, 2 blades mace and 1 bay leaf; stir this over the fire till
the gelatine is dissolved; beat the whites of 2 eggs till light and
add the juice of 1 lemon and a little cold water; stir it with an
egg beater into the jelly and stir and boil for a few minutes; then
draw the saucepan to side of stove and let it stand 5 minutes; then
strain through a jelly bag; or turn a chair upside down on a kitchen
table; then take a square piece of unbleached muslin and tie a
corner over each of the upturned legs of the chair; set a bowl
underneath and pour the jelly onto the cloth a little at a time and
keep the saucepan on the side of stove, to keep the jelly warm. If
meat stock is not handy dissolve 2 teaspoonfuls Liebig’s beef
extract in 1 quart boiling water and use it instead of meat stock.
Another way is to boil 4 calves’ feet till they fall apart; then
strain off the liquor, set it aside and when cold remove all the
fat; boil the liquor down to 2 quarts; then beat the whites of 4
eggs to a froth and add the juice of 1 lemon and a little water; add
to the broth sufficient white vinegar to give it a nice sour taste;
also add a little salt, some whole pepper corns, a few blades mace,
4 cloves and 1 bay leaf; stir in the beaten whites, continue
stirring, let the contents boil for a few minutes and let it stand 5
minutes; then draw to side of stove, let it stand 5 minutes and
strain through a flannel jelly bag. Pigs’ feet or the skin of fresh
pork may be used instead of calves’ feet. Sour jelly is used for
garnishing dishes of meat and salads. It is either chopped with a
knife or put into small fancy forms and when firm turned out and
laid around the dishes with cresses, lettuce or celery between. If
the jelly is not dark enough add a little sugar color (see Sugar
Color). If the jelly is white it may be colored green with green
spinach color or pink with cochineal.

918. +Garnishing.+-- The articles which are mostly used in garnishing
are:--Lettuce, cresses and hard boiled eggs (either cut into slices
or quarters or chopped fine, the yolks and whites separately, and
laid alternately in small clusters all over the salad); or cut green
pickles in slices and lay them in a circle around the salad with
small clusters of finely chopped beets and chopped eggs; small
girkins, capers, olives and very small, white pickled onions are
also used for garnishing. Another way is to cut boiled carrots,
white turnips and beets into fancy shapes, such as half moons,
stars, leaves and roses, with a vegetable cutter; anchovies are also
largely used in garnishing. They are freed from skins and bones and
then rolled up and laid in a circle around the dish with small white
onions, pink horseradish and olives or girkins.

919. +Horseradish for Garnishing.+-- Remove the outside black skin
from a large root of horseradish and wash it clean; then shave it
off with a knife in long narrow strips so they curl up; color ½ the
shavings with prepared cochineal and leave the other ½ white; then
use for decorating dishes of meats or salads by laying it in small
clusters around the dish.

920. +Cocoanut for Garnishing Salads.+-- Grate cocoanut and sprinkle
it over the top of salad. Especially nice over chicken, shrimp and
fish salads; also on potato, tomato and egg salads. Grated cocoanut
lends a handsome appearance to any salad.




ICES AND GLAZES.


921. +How to Use Icing.+-- Over large cakes pour the icing by
spoonfuls near center on top of cake and spread it with a
broad-bladed knife dipped in cold water all over the cake as
smoothly as possible; set it in a cool oven for a few minutes, then
in a dry, airy place, free from dust, to dry. Some icing does not
need to be put in the oven, as it dries immediately, as will be seen
from the directions given in following recipes. Small cakes are
dipped into the icing or into glaze and then laid on paper or tins
to dry. If the cake is to be ornamented make a paper funnel as
follows:--Take a piece of brown paper, not too thick, or white tea
paper 12 inches square and cut it through on the bias in two pieces
from one corner to the other; take one piece in your right hand, the
bias side from you, roll with the left hand, the bias side towards
you, and form the paper into a funnel; bend the end where it closes
near the top over to the inside, clip a small piece from the end of
funnel with a scissors and slip a small tube inside it to the end
opening; then put in the icing and bend the top of funnel in all
around the same way as ¼ pound tea is put up in those small
funnel-shaped bags; next press the icing down towards the end and
commence to squirt it onto the cake. The cake may be ornamented with
a border and a harp in the center, or an anchor or any kind of a
pattern that may be desired. Flowers and leaves may be bought at any
confectionery and pasted on with a little icing.

922. +White Icing.+-- Sift ½ pound powdered sugar into a bowl, add
the whites of 2 eggs and stir 20 minutes; add a few drops lemon
juice while the stirring is going on; drop a little icing onto
paper; if the icing stands without running it is stiff enough; if it
shows the least tendency to run more sugar must be added. This icing
is used for ornamenting cake and serves as a kind of paste to stick
flowers and leaves onto top of cake.

923. +Clear Icing.+-- Sift ½ pound powdered sugar into a bowl, add
the whites of 2 eggs and stir for 5 minutes; add a few drops lemon
juice and stir 5 minutes longer; then spread it over the cake; set
the cake for 2 or 3 minutes in a cool oven, take out and let it dry
for a few hours in a dry place which is free from dust.

924. +White Icing with Wine or Liquor.+-- Mix ½ pound sifted powdered
sugar with the white of 1 egg and add 3 tablespoonfuls maraschino,
Madeira or sherry wine, kirsch, rum or brandy; before this icing is
put on cover the cake with a layer of jelly; then put the icing over
it and set the cake for 1 minute in the oven; then set it in a dry
place which is free from dust to dry. To make pink icing add a few
drops prepared cochineal or strawberry syrup. Yellow icing is made
by adding prepared saffron. Essence of lemon or the grated rind of 1
orange may be used instead of vanilla flavoring.

925. +Almond Icing.+-- Pound 3 ounces blanched almonds with the white
of 1 egg in a wedgewood mortar to a paste, mix them with ¼ pound
powdered sugar, the white of ½ egg and ½ teaspoonful vanilla extract
and stir for 5 minutes; dip small pieces of cake into the icing;
pour and spread it over whole cakes with a broad-bladed knife. Hazel
nuts and walnuts may be used the same way as almonds, as can also
pistachio nuts. To the latter add a few drops spinach green.

926. +Fruit Icing.+-- Mix ½ pound sifted powdered sugar with the
white of 1 egg and add 3 tablespoonfuls fruit juice--either
raspberry, strawberry, currant, pineapple or peach; if lemon or
orange juice is used add a little grated rind; spread the icing over
the cake and set it for a few minutes in a cool oven; then set it in
a dry place which is free from dust to dry.

927. +Sugar Glaze.+-- Mix 1 cup powdered sugar with 2 tablespoonfuls
water and put it over the fire to get lukewarm; pour over the cake
and let it dry, which will take but a few minutes; dip small pieces
of cake into it. Glazes of raspberries, strawberries, pineapples,
peaches, wine, maraschino or rum are made the same way. Omit the
water and use 2 tablespoonfuls fruit juice or wine, whichever kind
is wanted.

928. +Maraschino Glaze.+-- Mix 1 cup sifted powdered sugar with 1
tablespoonful water and 1 tablespoonful maraschino, let it get warm
on the fire and pour while warm over the cake. It will get hard in a
few minutes. Rum glaze is made the same as Maraschino Glaze.

929. +Orange Glaze.+-- Mix 2 tablespoonfuls orange juice with 1 cup
powdered sugar, add a little grated rind, set over a slow fire to
get lukewarm and use it at once.

930. +Lemon Glaze.+-- Stir 1 cup sifted powdered sugar with 1
tablespoonful lemon juice, 1 tablespoonful water and a little grated
rind; let it get lukewarm; then spread it over the cake and set in a
dry place which is free from dust to dry.

931. +Coffee Glaze.+-- Mix 1 cup powdered sugar with 2 tablespoonfuls
strong coffee, let it get lukewarm and use at once.

932. +Wine Glaze.+-- Boil 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water until it
forms a thread between 2 fingers; remove it from fire, add 2
tablespoonfuls sherry or Madeira wine and stir for 1 or 2 minutes;
then quickly pour it over the cake and let it stand in a dry place
which is free from dust to harden.

933. +Boiled Cinnamon Glaze.+-- Boil 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water and
1 teaspoonful powdered cinnamon until it forms a thread between 2
fingers; remove it from fire, stir for a few minutes and use at
once.

934. +Chocolate Glaze.+-- Melt 2 tablespoonfuls grated chocolate in
the oven and mix it with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar syrup; mix 1 cup
sugar with 1 tablespoonful water, add the chocolate, set it over a
slow fire to get lukewarm and use at once.

935. +Cinnamon Glaze.+-- Mix 1 cup sifted powdered sugar with 1
teaspoonful cinnamon, add 2 tablespoonfuls water, set it over a slow
fire, stir until lukewarm and use at once.

936. +Cold Sugar Glaze.+-- Mix 1 cup sifted powdered sugar with 2
tablespoonfuls cold water and add 1 teaspoonful lemon or vanilla
extract; spread glaze over the cake and set it for 1 or 2 minutes in
a cool oven to obtain a glaze; then remove and set in a dry place
which is free from dust to dry. NOTE.--Instead of water any kind of
fruit juice syrup, wine, rum or Cognac may be used. If lemon juice
is used take ½ water, ½ juice and a little grated rind. For orange
use a little rum and 2 tablespoonfuls orange juice. For coffee use
instead of water 2 spoonfuls strong coffee. For chocolate stir in 2
tablespoonfuls grated chocolate or cocoa the same way, or melt the
chocolate in the oven and then add it to the sugar.

937. +Boiled Chocolate Glaze.+-- Place a small saucepan with ½ pound
sugar, ½ pound grated chocolate and ½ pint water over the fire and
stir and boil till it forms a thread between 2 fingers; remove from
fire and stir until a thin skin forms on top of glaze; then use it
at once; spread it evenly all over the cake and set for a few
minutes in a cool oven. If the glaze should become too cold before
it is all used return it to the fire and repeat again. The glaze
when done should shine like a mirror.

938. +Transparent Glaze.+-- Boil 1 cup sugar with ¾ cup water until
it forms a thread between 2 fingers; remove it from fire, stir for a
few minutes and then quickly use; dip small pieces of cake into the
glaze, pour over large pieces and spread it apart; let it dry in an
airy room which is free from dust.

939. +Rose Glaze.+-- Boil 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water till it forms
a thread between 2 fingers; remove at once and add 2 tablespoonfuls
rose water and a little prepared cochineal, to color it to a
delicate pink; stir for a minute and then pour it over the cake.
Small cakes may be dipped into the glaze and set in a dry place
which is free from dust to dry.

940. +Spinning Sugar.+-- Put ¾ pound loaf sugar in a small copper
kettle, add sufficient cold water to half cover the sugar and stir
until it is melted; then place the kettle over a strong fire and
boil the sugar to a crack (the 6th grade); add a few drops vinegar,
remove the kettle, dip it for a few minutes into cold water and let
it cool off a little; if the sugar is spun when too hot the threads
will be too thin and lumps will form; then place the kettle in a pan
of hot water, or on the side of stove, to keep the sugar warm; take
a large knife in the left hand and hold it out straight before you;
take a silver spoon in the right hand, dip it into the sugar without
touching the bottom of kettle and let some of the sugar run off from
the spoon; then spin long threads back and forth over the knife from
right to left; after a considerable amount of sugar is spun in this
way take it from the knife, lay on clean paper and spin the rest in
like manner; when all is spun form the sugar into pompoms, garlands,
bouquets, etc. Half the sugar may be colored with cochineal to a
delicate pink. The sugar should be spun in a place free from
draughts and in clear and dry weather. This sugar is used for
decorating and trimming dishes.

941. +Boiling Sugar.+-- Put 1 pound sugar into a kettle with ½ pint
water and let it stand for a few minutes; then put it over the fire
to boil; while the boiling is going on dip a small brush into cold
water and wipe off the sides and edge of kettle; the different
grades the sugar goes through in boiling are as follows:--1st grade,
broad run; 2d grade, small pearl; 3d grade, large pearl; 4th grade,
the small blubber; 5th grade, the large blubber; 6th grade, to a
crack; 7th grade, caramel; boil the sugar for a few minutes and dip
the point of a spoon into it; if the sugar falls in large drops from
the spoon it has reached the 1st grade; continue the boiling for a
few minutes longer; dip your first finger into it and press the
finger against the thumb; then open the fingers and if the sugar
forms a thread between the 2 fingers it has reached the 2d grade;
after boiling a little longer dip in a spoon and if a pearl hangs
onto a long thread of the spoon the sugar has reached the 3d grade;
after a few minutes longer boiling take a little in a spoon, blow it
and if the sugar falls from the spoon in blubbers it has reached the
4th grade; after a few minutes longer take a little of the sugar
between your fingers and quickly dip into cold water; if the sugar
can be formed into a ball it has reached the 5th grade; after a few
minutes longer dip the finger into the sugar and then quickly into
cold water; if the sugar can be broken it has reached the 6th grade;
then set the saucepan in cold water; if it boils a few minutes
longer it will have reached the 7th grade, or caramel. The principal
care in boiling sugar is to use the exact amount of water. With too
little water the sugar will curdle before it has boiled enough. If
too much water is used the sugar will have to boil too long and will
turn yellow. It should boil quickly and only for a short time. It
will then stay white.

[Decoration]




APPENDIX.

CAKES.


+Cheese Torte.+-- One pound fresh pot cheese, ½ pint sour cream, 1½
ounce sweet almonds, 1½ ounce bitter almonds, 1 cup seedless
raisins, 2 tablespoonfuls flour, 1 cup sugar, 1 tablespoonful
butter, 6 eggs, ¼ teaspoonful salt. Blanche and grind the almonds
fine or grate them on a nutmeg grater; stir sugar, butter, and yolks
to a cream, add all the ingredients, and last the beaten whites; mix
well and set aside till following paste is made: Sift 1 pint of
flour with 1 teaspoonful baking powder into a bowl, add 2
tablespoonfuls sugar, ½ teaspoonful salt, and 1 tablespoonful
butter. Rub the butter fine in the flour, add 1 cup of milk and 1
egg, mix together into a firm dough, work it lightly on a board till
it does not stick to the hands, then roll it out thin. Butter a
large cheesecake pan, dust it with flour, and line the pan with the
dough; pour in the cheese preparation, and bake in medium-hot oven
till nearly done. In the meantime stir the yolks of 2 eggs with 3
tablespoonfuls granulated sugar to a cream, add 1 teaspoonful lemon
juice and little grated rind, add the 2 beaten whites, and stir the
whole 10 minutes; add last 3 level tablespoonfuls flour. When the
cake is firm to the touch remove it from the oven, pour over this
last mixture, and bake till done. Serve cold, dusted with sugar. The
bitter almonds may be omitted if objected to, and the cake pan may
be lined with puff paste or fine pie crust.

+Pistachio Torte.+-- Four ounces almond paste, 4 ounces ground
pistachio nuts or almonds, the yolks of 16 eggs, the whites of 8
eggs, 3 ounces flour, ½ pound sugar, ½ teaspoonful extract of
pistachio; rub the almond paste with the white of 1 egg fine; add
the 16 yolks and sugar; stir 15 minutes, then add the ground
pistachio nuts or almonds; continue the stirring 10 minutes; add the
extract; beat the whites to a stiff froth; add the yolk mixture to
the whites while beating constantly; beat the whole together 5
minutes; add the sifted flour; stir the flour in lightly; butter 2
large deep jelly-cake tins and dust them with the flour; fill in the
mixture and bake in a slow oven. FILLING: Boil ½ cup of sugar, with
½ cup water to a caramel, then add it slowly to the beaten whites of
2 eggs; beat until cold; add ½ teaspoonful vanilla sugar, ½ cupful
fine-cut candied pineapples, ½ cupful fine-chopped pistachio nuts or
almonds; spread this filling over one layer, put on the remaining
layer. Ice the cake with pistachio icing made as follows: Mix 1½ cup
sifted powdered sugar with 3 tablespoonfuls boiling water and a
little green coloring and pistachio flavoring; pour over the cake
and let stand till firm.

+Kugelhupf+, also called +Bunt Kuchen.+-- One pound flour, 10 ounces
butter, 2 yeast cakes, 6 whole eggs and 6 yolks, ¾ cup of sugar, ½
teaspoonful salt, 1 cupful seeded raisins; break the yeast into a
small bowl, add ½ cupful lukewarm milk and 1 teaspoonful sugar; let
it stand till the yeast rises to the surface, then add ½ cupful of
flour, mix to a stiff batter; cover and let stand till it is a light
sponge. In the meantime stir butter and sugar to a cream; add the
yolks one at a time, then alternately a little flour and 1 whole
egg, till all are used; beat this with the right hand 10 minutes;
add the raisins, and last the sponge; continue to beat 5 minutes;
butter a large ribbed form with tube in the center; dust with
powdered sugar, pour in the cake mixture; set the form in a warm
place till the contents has risen to double its size; then place the
form on a tin with salt and bake in a medium-hot oven about 45
minutes. When done, take it out of the oven, let it stand a few
minutes, then turn the cake out of the form, dust it with sugar, and
serve when cold.

+Jelly Roll.+-- One half pound sugar, 9 ounces flour, 1 teaspoonful
baking powder, 1 gill of milk (½ cupful), 3 eggs, ½ teaspoonful
lemon extract; sift flour, sugar, and powder into a bowl and make a
hollow in the center; put in milk, eggs, and lemon extract, mix all
together; butter a large shallow tin pan, cover with paper, spread
on the mixture thin and evenly, bake in slow oven. When done, remove
the pan, let it stand a few minutes to cool off a little, then turn
it upside down on a clean piece of paper, remove the paper carefully
from the cake which has laid in the pan, spread some currant jelly
over the surface, roll the cake up like a music roll, let it lie
rolled in the paper till cold. This preparation is also nice for
lady fingers.

+Election Cake.+-- One and a half pint lukewarm milk, 1 pound sugar,
½ pound lard, ½ pound butter, 2 pounds flour, the whites of 4 eggs,
1 pound citron, 1 pound seeded raisins, 1 teaspoonful mace, ½ cupful
rum, 3 yeast cakes. Break the yeast into a cup of lukewarm milk, add
1 teaspoonful sugar, set the cup in a warm place till the yeast
rises to the surface, put 1 cupful flour into a bowl, add the yeast,
mix into a stiff batter, cover, and set in a warm place to rise till
the sponge is very light. In the meantime stir butter, lard, and
sugar to a cream, add the mace, then alternately milk and flour,
then the fruit and rum, and last the 4 whites beaten to a stiff
froth; beat the whole with the hand 10 minutes, then add the sponge;
continue to beat a few minutes longer, cover, and set it in a warm
place to rise till double its size; butter and dust with flour a
large round cake pan, pour in the cake mixture, and bake in a
medium-hot oven till done. When cold, ice the cake with rum icing.

+Small Sponge Cake.+-- Three eggs, ½ cup granulated sugar, ½ cup
flour, the grated rind of ½ lemon, and a little lemon juice. Stir
the 3 yolks with the sugar 15 minutes, then add the lemon; beat the
whites to a stiff froth, add them to the yolks, and beat till the
sugar is all dissolved, which will take about 10 minutes, then sift
in the flour, stir the flour in lightly; butter and dust with flour
a small round pan, pour in the mixture, and bake in a slow oven.

+Apple Ringlets.+-- Peel, core, and cut into thick slices 4 large
tart apples, mix ½ cup of flour with ½ teaspoonful baking powder, ½
teaspoonful butter, and ½ teaspoonful salt. Break 1 egg into ½ cup
of cold water, beat until it foams, add the water and egg to the
flour, and mix into a batter. Melt 1 tablespoonful lard and butter
in a frying pan, dip the apple slices into the batter, put them into
the frying pan, not too many at once, and fry light brown on both
sides, keeping the pan covered while the frying is going on. Serve
dusted with sugar.

+Baking-Powder Rolls.+-- One pint flour, 1 heaping teaspoonful baking
powder, ½ tablespoonful butter, ½ teaspoonful salt, ½ pint milk, 1
egg, 1 teaspoonful sugar. Sift flour, salt, sugar, and powder into a
bowl, add the butter and rub it fine with the flour, mix the egg and
milk together, pour a little of the egg milk into a cup, add the
remaining to the flour, mix all together with a knife into a firm
dough, turn it on to a floured board, and work it together to smooth
the dough, roll it out ¼ inch in thickness, then cut it into rounds,
brush them over with a little melted butter, fold them over and set
them on a buttered tin, brush the rolls over with the egg milk which
was set aside, and bake in a quick oven. A good plan is to keep the
rolls covered with buttered paper the first 10 minutes while baking.

+Waffles.+-- Four ounces butter, 6 eggs, 4 ounces flour, 1
tablespoonful sugar, a pinch of mace, and a little grated lemon
rind, ½ pint whipped cream. Stir the butter to a cream, add
alternately 1 yolk, then a little flour until both are used, add the
sugar, the mace, and lemon, then the whipped cream, and last 5
whites whipped to a stiff froth; rub a waffle iron with fork, pour 1
tablespoonful batter into each compartment, and bake the waffles
light brown on both sides. Serve dusted with sugar.

+Gateau à la Weckesser.+-- Half pound of granulated sugar, 13 yolks,
9 whites, ½ pound flour, and the rind and juice of 1 lemon. Stir
sugar and yolks for 25 minutes by the clock, then beat the whites to
a stiff froth; add the yolks and sugar slowly to the white while
beating constantly, add the lemon, continue the beating 5 minutes,
then add the sifted flour, stir in lightly; butter a large round pan
and dust it with flour, pour in the batter, place the cake on a pan
of salt, and bake in a slow oven. When done, turn it on to a board,
which should be dusted with powdered sugar; let it lie till cold,
then spread a layer of pineapple marmalade over the cake, ice it
with white sugar glaze, and decorate the cake with candied fruit, of
plums, apricots, and cherries. The fruit must be cut into small
slices and the cherries in small dice.

+Lady Cake.+-- Six ounces butter, ½ pound sugar, 1 pound flour, 10
whites of eggs, ½ pint whipped cream, 1 teaspoonful baking powder, 1
teaspoonful vanilla sugar. Stir butter and sugar to a cream until
white and frothy, add the vanilla sugar, sift flour and baking
powder together, beat ½ pint cream until stiff; beat also the 10
whites to a stiff froth, then add alternately the three ingredients
to the creamed butter and sugar; butter and dust with flour a large
round pan, pour in the mixture, and bake in a medium-hot oven. When
done and cold, ice it with clear icing.

+Denmark Cake.+-- Two pounds flour, 2 teaspoonfuls baking powder, 1¾
pound sugar, 1 pound butter, 2 pounds raisins, 8 eggs, 1 pint sweet
milk, ½ pint wine, 3 tablespoonfuls allspice, 3 tablespoonfuls
cinnamon, 4 nutmegs. Sift flour and baking powder together, stir
butter and sugar to a cream, add gradually the yolks and spice, then
alternately milk, flour, and wine, last the fruit. Bake in a large
well-buttered pan in medium-hot oven.

+Stullen with Baking Powder.+-- One pound flour sifted with ½
teaspoonful salt, 2 teaspoonfuls baking powder, ½ cup of butter, ½
cup of sugar, and 2 eggs, the fine-chopped peel of ½ lemon, 1 cupful
seeded raisins, ½ cupful fine-cut citron, ¾ cup of milk. Rub flour
and butter together, add sugar, salt, milk, and eggs, mix all
together; add last the fruit, turn the dough on to a floured board
and work it a little to smooth the dough, then roll it out 1 inch in
thickness, fold it over and lay the cake in a buttered pan, giving
it the shape of a half moon; brush over with beaten egg and bake in
medium-hot oven.

+Wine Baba.+-- One pound flour, 2 teaspoonfuls baking powder, 1
teaspoonful salt, 4 ounces butter, 3 tablespoonfuls sugar, the
fine-chopped peel of 1 lemon, 4 eggs, ½ pint milk, ½ cup currants,
½ cup seeded raisins, ½ cup fine-cut citron. Sift flour and baking
powder together, stir butter and sugar to a cream, add by degrees
the yolks and lemon, then alternately flour and milk, next add the
fruit, and last the beaten whites. Fill the mixture into a buttered
form with a tube in the center, place it in a medium-hot oven, and
bake about 40 minutes or till done. In the meantime boil 1 cup sugar
with ½ cup water 5 minutes, remove from fire, add 1 gill sherry wine
and a few tablespoonfuls of raspberry syrup. When the cake is done
turn it on to a sieve, place the sieve on a large plate, and pour
the syrup by spoonfuls over the cake; pour that which runs below in
the plate over the cake again.

+Bunt Kuchen with Baking Powder.+-- One pint flour, 1 heaping
teaspoonful baking powder, ½ teaspoonful salt, 3 tablespoonfuls
sugar, 2 ounces butter, 2 eggs, ½ pint milk, ½ cup currants, ½ cup
stoned raisins, the grated rind of ½ lemon. Sift flour and baking
powder together, add the sugar, salt, and butter, rub the butter
fine in the flour, mix the yolks with the milk and add them to the
flour, mix all into a dough, add the fruit, and last the beaten
whites. Fill the mixture into a round buttered form with a tube in
center and bake about 35 minutes; cover the first 20 minutes with
buttered paper.

+Emelines.+-- _First Part_: The whites of 6 eggs, 1 cup powdered
sugar, 1 cup flour sifted with 1 teaspoonful baking powder, ½
teaspoonful lemon extract, 1 tablespoonful melted butter, measured
after it is melted, 2 tablespoonfuls milk. Beat the whites till
stiff, then add gradually the sugar, butter, lemon extract, and
milk, and last the flour. Butter a long shallow tin pan (13 inches
long, 9 inches wide, and 1 inch deep), dust it with flour, pour in
the mixture, smooth it even with a knife, and bake in a medium-hot
oven.

_Second Part_: The yolks of 6 eggs, 1 cup powdered sugar, 1 cup
flour sifted with 1 teaspoonful baking powder, 2 tablespoonfuls
milk, 1 tablespoonful butter, ½ teaspoonful lemon extract. Stir
butter, sugar, and yolks to a cream, add lemon extract, flour, and
milk; bake the same as the first part. When the cakes are nearly
cold lay them over one another with a layer of jelly between, then
cut it into fancy shapes like half moons, small rounds, and squares;
glaze them with sugar glaze No. 927. In place of jelly, cream or any
other filling may be taken. The two cakes may be spread separately
with jelly, then rolled up like jelly rolls.

+Sand Wafers.+-- Stir 4 ounces butter with 6 tablespoonfuls sugar
till light and creamy, add gradually 3 eggs, the grated rind of ½
lemon, stir 15 minutes, add last 7 ounces sifted flour. Fill the
preparation in a pastry bag, butter and dust with flour some large
shallow tin pans, press small cakes from the bag on to the pans the
size of a 50-cent piece, and bake in medium-hot oven. When done and
cold, glaze them with fruit glaze or leave them plain.

+Cream S.+-- Stir ½ pound butter with 6 ounces sugar to a cream, add
1 teaspoonful vanilla sugar and 4 eggs, stir 10 minutes; add last ½
pound of sifted flour. Put the preparation into a kiss syringe and
press small cakes in the shape of an S into buttered and floured
pans, bake in medium-hot oven, and when cold glaze them with vanilla
glaze.

+Aniseed Wafers.+-- Rub some shallow tin pans with wax, place ½ pound
sugar and 4 whole eggs in a bowl, set the bowl into a pan of hot
water, beat the contents of bowl with an egg beater 15 minutes, then
remove and beat till cold; add 1 teaspoonful well-cleaned aniseed
and ½ pound sifted flour, fill the mixture into a pastry bag and
press small cakes on to the waxed tins, cover and let them stand
till next day, when the little cakes have obtained a crust, then
bake them in slow oven.

+Cinnamon Sticks.+-- Four ounces of almond paste, the white of 1 egg,
4 ounces powdered sugar, 1 teaspoonful cinnamon. Mix all together,
put on to a floured board; roll it out ⅛ inch thick, cut the paste
into 3 long strips 3 fingers wide, spread over an icing made as
follows: Mix the whites of 2 eggs with ½ pound powdered sugar, add ½
teaspoonful cinnamon and a few drops of lemon juice, stir 5 minutes,
then cut the strips into small sticks a finger wide, lay them on to
buttered tins, and bake in a slow oven.

+Meringue Shells.+-- Beat the whites of 4 eggs to a stiff froth, add
½ pound granulated sugar and a little vanilla sugar, stir the sugar
in lightly; fill this into a pastry bag or a paper funnel; press
small portions on to a double-folded paper, dust thickly with sugar,
lay the paper in a pan, and bake in a slow oven. When done and cold,
remove them from the paper, press the soft bottoms into shape to
form a shell, and serve filled with whipped sweetened cream or ice
cream.

+Kisses.+-- Five ounces whites of egg, 1 pound granulated sugar, 1
cup water, 4 ounces powdered sugar. Put the granulated sugar and
water in a saucepan, stir until the sugar is dissolved, then place
the saucepan over the fire, and boil to a crack; have the whites
beaten to a stiff froth, and add slowly the hot sugar while beating
constantly with an egg beater, then beat until cold. This may then
be used as it is, and if wanted very stiff, add the 4 ounces
powdered sugar; stir it through the mixture lightly, then put the
meringue in a kiss syringe, dust some paper with powdered sugar,
press the mixture on to the paper in any shape desired. For shells
it may be put on with a spoon, dust them with sugar, and bake in a
slow oven. The oven may be left open part of the time. In place of
paper, rub some tin pans with butter, then rub off all the butter
with paper, and dust them with powdered sugar, then put the kisses
on them.

+Banana Cake.+-- Three bananas, 1 cup of currant jelly, ½ pint of
whipped cream, 3 ounces butter, ¾ cup sugar, 1½ cups of flour, 1
teaspoonful baking powder, the whites of 3 eggs beaten to a stiff
froth, ½ cup milk, the juice and grated rind of ½ lemon. Sift flour
and baking powder together, stir butter and sugar to a cream, add
the lemon, then alternately flour, milk, and the white of egg;
butter 2 jelly tins of medium size, dust them with flour, divide the
cake mixture evenly in the tins, and bake in a medium-hot oven. When
done and cold, spread half of the jelly over one layer, cover with
banana slices, lay over the second layer, put on the remaining jelly
and bananas; mix the whipped cream with 1 tablespoonful fine sugar
and a little vanilla, cover the whole cake with cream, or take 1
pint of whipped cream and put half of the cream between the layers
and the remaining over the top, and serve.

+Neapolitan Cake.+-- Roll out some puff paste to ⅛ inch in thickness,
cut it into 3 strips 5 inches wide and about 10 inches long; moisten
a large shallow tin pan with cold water, put in the strips, dust
them with powdered sugar, and bake in a medium-hot oven. When done
and cold, cover 1 strip with boiled vanilla cream (see recipe No.
139), put over this the second strip, and spread over some currant
jelly; lay on the third strip. Mix ½ cup powdered sugar with 1
tablespoonful boiling water and a few drops of lemon juice, pour it
over the cake, and set aside till firm.

+One-Egg Cake.+-- One cup sugar, 1 egg, a piece of butter the size of
a walnut, 2 scant cups of flour sifted with 1 heaping teaspoonful
baking powder, ½ teaspoonful extract of lemon or vanilla, 1 cup of
milk; rub butter and flour together, add the sugar, milk, and egg;
mix into a batter, butter a square pan, dust with flour, put in the
mixture, and bake in a medium-hot oven till done. This mixture may
be baked in 3 small jelly tins, and when done lay them over one
another with jelly marmalade or cream between them; or bake it in a
pan 12 inches long and 8 inches wide and 1½ inch deep. When done,
cut the cake in half, lay them over one another with jelly or cream
between, then mix 1 cup sifted powdered sugar with 1 teaspoonful
lemon juice and 2 tablespoonfuls boiling water, stir until smooth,
pour the icing over the cake, and let stand till firm.

For a chocolate cake, bake the cake the same way, then mix 1 cup of
powdered sugar with the white of 1 egg; melt 4 ounces Baker’s
chocolate, add it to the sugar, mix all together, put half of it
between the cake, and spread the remaining over the top of the cake.

For a strawberry shortcake, bake the mixture in 2 small well
buttered and floured jelly tins, wash and mash 1 quart of
strawberries, mix with ½ cup sugar, put half of them between the 2
layers, and the remainder on top; serve with cream or vanilla sauce,
or put some whipped cream over the strawberries.

+Spice Cake.+-- Three fourths cup butter, 1 cup molasses, 1 cup
sugar, 3 eggs, 3 cups flour sifted with 1½ teaspoonful baking
powder, 1½ teaspoonful cinnamon, 1 teaspoonful cloves, ½ grated
nutmeg, 1 cup sour milk or cold coffee. Stir butter and sugar to a
cream, add the eggs one at a time, stir a few minutes between each
addition, add molasses and spice, then alternately flour and milk.
Butter a square cake pan, dust with flour, pour in the cake mixture,
and bake in medium-hot oven; or bake small cakes in gem pans and
when cold ice them with sugar glaze.

+Molasses Cake.+-- One cup molasses, ½ cup butter, 2 eggs, ½ cup
milk, ½ tablespoonful ginger, 2 cups flour sifted with 1 teaspoonful
baking powder. Mix and bake the same as above.

+Gingerbread.+-- One cup brown sugar, 1 cup molasses, ½ cup butter or
lard, 2 eggs, 1 tablespoonful ginger, ½ teaspoonful ground mace, ½
cup cold coffee, ½ teaspoonful salt, 1 heaping teaspoonful baking
powder sifted with 3 cups of flour. Stir butter or lard with the
sugar to a cream, add the eggs one at a time, stirring a few minutes
between each addition; then add the spice and syrup, last the flour
and coffee alternately; pour the mixture into a square or long pan
previously well buttered and dusted with flour; bake in a medium-hot
oven.

+Ginger Snaps.+-- Half pound brown sugar, ½ pound butter, 1 pint
molasses, 1 tablespoonful ginger, 1 teaspoonful cloves, 2
teaspoonfuls cinnamon, 1 teaspoonful baking powder sifted with 2
cups flour. Stir butter and sugar to a cream, add the molasses and
spice; when well mixed add flour and work it into a soft dough; if
necessary, add more flour, roll out very thin, cut into rounds, and
bake on buttered tins.

+Corn Bread.+-- One pint of corn meal, ½ cup of flour, 1 teaspoonful
baking powder, 1 egg, ½ teaspoonful salt, 1½ tablespoonful sugar, 1
cup milk. Mix all together and bake in a well-buttered square tin
pan. This bread should be about 1½ inch thick when done.




FROZEN DESSERTS.


+Mignon Cream.+-- One pint milk, the yolks of 4 eggs, ½ cupful cream,
1 cupful sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla sugar. Place a small pan with
3 tablespoonfuls of the sugar over the fire, stir until it melts and
turns light brown, then add ¼ cup hot water, let it boil to a thin
syrup and add it to the milk; add the yolks, sugar, and vanilla, mix
well and freeze.

+Malborn Cream.+-- Cut ½ pound candied fruit into small pieces, place
it in a bowl with ½ gill of sherry wine, then place a double boiler
with ½ pint of milk, the yolks of 2 eggs, and ¾ cup of sugar over
the fire, stir until just about to boil, remove instantly, and when
cold add ½ pint of cream, 1½ tablespoonful best rum, put the cream
in a freezer, and freeze till nearly stiff, then add the candied
fruit; continue the freezing till firm.

+Banana Ice Cream.+-- Remove the peel from 6 ripe bananas and mash
them fine, mix 1 pint of cream with ½ pint milk, 1 cup of sugar, and
2 teaspoonfuls vanilla; put the cream into the freezer, and freeze
till it begins to thicken, then add the bananas, and freeze till
firm.

+Frozen Caramel Cream.+-- Put in a double boiler 1 cup milk, 1 cup
cream, ¾ cup sugar, and the yolks of 3 eggs; beat well, then place
over the fire, and stir till nearly boiling; when cold, add this
slowly to the 3 beaten whites while stirring constantly; put 3
tablespoonfuls sugar over the fire, stir till it turns yellow, add a
little water, boil to a syrup. When cold, add it to the cream, and
freeze. In place of caramel, 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract may be
added.

+Ice Cream without Milk or Cream.+-- One pint water, 1 ounce butter,
the yolks of 3 eggs, 1 cup of sugar, the peel of ½ lemon, and ½
tablespoonful lemon juice; beat 3 whites to a stiff froth; wash the
butter several times, stir sugar and yolks to a cream, add the water
and butter, place it in a double boiler, stir till nearly boiling;
remove, and when cold add the whites, then freeze.

+Lemon Sherbet.+-- The juice of 4 lemons and 1 orange, 2½ cups sugar,
1 quart water; boil sugar and water to a syrup; when cold add the
lemon and orange juice and freeze; add last 1 or 2 beaten white of
eggs, mix, and serve.

+Strawberry Sherbet.+-- Put the juice of 1 lemon over 1 quart of
mashed strawberries; boil 1 quart water with 2 cups sugar, pour it
over the strawberries, and when cold rub them through a sieve, then
freeze; add last the white of 1 beaten egg, mix, and serve.

+Coffee Frappe.+-- Boil 1 quart water with ½ cup sugar, add 4 ounces
fine-ground coffee, cover and set on side of the stove 10 minutes;
then strain, and when cold add the white of 1 egg; then freeze, and
serve in glasses with whipped cream on top.

+Coffee Sorbet.+-- Pour 3 pints of boiling water over 1 cup of
fine-ground coffee, cover, and let it stand 15 minutes, then strain
through a napkin; add 1 cup sugar, stir till dissolved, and when
cold freeze it till nearly stiff; add 1 gill of the best brandy,
continue the freezing for a few minutes, and serve.




CUSTARD.


+Caramel Custard.+-- Boil 1 cup sugar with ½ cup water till the sugar
begins to turn light brown, then pour it into a pudding-dish. Mix at
the same time 1 quart of milk with 6 eggs, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1
teaspoonful vanilla extract; pour this into the dish, set the dish
in a pan of water, and bake till the custard has set. Remove and
place it for several hours on ice. In serving, turn the custard out
on to a dish, and serve. This custard may be put into small molds or
cups and baked the same way.

+Cocoanut Caramel.+-- Mix the whites of 8 eggs with 1½ pint of milk,
½ cup sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla extract, and 1½ cup fresh
cocoanut; let it stand 1 hour. Place 1 cup of sugar with ½ cup water
over the fire, boil until it begins to turn yellow, then pour it
into 6 small bowls; spread the caramel even with a spoon so that the
bowls are completely lined inside, then pour in the custard, set the
bowl in a pan of water so that the water reaches halfway up the
bowls, and bake till the custard is firm to the touch. When done,
remove the bowls and set them in a cool place. In serving, turn the
custard on to small plates, and serve.

+Caramel Charlotte.+-- Put ½ ounce gelatin in a small bowl with ½
gill of cold water; at the same time place a small saucepan with 3
tablespoonfuls sugar over the fire, stir until the sugar is melted
and has assumed a rich brown color, then add ½ pint milk; cook and
stir till the sugar is dissolved, mix the yolks of 5 eggs with 3
tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 teaspoonful vanilla, and 2 tablespoonfuls
cold milk; add a little of the hot caramel milk to the yolks, then
add the yolks to the caramel milk, stir over the fire till nearly
boiling; instantly remove, add the gelatin, stir until dissolved,
then strain into a bowl, and set aside to cool. Beat 1 pint of cream
till stiff, when the caramel mixture begins to thicken add it slowly
to the cream while beating constantly; in the meantime fit a piece
of white paper in the bottom of a charlotte mold, line the sides and
bottom with thin slices of sponge cake, pour in the cream, cover the
top with sponge cake the same way. Place the charlotte on ice for
several hours. When ready to serve turn the charlotte on to a dish
and garnish with a wreath of spun sugar or serve plain.

+Strawberry Charlotte.+-- Prepare a strawberry fromage, No. 189, line
a mold with sponge cake or lady fingers the same as in the foregoing
recipe, pour in the strawberry fromage, cover with the same cake or
fingers, and set on ice. When ready to serve, turn the charlotte on
to a dish, remove the paper, and serve with cream, which should be
sweetened with sugar and flavored with vanilla, or serve plain
without the cream. In place of strawberry fromage any other kind of
fromage may be used.




SAUCES.


+Bismarck Sauce.+-- Stir the yolk of 2 eggs with 1 cup of powdered
sugar to a cream, add slowly ½ cup of Rhine wine, beat the white to
a stiff froth, add the sauce slowly to the white while beating
constantly, add last ½ cupful whipped cream. In place of Rhine wine
sherry wine may be taken.

+Transparent Sauce.+-- Mix 1 heaping teaspoonful cornstarch in a
small saucepan with ¼ cup cold water, add 1 cupful boiling water and
the thin peel of ½ lemon; set the saucepan over the fire, stir and
boil a few minutes, then remove, add 2 tablespoonfuls lemon juice
and 3 or 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, or sweeten to taste. To this sauce
a few spoonfuls of strawberry or raspberry syrup or juice may be
added.

+Orange Sauce.+-- Stir the yolks of 3 eggs with 1 cupful powdered
sugar to a cream, add slowly 1 cupful orange juice and 3
tablespoonfuls lemon juice; beat the whites to a stiff froth, add
slowly while beating constantly the orange mixture to the whites;
serve either with hot or cold puddings.

+Cream Sauce.+-- Stir the yolks of 2 eggs with ½ cupful powdered
sugar to a cream, add ½ cupful orange juice and 1 tablespoonful
lemon juice; beat the whites to a stiff froth, add the orange
mixture slowly to the whites while beating constantly; add last 1
cupful whipped cream. In place of orange juice any kind of fruit
juice may be taken, or jelly may be dissolved in hot water and used
the same way.

+Fruit Sauce.+-- Mix 1 teaspoonful cornstarch in a small saucepan
with ½ gill of cold water, add while stirring constantly 1 cupful
boiling water, the thin peel of ½ lemon; place the saucepan over the
fire and boil a few minutes; remove from fire, add ¾ cupful fruit
syrup, either of raspberry, strawberry, apricot, or cherries, and 1
tablespoonful lemon juice; if handy, add 2 or 3 tablespoonfuls white
wine, and serve with soufflé and light delicate puddings. It may
also be served cold with puddings. In place of fruit syrup,
strawberry or cherry marmalade may be taken, or apple or currant
jelly.

+Raspberry Sauce.+-- Mix 1 heaping teaspoonful cornstarch in a small
saucepan with a little cold water; add slowly while stirring
constantly 1 cupful boiling water, a small piece of cinnamon, and
the thin peel of ½ lemon; place the saucepan over the fire, cook a
few minutes, then remove, add 1 cupful fresh raspberry juice, ½
cupful sugar, and 1 tablespoonful lemon juice; if liked and handy,
a little Rhine wine or white wine may be added; serve either hot or
cold. If raspberry syrup is used, omit the sugar.

+Cream Cakes Glassé.+-- Boil ½ pint milk with 2 ounces butter, add 4
ounces flour, stir until it forms into a smooth paste and loosens
itself from the bottom and sides of the saucepan, transfer the paste
to a dish, and when nearly cold add the yolks of 4 eggs, and last
the beaten whites; drop this mixture (by tablespoonfuls) on to
buttered tins, not too close together, brush them over with the
beaten egg, and bake to a fine golden color and well done. When done
and cold, cut the cakes open on the side and fill them with vanilla
cream, No. 129; half the quantity of cream will be sufficient. Place
the cakes on a sieve, boil 1 cup of sugar with ½ cup water till the
sugar begins to turn light brown (caramel), instantly remove, and
pour it over the cakes.




WAR RECIPES


+Economical Jelly Roll.+-- Separate three eggs; to the yolks add half
a pound of powdered sugar; beat fifteen minutes; then add grated
lemon rind; half a pound of sifted flour with a quarter teaspoonful
of baking powder; add it to the mixture with the whites beaten stiff
and half a cup of milk.

Spread, dust with sugar, and bake till done.

+Millionaire Cake.+-- Cream the yolks of three eggs with one-half cup
powdered sugar for ten minutes, add one-half teaspoonful vanilla and
three quarters of a cup of flour sifted with one-fourth of a
teaspoonful of baking powder and the beaten whites of the three
eggs, butter six small layer cake tins and put in the mixture. Bake
in a quick oven ten minutes.

+Filling.+-- Put two tablespoonfuls of chocolate and three
tablespoonfuls sugar with one-half cup strong coffee and boil for
ten minutes, when almost cold add one-half cup well-washed butter,
teaspoon vanilla in small portions; when thick and creamy spread
between layers and on top and decorate with candied cherries.

+Probasco Cream.+-- Mix 4 ounces flour with 2 ounces butter, 2 ounces
ground almonds, 1 yolk and a little water, 1 tablespoonful sugar to
a firm paste; let rest 1 hour, roll out ¼ inch thick, lay a small
jelly tin over, cut around it, lay the round piece of paste on a
buttered tin, brush over with egg and bake a fine golden color. Add
to ½ pint whipped cream, 1 teaspoonful granulated gelatine dissolved
in 2 tablespoonfuls milk, flavor with ½ teaspoonful vanilla and
sweeten with 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, fill into a round form and set
on ice.

Boil 1 pound of chestnuts 20 minutes, remove the outside shells and
the brown skin, place the nuts in a saucepan, cover with boiling
water, cook till very tender, drain and press through a sieve, add 2
tablespoonfuls cream, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, a pinch of salt, and ½
tablespoonful melted butter. Set on ice. Shortly before serving turn
the cream on the almond cake, put the chestnut puree in a pastry bag
with a small tube in the end, press the puree in the form of
spaghetti around the cream and cover the cream with a thick layer of
pulverized macaroons with sponge sugar, sprinkle over 1
tablespoonful satin sugar, ornament with whipped cream and sprinkle
with fine pistachio nuts.

+Prune Soufflé.+-- Wash and soak 1 cup of prunes over night, next day
drain, remove pits, and add them to 3 whites of eggs beaten stiff;
add 1 teaspoonful vanilla, put in buttered and sugared soufflé dish,
set in shallow pan with a little water, set in a medium oven to
poach till done, which will take about 40 minutes.

+Apricot Whip.+-- Rub half a cup of apricots after they have been
cooked through a sieve, add half a bottle of cream beaten stiff to
it and two tablespoons powdered sugar and half a teaspoon vanilla,
put in six sherbet glasses and decorate with lady fingers around the
edge.

+Coffee Parfait.+-- Put ¼ cup granulated sugar with one tablespoon
cornstarch and one pint of milk over the fire and boil five minutes,
then add two tablespoons coffee extract and ½ teaspoon vanilla; when
cool freeze, put into four parfait glasses and decorate with whipped
cream.

+Dorothy Royal.+-- Bake a cup cake mixture in a sheet pan, when done
and cool, cut into square pieces and pour over a sauce made as
follows: put one cup of sugar with half a cup of milk, a tablespoon
of butter and one square of chocolate over the fire and cook until
thick and creamy, about ten minutes; pour hot over the cake, add a
spoonful of whipped cream on every piece and sprinkle chopped
walnuts over all.

+Peach à la Melba.+-- Put one tablespoon of vanilla ice cream on a
round of sunshine cake, on it lay half a preserved peach and pour
over two tablespoons melba syrup made as follows: melt ½ cup
raspberry syrup to which has been added one tablespoon fine cut
candied cherries and decorate with whipped cream.

+Praline Cream.+-- Put ¼ cup granulated sugar with one tablespoon
cornstarch and one pint milk over the fire and boil five minutes,
stirring all the time, then add the yolks of two eggs and one
teaspoon vanilla and set aside to cool, in another saucepan put ½
cup granulated sugar with ¼ cup water over the fire and boil until
it turns a golden brown; pour on a buttered marble and when cold
roll with a rolling pin until fine, sprinkle into the cooked
mixture, add ½ pint cream and freeze in a well-packed freezer.

+Prune Whip.+-- Rub ½ cup prunes after they have been cooked through
a sieve; add ½ bottle whipped cream to it and two tablespoonfuls
powdered sugar, ½ teaspoon vanilla, serve in six sherbet glasses
with lady fingers around the edge.

+War Bread.+-- Two cups of rye flour, one cup bran, one cup Indian
meal, one teaspoonful salt, one yeast cake and 2 cups of luke warm
water, two tablespoonfuls molasses, one teaspoonful fat; put flour,
bran and meal into a bowl, add the salt and rub the fat through the
flour, then add the yeast and crumble it fine, then add the warm
water and mix well about 15 minutes, cover and let raise to double
its height, then add some wheat flour slowly while kneading the
dough to a soft firm dough; shape it into loaves, put into buttered
pan, let rise again till double its size, and bake in a medium hot
oven till done about ¾ of an hour.

+Bran Muffins.+-- Put one cup of bran and one cup of whole wheat in a
bowl, add one teaspoon salt and one teaspoon fat and rub it through
until fine and then add one egg, two tablespoons molasses and one
cup milk and a heaping teaspoon baking powder, mix well and put in
buttered and floured muffin tins and bake about fifteen minutes.

+Oatmeal Cookies.+-- Cream two tablespoons butter with ½ cup sugar
until white and creamy, add one egg and stir again a few minutes,
then add ½ cup oatmeal and ½ cup flour, two tablespoons raisins, one
tablespoon molasses and ¼ cup milk; drop by teaspoons on
well-buttered tins and bake in a hot oven about ten minutes.

+Vienna Pancakes.+-- Put two ounces flour with three eggs in a bowl,
add ½ teaspoon salt, one cup milk, one teaspoon sugar and beat
fifteen minutes, heat a large well-cleaned frying pan, melt ½
tablespoon fat or butter, pour in the mixture, turn the pan from
side to side, let the batter run up the sides of the pan, continue
until the batter has formed a coating on bottom and sides of the
pan, then set in a hot oven and bake until light brown on top; serve
dusted with powdered sugar and the juice of ½ lemon.

+Checkerboard Sandwiches.+-- Take an 8-cent white loaf of bread, and
an 8-cent loaf of brown bread, cut off crusts on all sides of both
loaves; now cut into lengths of 2 inches thick, butter thickly on
all sides, lay a white strip next a brown strip of bread alternately
to form checkers; then roll in a wet napkin and set aside to chill;
when required cut in slices and serve. When finished they should
look like checkerboards.

+Domino Sandwiches.+-- Stir one cream cheese with ½ cup cream and two
dashes of paprika until smooth; spread on brown bread and cover with
brown bread; cut the sandwiches 1½ inches by three inches and
decorate top with the cheese mixture put through a pastry bag to
represent dominoes.

+Minced Ham Sandwiches.+-- Put cooked ham through meat machine and to
one cup of ham add ¼ cup mayonnaise spread between thin pieces of
wheat bread cut in diagonal shapes and put a little of the mixture
in the center of each sandwich.

+Fruit Sandwich.+-- Cook ½ cup dates and ½ cup figs in water five
minutes; drain, chop fine, mix with ½ cup apple or currant jelly and
½ cup of chopped walnuts or pecans. Cut graham bread into round and
heart shapes and put mixture between and decorate top with a little
of the mixture.

+Toasted Cheese Roll.+-- Sprinkle grated cheese on thin slices of
wheat bread that has been buttered, sprinkle a little paprika over
it and toast until cheese is melted, holding cheese side to the
flame. Then roll quickly, hold together with a toothpick and toast
the outside.

+Cheese Balls.+-- Grate one-third of a cup of American cheese, add
the beaten whites of one egg to it and a little paprika, drop by
teaspoonfuls into bread crumbs and then fry in hot fat a minute till
brown; nice served with fish or salad.

+Horn of Plenty Salad.+-- Cut pineapple from top lengthwise cutting
across the bottom, remove the fruit of pineapple, cutting it in
small pieces, careful not to break the skin; add one pint of fine
cut peeled apples, one pint of fine cut celery, ½ cup of walnut
meats broken, mix with 1 cup of fine mayonnaise, arrange the
pineapple on a platter the green top up and fix it to look like a
horn of plenty; fill in the salad, pour over one cup of fine
mayonnaise, spread it smooth with a knife, decorate with celery
tops, candied cherries and chopped pistachio nuts.

+Grape Fruit Salad.+-- Cut three grape fruit and three oranges in
half and take out the pieces, add one pint fine cut celery, four
tablespoons fine mayonnaise and put back in the grape fruit shells
that have been cleaned out and scalloped. Mask with mayonnaise and
garnish with pieces of grape fruit and orange and celery leaves,
sprinkle finely chopped pistachio nuts over all.

+Waldorf Salad.+-- Peel, core and cut fine, four apples, add one pint
finely cut celery to it and mix two tablespoonfuls broken English
walnuts previously boiled in salted water, add four tablespoonfuls
fine mayonnaise and mix well, pile on a platter and mask with
mayonnaise, garnish with pieces of red apple, celery leaves and
walnuts.

+Pear farcis fromage à la Rocquefort.+-- Peel a nice mellow ripe
pear, remove core after cutting it carefully in half, cream, put
Rocquefort cheese through a potato ricer, add little cream and a few
dashes of paprika, mix few minutes, fill in center of pears, lay the
pear on a crisp lettuce leaf, decorate with chopped pistachio nuts,
and a candied cherry at top, pour over a nice Russian dressing, and
serve.

+Russian Dressing.+-- Put 2 yolks of eggs in a bowl, set the bowl in
cracked ice or cold water, add to the yolks ¼ teaspoonful dry
mustard, add ¼ cup of salad oil, in small portions till absorbed by
the yolks, add 1 teaspoonful lemon juice or vinegar, 1 even
teaspoonful salt, dash of paprika, 1 tablespoonful Chili sauce, and
1 tablespoonful whipped cream.

+Green Pepper farcis fromage à la Cream.+-- Have a washed green
pepper scooped out so the seeds are all removed. Mix a fresh cream
cheese with fine chopped walnuts and pieces of pimento cut into
small squares, fill into the pepper, so it is well packed, set on
ice till chilled an hour or so.

When ready to serve, cut into slices with a sharp knife, arrange
onto fresh lettuce leaves, pour over French dressing and serve.




CONTENTS.

[Recipe numbers were added by the transcriber, as were any items in
[brackets]. All headers were printed as shown; they do not always
correspond to headers in the body text.]


SAUCES.

                                                                  PAGE

  1. Wine Chaudeau                                                   5
  2. White Wine Sauce                                                5
  3. Wine Cream Sauce                                                5
  4. Claret Sauce                                                    5
  5. Bishop Sauce                                                    6
  6. Madeira Sauce, No. 1                                            6
  7. Madeira Sauce, No. 2                                            6
  8. Butter Sauce                                                    6
  9. Sherry Wine Sauce, No. 1                                        6
  10. Sherry Wine Sauce, No. 2                                       6
  11. Sherry Wine Sauce, No. 3                                       6
  12. Wine or Brandy Sauce                                           7
  13. Arrack Sauce (Allemande)                                       7
  14. Arrack Sauce (English)                                         7
  15. Brandy Sauce with Milk (“English Style”)                       7
  16. Brandy Sauce (American), No. 1                                 7
  17. Brandy Sauce, No. 2                                            7
  18. Punch Sauce                                                    7
  19. Rum Sauce                                                      8
  20. Sauce à la Diaz                                                8
  21. Wine Chaudeau with Rum                                         8
  22. Wine Sauce with Almonds and Raisins                            8
  23. Hard Sauce                                                     8
  24. Hard Sauce with Cherries                                       9
  25. Strawberry Sauce                                               9
  26. Sauce of Apricots                                              9
  27. Sauce of Cherries, No. 1                                       9
  28. Sauce of Cherries, No. 2                                       9
  29. Strawberry Hard Sauce                                          9
  30. Raspberry Sauce, No. 1                                        10
  31. Raspberry Sauce, No. 2                                        10
  32. Huckleberry Sauce                                             10
  33. Sauce of Dried Cherries                                       10
  34. Nut Sauce                                                     10
  35. Hard Sauce with Nuts                                          10
  36. Strawberry Custard Sauce                                      11
  37. Fruit Sauce (not boiled)                                      11
  38. Peach Sauce, No. 1                                            11
  39. Peach Sauce, No. 2                                            11
  40. Sauce of Currants and Raspberries                             12
  41. Cream Sauce with Jelly, No. 1                                 12
  42. Cream Sauce with Jelly, No. 2                                 12
  43. Lemon Sauce, No. 1                                            12
  44. Lemon Custard Sauce                                           12
  45. Lemon Sauce with Liquor                                       12
  46. Sauce à l’Orange                                              12
  47. Sauce au Kirsch                                               13
  48. Lemon Sauce, No. 2                                            13
  49. Lemon Cream Sauce                                             13
  50. Almond Sauce                                                  13
  51. Chocolate Sauce                                               13
  52. Chocolate Cream Sauce                                         13
  53. Vanilla Cream Sauce                                           14
  54. Vanilla Sauce                                                 14
  55. Sauce à la Cream (sweet)                                      14
  56. White Sauce                                                   14
  57. Cream Sauce (plain)                                           14
  58. Vanilla Sauce (plain)                                         14
  59. Vanilla Sauce with Cognac                                     14
  60. Caramel Sauce                                                 15
  61. Coffee Cream Sauce                                            15
  62. Nutmeg Sauce                                                  15
  63. Orange Cream Sauce                                            15
  64. Sabayon Sauce                                                 15
  65. Strawberry Chaudeau Sauce                                     16
  66. Pineapple Chaudeau Sauce                                      16
  67. Raspberry Chaudeau Sauce                                      16
  68. Cocoanut Snow Sauce                                           16
  69. Cocoanut Sauce (another way)                                  16
  70. Snow Sauce with Orange Flavor                                 16
  71. Pistachio Sauce                                               17
  72. Cold Pineapple Sauce                                          17


FRUIT AND SUGAR SYRUPS.

  73. Plain or Sugar Syrup                                          17
  74. Pineapple Syrup                                               17
  75. Strawberry Syrup                                              17
  75a. Raspberry Syrup                                              18
  76. Raspberry and Currant Syrup                                   18
  77. Raspberry Syrup without Fruit                                 18
  78. Raspberry Syrup without Boiling                               18
  79. Blackberry Syrup                                              18
  80. Peach Syrup                                                   19
  81. Apricot Syrup                                                 19
  82. Cherry Syrup                                                  19
  83. Wild Cherry Syrup                                             19
  84. Wild Cherry Bark Syrup                                        19
  85. Vanilla Syrup                                                 19
  86. Vanilla Cream Syrup                                           19
  87. Cream Syrup                                                   20
  88. Lemon Syrup                                                   20
  89. Lemon Syrup with Oil of Lemon                                 20
  90. Lemon Syrup (another way)                                     20
  91. Lemon Syrup (plain)                                           20
  92. Orange Syrup                                                  20
  93. Orange Flower Syrup                                           20


ESSENCES AND EXTRACTS.

  94. Essence of Lemon                                              21
  95. Essence of Vanilla                                            21
  96. Bishop Essence                                                21
  97. Essence of Oranges                                            21
  98. Peach Essence                                                 21
  99. Bitter Almond Essence                                         21
  100. Coffee Essence                                               21
  101. Celery Essence                                               21
  102. Strawberry Essence                                           22
  103. Raspberry Essence                                            22
  104. Rose Essence                                                 22
  105. Orange Blossom Extract                                       22
  106. Orange Peel Extract                                          22


MERINGUES.

  107. Italian Meringue                                             22
  108. Plain Meringue                                               22
  109. Spinach Green for Coloring                                   23
  110. Sugar Color                                                  23


COLORED AND FLAVORED SUGARS.

  111. Lemon Sugar                                                  23
  112. Vanilla Sugar                                                23
  113. Red Sugar                                                    23
  114. Green Sugar                                                  23


FRENCH CREAMS.

  115. Crême française à la vanille                                 23
  116. Crême française au chocolat                                  24
  117. Crême française aux amandes                                  24
  118. Crême française au Café                                      24
  119. Crême française au Thé                                       24
  120. Crême française au Marasquin                                 25
  121. Crême française au rhum                                      25
  122. Petits pots crême à la vanille                               25
  123. Crême au bain-Marie au caramel                               25
  124. Crême au bain-Marie au chocolat                              25
  125. Vienna Orange Cream                                          26
  126. Vienna Lemon Cream                                           26
  127. Milk Cream                                                   26
  128. Russian Cream                                                28
  129. Sabayon of Oranges                                           27
  130. Sabayon of Lemon                                             27
  131. Whipped Cream                                                27
  132. Whipped Cream with Strawberries                              27
  133. Cream with Pineapple                                         27
  134. Whipped Cream with Chocolate                                 28
  135. Whipped Cream with Oranges                                   28
  136. Crême fouettée à la Cobby                                    28
  137. Whipped Cream with Peaches                                   28
  138. Whipped Cream with Cherries                                  28


BOILED CREAMS.

  139. Vanilla Cream                                                29
  140. Chocolate Cream                                              29
  141. Orange Cream                                                 29
  142. Almond Cream                                                 29
  143. Coffee Cream                                                 29
  144. Crême Frangipane à la vanille                                29


JELLIES.

 [145. Jellies                                                      30]
  146. To Clarify Gelatine                                          30
  147. To Clarify Sugar                                             30
  148. To Clarify Fruit Juice                                       30
  149. Jelly Bag                                                    31
  150. Orange Jelly                                                 31
  151. Plain Orange Jelly                                           31
  152. Lemon Jelly                                                  32
  153. Strawberry Jelly                                             32
  154. Pineapple Jelly                                              32
  155. Jelly of Peaches                                             33
  156. Raspberry Jelly                                              33
  157. Wine Jelly                                                   33
  158. Rhine Wine Jelly                                             34
  159. Champagne Jelly                                              34
  160. Apple Jelly                                                  34
  161. Cider Jelly                                                  34
  162. Rose Jelly                                                   35
  163. Gelée russe                                                  35
  164. Macédoine de fruit à la russe                                35
  165. Calvesfoot Jelly                                             35
  166. Macédoine de fruits au vin du Rhine                          36
  167. Gelée à la moscovite                                         36
  168. Orange Baskets with Jelly                                    37
  169. Orange Quarters Used for Garnishing Jellies
         and Other Dishes                                           37
  170. Almond Blanc-Mange                                           37
  171. Chocolate Blanc-Mange                                        38
  172. Blanc-mange marbre au chocolat                               38
  173. Cream Blanc-Mange                                            38
  174. Plain Blanc-Mange                                            39
  175. Cocoanut Blanc-Mange                                         39
  176. Neapolitan Blanc-Mange                                       39
  177. Nest with Eggs                                               39
  178. Fromage bavarois à la vanille, No. 1                         40
  179. Fromage bavarois à la vanille, No. 2                         40
  180. Fromage bavarois aux pistache                                40
  181. Fromage bavarois aux amandes                                 40
  182. Fromage bavarois au Café                                     41
  183. Fromage bavarois au Thé                                      41
  184. Fromage bavarois au chocolat                                 41
  185. Lemon Fromage                                                41
  186. Orange Fromage                                               41
  187. Pineapple Fromage                                            42
  188. Peach Fromage                                                42
  189. Strawberry Fromage                                           42
  190. Rum Bavarois                                                 43
  191. Fromage Bavarois Cardinal                                    43
 [192. Bavarois                                                     43]
  193. Fromage bavarois au pain noir                                43
  194. Snow Pudding                                                 44
  195. Wine Pudding                                                 44
  196. Apple Jelly Pudding                                          44
  197. Maraschino Pudding                                           44
  198. Manilla Pudding                                              45
  199. Rum Pudding                                                  45
  200. Fine Chocolate Pudding                                       45
  201. Fine Claret Pudding                                          46
  202. White Wine Pudding                                           46
  203. Cold Apple Pudding                                           46


FINE COLD PUDDINGS.

  204. Pudding à la polonaise                                       47
  205. Peach Pudding with Champagne                                 47
  206. Pineapple Pudding à la royale                                48
  207. Orange Pudding à la maltaise                                 48
  208. Pudding de Savoie à L’orange                                 49
  209. Chestnut Pudding à la dauphine                               49
  210. Pudding à la Girot                                           50
  211. Chocolate Pudding à la Hollandaise                           50
  212. Pudding à la reine                                           51
  213. Pudding à L’allemande                                        51
  214. Strawberry Pudding                                           52
  215. Imperial Pudding                                             52
  216. Suédoise of Apples                                           53
  217. Suédoise of Pears                                            54
  218. Timbale de pêche à la condé                                  54
  219. Timbale de riz à la napolitaine                              55
  220. Pear Timbale                                                 55
  221. Timbale à la sicilienne                                      55
  222. Timbale of Mixed Fruit                                       56
  223. Chocolate Plombière                                          56
  224. Orange Plombière                                             56
  225. Rum Plombière                                                56
  226. Plombière of Maraschino Curaçoa                              57
  227. Pistache Plombière                                           57
  228. Plombière aux Café                                           57
  229. Tea Plombière                                                57
  230. Peach Plombière                                              57
  231. Vanilla Plombière                                            57
  232. Strawberry Plombière                                         58
  233. Pineapple Plombière                                          58


FROZEN PUDDINGS.

  234. Frozen Strawberry Pudding                                    58
  235. Rich Ice Cream Pudding                                       59
  236. Pudding à la Pückler-Muskau                                  59
  237. Ice Pudding à la Prince Pückler                              59
  238. Chocolate Ice Cream Pudding                                  59
  239. Bombe à la Altenberg                                         60
  240. Bombe à la parisienne                                        60
  241. Pineapple Cream for Bombe à la parisienne                    60
  242. Ice Pudding with Pumpernickel                                61
  243. Ice Pudding with Almonds                                     61
  244. Frozen Puddings à la Montmorency                             61
  245. Pudding Glacé à la Metternich                                62
  246. Pudding à la Duchesse de Berry                               62
  247. Pudding Glacé à la allemande                                 63
  248. Frozen Pudding à la Richelieu                                63
  249. Frozen Chestnut Pudding                                      64
  250. Frozen Apple Pudding                                         64
  251. Mousse à L’ananas                                            65
  252. Mousse à la vanille                                          65
  253. Mousse à L’orange                                            65
  254. Mousse au chocolat                                           65
  255. Mousse au maraskino                                          66


PAINS DE FRUITS.

  256. Pain of Strawberries                                         66
  257. Pain d’ananas                                                66
  258. Pain d’ananas à la parisienne                                66
  259. Pain de pêches                                               67
  260. Pain à la Victoria                                           67
  261. Pain de pêches à la Richelieu                                67
  262. Pain de pêches à la condé                                    68
  263. Pain de pommes à la condé                                    68


ICE CREAMS.

  264. Directions for Making Ice Cream                              69
  265. Ice Cream (large quantity)                                   70
  266. Fine Vanilla Ice Cream                                       70
  267. Custard Ice Cream                                            70
  268. Plain Ice Cream                                              70
  269. Plain Ice Cream (another way)                                70
  270. Pistachio Ice Cream                                          71
  271. Maraschino Ice Cream                                         71
  272. Caramel Ice Cream                                            71
  273. Tea Ice Cream                                                71
  274. Coffee Ice Cream, No. 1                                      71
  275. Coffee Ice Cream, No. 2                                      72
  276. Ice Cream, Simple                                            72
  277. Plain Chocolate Ice Cream                                    72
  278. Nut Ice Cream                                                72
  279. Fine Chocolate Ice Cream                                     72
  280. Strawberry Ice Cream                                         73
  281. How to Make Ice Cream without a Freezer                      73
  282. Vanilla Ice Cream, No. 1                                     73
  283. Vanilla Ice Cream, No. 2                                     73
  284. Fruit Ice Cream                                              74
  285. Fruit Ice                                                    74
  286. Cold Sugar Syrup for Fruit Ice                               74
  287. Strawberry Ice                                               74
  288. Pineapple Ice                                                75
  289. Tutti Frutti Ice                                             75
  290. Peach Ice                                                    75
  291. Melon Ice                                                    75
  292. Orange Ice                                                   75
  293. Lemon Ice                                                    75


SORBETS.

 [294. Sorbet                                                       75]
  295. Champagne Sorbet                                             75
  296. Pineapple Sorbet                                             76
  297. Strawberry Sherbet                                           76
  298. Orange Granite                                               76
  299. Spongada aux pêches                                          76
  300. Spongada au chocolat                                         77
  301. Spongada au Café                                             77
  302. Spongada au marasquin                                        77
  303. Orgeat of Almond Milk                                        77
  304. Thé polonaise                                                77
  305. Iced Tea                                                     78
  306. Iced Coffee                                                  78
  307. Bread Crumbs                                                 78
  308. How to Prepare a Pudding Form                                78


BOILED AND BAKED PUDDINGS.

  309. Plum Pudding                                                 79
  310. English Plum Pudding                                         79
  311. Biscuit Pudding                                              80
  312. Cottage Pudding (baked)                                      80
  313. Cottage Pudding (boiled)                                     80
  314. Cottage Apple Pudding                                        81
  315. Batter Fruit Pudding                                         81
  316. Prince Regent Pudding                                        81
  317. Layer Pudding (German style)                                 81
  318. Portugal Pudding                                             82
  319. Ipsilanti Pudding                                            82
  320. Fine Cherry Pudding                                          82
  321. Cherry Pudding of Preserved Cherries                         83
  322. Cherry Batter Pudding                                        83
  323. Plain Suet Pudding                                           84
  324. Suet Pudding with Apples                                     84
  325. Blackberry Pudding                                           84
  326. Cherry Suet Pudding                                          85
  327. Suet Pudding with Nuts                                       85
  328. Suet Pudding with Raisins                                    85
  329. Suet Fruit Pudding                                           85
  330. Marrow Pudding                                               85
  331. Fig Pudding                                                  86
  332. Apple Pudding (baked)                                        86
  333. Pineapple Pudding or Souflée                                 86
  334. Almond Sponge Pudding                                        87
  335. Nut Pudding                                                  87
  336. Uncle Tom’s Pudding                                          88
  337. Plain German Flour Pudding                                   88
  338. The Queen of Puddings with Strawberries                      88
  339. Indian Pudding (boiled)                                      88
  340. Indian Pudding (baked)                                       89
  341. Graham Flour Pudding                                         89
  342. Madeira Pudding                                              89
  343. Almond Pudding                                               90
  344. Boiled Bread Pudding                                         90
  345. Zwieback Pudding, No. 1                                      90
  346. Cabinet Pudding                                              91
  347. Lemon Pudding (baked)                                        91
  348. Zwieback Pudding, No. 2                                      91
  349. Pumpernickel Pudding                                         91
  350. Vienna Pudding                                               92
  351. Chocolate Pudding                                            92
  352. Apple Pudding with Almonds                                   92
  353. Nudel Pudding                                                93
  354. Potato Pudding                                               93


BREAD AND APPLE PUDDINGS.

  355. Plain Bread Pudding, No. 1                                   94
  356. Plain Bread Pudding (baked), No. 2                           94
  357. Bird’s Nest Pudding                                          94
  358. Bread Pudding (boiled)                                       95
  359. Bread Fruit Pudding                                          96
  360. Bread Sponge Pudding                                         96
  361. Hanoverian Pudding                                           96
  362. Huckleberry Pudding (German style)                           97
  363. Rye Bread Pudding                                            97
  364. Apple Pudding (German art)                                   97
  365. English Apple Pudding                                        98
  366. Apple Pudding (boiled)                                       98
  367. Apple Bread Pudding (German art)                             98
  368. Bread Pudding with Apples                                    99
  369. Apple Rice Pudding (German art)                              99
  370. Apple Pudding à l’allemande                                  99
  371. Old-Fashioned Apple Pudding                                 100
  372. Roly-Poly                                                   100
  373. Roly-Poly Tutti Frutti                                      101


SOUFLEES, PANCAKES, OMELETS AND FRITTERS.

  374. Plain Souflée                                               101
  375. Almond Souflée                                              102
  376. Lemon Souflée                                               102
  377. Vanilla Souflée                                             103
  378. Orange Souflée                                              103
  379. Chocolate Souflée                                           103
  380. Macaroon Souflée                                            103
  381. Apple Souflée, No. 1                                        103
  382. Apple Souflée, No. 2                                        104
  383. Apple Souflée, No. 3                                        104
  384. Apple Souflée, No. 4                                        104
  385. Pineapple Souflée                                           105
  386. Rhubarb Souflée                                             105
  387. Cherry Souflée                                              105
  388. Gooseberry Souflée                                          106
  389. Raspberry Souflée                                           106
  390. Cherry Omelets                                              106
  391. Fruit Pancakes                                              106
  392. Huckleberry Pancakes                                        106
  393. Strawberry Pancakes                                         107
  394. Cherry Pancakes                                             107
  395. Pancakes with Currants and Raspberries                      108
  396. Plain German Pancakes                                       108
  397. Lemon Pancakes                                              108
  398. Peach Pancakes                                              108
  399. Apple Pancakes                                              108
  400. Apple Fritters                                              109
  401. Cherry Fritters                                             109
  402. Orange Fritters                                             109
  403. Rice Fritters                                               110
  404. Cocoanut Fritters                                           110
  405. Currant Fritters                                            110
  406. Walnut Fritters                                             110
  407. Omelette Souflée à la vanille                               111
  408. Omelette Souflée Confitures                                 111
  409. Omelette Souflée with Chocolate                             111
  410. Omelette Souflée with Cocoanut                              111
  411. Rum or Maraschino Souflée                                   111
  412. Vienna Souflée                                              112
  413. Peach Souflée                                               112
  414. Apricot Souflée                                             112
  415. Farina Souflée (Vienna art)                                 112
  416. Farina Souflée (Italian art)                                113
  417. Farina Souflée                                              113
  418. Strawberry Souflée                                          113
  419. Chestnut Souflée                                            113
  420. Beignet Souflée                                             114
  421. Potato Souflée                                              114
  422. Vanilla Koch                                                114
  423. Cream Koch (boiled)                                         115
  424. Nudel Souflée                                               115
  425. Macaroon Souflée                                            115
  426. Zwieback Koch                                               115
  427. Almond Koch with Snow Sauce                                 116
  428. Plain Koch with Strawberry Chaudeau                         116
  429. Apple Koch, No. 1                                           117
  430. Apple Koch, No. 2                                           117
  431. Apple Koch with Almonds and Raisins                         117
  432. Jelly Koch                                                  117
  433. Cream Koch                                                  118
  434. Cream Koch with Sponge Cake                                 118
  435. Almond Koch                                                 118
  436. Nudel Koch                                                  118
  437. Nudel Koch (boiled)                                         118
  438. Nut Koch, No. 1                                             119
  439. Nut Koch, No. 2                                             119
  440. Rice Koch                                                   119
  441. Vanilla Almond Koch                                         120
  442. Koch with Orange Chaudeau                                   120
  443. Orange Chaudeau                                             120
  444. Koch with Nut Cream                                         120
  445. Koch with Chocolate Beguss                                  121
  446. Beignets with Fruit                                         121
  447. Beignets with Zwieback                                      122
  448. Poor Knight (Arme Ritter)                                   122
  449. Apple Beignets                                              122
  450. Poveison                                                    122
  451. Poveison of Pineapple                                       123
  452. Beignets à la Marie-Louise                                  123
  453. Beignets de crême à la française                            123
  454. Peach Beignets                                              123
  455. Batter for Beignets                                         124
  456. Pineapple Beignets                                          124
  457. Beignets of Nudels                                          124
  458. Beignets à la polonaise                                     124
  459. Pannequets à la royale                                      125
  460. Pannequets à la vanille                                     125
  461. Pannequets meringués                                        125
  462. Plain Omelet                                                126
  463. Rum Omelet                                                  126
  464. Strawberry Omelet                                           126
  465. Huckleberry Omelet                                          127
  466. Orange Omelet                                               127
  467. Jelly Omelet                                                127
  468. Omelette à la française                                     127


CHARLOTTES.

  469. Charlotte of Apples, No. 1                                  127
  470. Charlotte of Apples, No. 2                                  128
  471. Charlotte of Peaches                                        128
  472. Charlotte of Cherries                                       128
  473. Charlotte of Currants                                       129
  474. Charlotte of Pineapple                                      129
  475. Charlotte à la polonaise                                    129
  476. Charlotte Russe, No. 1                                      130
  477. Charlotte Russe, No. 2                                      130
  478. Charlotte à la russe                                        130
  479. Charlotte à la russe with Preserved or Stewed Pears         131
  480. Snow Eggs                                                   131


RICE PUDDINGS AND DISHES MADE OF RICE FOR DESSERT.

  481. To Prepare Rice Flour                                       131
  482. Rice Beignets                                               132
  483. Rice Pears                                                  132
  484. Rice Beignets with Chocolate                                132
  485. Rice Boiled with Raisins                                    132
  486. Rice Coteletten                                             133
  487. Rice à la Creole                                            133
  488. Lemon Rice                                                  133
  489. Rice à la française                                         134
  490. Rice Cherry                                                 134
  491. Poor Man’s Rice Pudding                                     134
  492. Rice Custard Pudding                                        134
  493. Rice Pudding (minutatim)                                    135
  494. Rice Snowballs                                              135
  495. Cold Rice Flour Pudding                                     135
  496. Rice Souflée                                                136
  497. Rice Flour Pudding (colored)                                136
  498. Rose Rice Pudding                                           137
  499. Cold Rice Pudding with Almonds                              137
  500. Rice Snowballs with Apples                                  137
  501. Rice Kalte Schale with Wine                                 138
  502. Rice Radetzky                                               138
  503. Rice with Strawberries                                      138
  504. Rice with Apples                                            138
  505. Rice with Marmalade                                         139
  506. Rice Dressed with Sugar and Cinnamon                        139
  507. Fine Rice Pudding with Oranges                              139
  508. Fried Rice                                                  140
  509. Rice Pudding (baked)                                        140
  510. Boiled Rice Pudding                                         140
  511. Rice Flour Pudding                                          141
  512. Rice Flour Pudding (baked)                                  141
  513. Rice Pudding (baked)                                        142
  514. Rice Pudding with Peaches                                   142
  515. Rice Pudding à la Palerino                                  142
  516. Rice à la Malte                                             143
  517. Rice Pudding à la Wellington                                143
  518. Rice Pudding with Pineapple                                 144
  519. Rice Pudding with Apples                                    144
  520. Rice Pudding with Cherries                                  145
  521. Rice Pudding with Almonds                                   145
  522. Lemon Rice Pudding                                          145
  523. Rice Scallop                                                146
  524. Cream of Rice Flour                                         146
  525. Rice Kalte Schale with Cream                                146
  526. Rice Jelly                                                  146
  527. Apples with Rice Border                                     147
  528. Rice Cream                                                  147
  529. Rice Cream with Chocolate                                   147
  530. Rice Cream with Fruit                                       148
  531. Rice Croquettes                                             148
  532. Brioche Dough                                               148
  533. Rice Brioche                                                149
  534. Poveison with Prunes                                        149
  535. Croquettes of Nudels                                        150
  536. Apple Croquettes                                            150
  537. Nudels with Jelly                                           150
  538. Apple Scallop                                               150
  539. Nudel Scallop                                               151


COLD PUDDINGS MADE WITH MILK.

  540. Cocoanut Custard Pudding, No. 1                             151
  541. Cocoanut Custard Pudding, No. 2                             152
  542. Pudding à la Princess                                       152
  543. Cold Sponge Pudding                                         152
  544. Chocolate Pudding                                           153
  545. Sago Pudding                                                153
  546. Sago Pudding with Almonds                                   153
  547. Sago Pudding (Allemande)                                    153
  548. Sago Meringue with Apples                                   154
  549. Sago Cream                                                  154
  550. Rothe Grütze                                                154
  551. Milk Pudding                                                155
  552. Fruit Custard Pudding                                       155
  553. Macaroon Meringue                                           155
  554. Lemon Custard Pudding                                       155
  555. Cornstarch Pudding                                          156
  556. Cornstarch Meringue                                         156
  557. Armor Pudding                                               156
  558. Red Cream Pudding                                           157
  559. Floating Island                                             157
  560. Banana Float                                                157
  561. Peach Float                                                 157
  562. Lemon Custard                                               157
  563. Lemon Cream Pudding                                         158
  564. Custard Bread Pudding                                       158
  565. Custard                                                     158
  566. Apple Custard                                               159
  567. Pineapple Custard                                           159
  568. Strawberry Custard                                          159
  569. Peach Custard                                               159
  570. Chocolate Fruit Custard                                     159
  571. Fruit Custard with Cake                                     160
  572. Tutti Frutti Custard                                        160
  573. Apple Custard Pudding                                       160
  574. Peach Meringue                                              160
  575. Tipsy Parson                                                161
  576. Russian Cream Pudding                                       161
  577. Tapioca Pudding                                             161
  578. Tapioca Meringue                                            161
  579. Tapioca Pudding (economical)                                162
  580. Tapioca Pudding with Lemon Sauce                            163
  581. Tapioca Pudding with Apples                                 162
  582. Apple Tapioca Pudding                                       163
  583. Farina Custard Pudding                                      163
  584. Rose Pudding                                                163
  585. Sultana Pudding                                             163
  586. Farina Melusine with Apples                                 164
  587. Farina Beignets                                             164
  588. Farina Pudding without Eggs                                 164
  589. Farina Koch with Chocolate                                  165
  590. Farina Souflée with Almonds and Raisins                     165
  591. Farina Pudding with Almonds                                 165
  592. Fine Farina Pudding (boiled)                                165
  593. Farina Souflée                                              166
  594. Farina Mush                                                 166
  595. Farina Pudding (cold)                                       166
  596. Fine Farina Pudding with Vanilla Sauce                      167
  597. Figaro Pudding                                              167


[APPLES AND STEWED FRUITS.]

  598. Apples au beurre                                            167
  599. Apple Meringue                                              168
  600. Apples with Whipped Cream                                   168
  601. Pêches à la condé                                           168
  602. Apricots à la parisienne                                    169
  603. Pineapple Croûtes                                           169
  604. Cherry Croûtes                                              170
  605. Apples in Jelly, No. 1                                      170
  606. Apples in Jelly, No. 2                                      170
  607. Apples with Custard                                         170
  608. Apples with Currant Jelly                                   171
  609. Steamed Apples                                              171
  610. Baked Apples, No. 1                                         172
  611. Baked Apples, No. 2                                         172
  612. Baked Apples and Cocoanut                                   172
  613. Pound Sweets (baked)                                        173
  614. Pound Sweets in Syrup                                       173
  615. Apples Baked with Jelly                                     173
  616. Apple à la Neige                                            173
  617. Apple Sauce                                                 174
  618. Apple Sauce (economical)                                    174
  619. Apples Stewed with Lemons                                   174
  620. Apples Stewed Whole with Currants                           174
  621. Stewed Dried Apples                                         175
  622. Stewed Evaporated Apples                                    175
  623. Peaches Stewed Whole                                        175
  624. Stewed Dried Peaches                                        175
  625. Stewed Cherries                                             175
  626. Stewed Quinces                                              175
  627. Stewed Dried Apricots                                       176
  628. Baked Pears                                                 176
  629. Stewed Pears                                                176
  630. Stewed Dried Pears                                          176
  631. Stewed Dried Prunes                                         176
  632. Prunelles                                                   177
  633. Stewed Cranberries                                          177
  634. Stewed Huckleberries                                        177
  635. Stewed Rhubarb                                              177
  636. Stewed Rhubarb with Eggs                                    178
  637. Compote of Gooseberries                                     178
  638. Compote of Strawberries                                     178
  639. Compote of Cherries                                         178
  640. Compote of Raspberries                                      178
  641. Compote of Greengages (or large Egg Plums)                  179
  642. Compote of Plums                                            179
  643. Compote of Oranges                                          179
  644. Compote of Prunes                                           179
  645. Compote of Raisins                                          179
  646. Compote of Dates                                            180
  647. Compote de Marrons                                          180
  648. Compote Chaude de Marrons                                   180
  649. Compote of Pineapple                                        180
  650. Compote of Quinces                                          180
  651. Compote of Peaches                                          181
  652. Compote of Apricots                                         181
  653. Compote of Pears                                            181
  654. Compote de Melons                                           181
  655. Compote of Watermelon                                       182
  656. Compote of Apples                                           182
  657. Compote de Strélity                                         182


PIES.

  658. Directions for Making Pies                                  183
  659. Pie Crust, Quick and Good                                   184
  660. Rich Pie Crust                                              185
  661. Fine Pie Crust                                              185
  662. Family Pie Crust                                            186
  663. Fine Paste for Meat Pies, Patties and Baked Apple Dumplings 186
  664. Puff Paste                                                  187
  665. Short Paste (Mürber Teig), German art                       188
  666. Neapolitan Paste                                            188
  667. Florentinian Paste                                          189
  668. Almond Paste                                                189
  669. Boiled Paste (Pâté a choux)                                 189
  670. Nudels                                                      189
  671. Mince Pie                                                   190
  672. Mock Mince Pie                                              191
  673. Apple Pie, No. 1                                            191
  674. Apple Pie, No. 2                                            191
  675. Apple Pie, No. 3                                            192
  676. Apple Citron Pie                                            192
  677. Apple Meringue Pie                                          192
  678. Dried Apple Pie                                             192
  679. Tutti Frutti Pie                                            193
  680. Cherry Pie                                                  193
  681. Banana Pie                                                  194
  682. Pineapple Pie                                               194
  683. Pineapple Pie with Meringue                                 194
  684. Prune Pie                                                   195
  685. Peach Pie                                                   195
  686. Peach Meringue Pie                                          195
  687. Peach Mountain Pie                                          195
  688. Plum Pie                                                    196
  689. Cranberry Pie                                               196
  690. Gooseberry Pie                                              196
  691. Blackberry Pie                                              196
  692. Huckleberry Pie                                             196
  693. Currant Pie                                                 196
  694. Rhubarb Custard Pie                                         197
  695. Rhubarb Pie                                                 197
  696. Rhubarb Meringue Pie                                        197
  697. Sweet Potato Pie                                            197
  698. Pumpkin Pie                                                 197
  699. Custard Pie                                                 198
  700. Cocoanut Pie                                                198
  701. Lemon Cocoanut Pie                                          199
  702. Chocolate Cream Pie                                         199
  703. Vanilla Cream Pie                                           199
  704. Orange Cream Pie                                            200
  705. Lemon Cream Pie                                             200
  706. Fine Lemon Pie with an Upper Crust                          201
  707. Lemon Pie (plain)                                           201
  708. Lemon Meringue Pie                                          201
  709. D’Artois (or Pie of Marmalade)                              202
  710. Allnumettes                                                 202
  711. Jelly Tarts                                                 202
  712. Tarts                                                       203
  713. Peach Tarts                                                 203
  714. Apple Tarts                                                 203
  715. Rice Tarts                                                  203
  716. Tartelettes of Cherries                                     204
  717. Tartelettes of Peaches, etc                                 204
  718. Tartelettes d’apricots                                      204
  719. Tartelettes of Peaches, etc                                 205
  720. Tartelettes of Strawberries                                 205
  721. Fleurons of Puff Paste                                      205
  722. Fanchonnettes de crême                                      205
  723. D’Artois Meringués                                          206
  724. Condés                                                      206
  725. Small Royal Cakes                                           206
  726. Pâté à choux                                                206
  727. Chocolate Eclairs                                           207
  728. Canapes                                                     207
  729. Cannelous                                                   207
  730. Vol-au-veut (an entrée)                                     207
  731. Vol-au-veut with Strawberries and Whipped Cream             208
  732. Vol-au-veut with Currants and Raspberries                   208
  733. Vol-au-veut with Peaches and Cream                          208
  734. Neapolitan Breads                                           209
  735. Viennoises                                                  209
  736. Almond Tartelettes                                          209
  737. Puites d’amour                                              209
  738. Neapolitans                                                 210
  739. D’Artois Grilles                                            210
  740. Cream Tarts                                                 210
  741. Fine Pineapple Tarts                                        211
  742. Gooseberry Tarts                                            211
  743. Grape Tarts                                                 211
  744. Cranberry Tarts                                             211
  745. Fanchonnettes de pommes                                     211
  746. Darioles à la vanille                                       212
  747. Flau de fruits printaniers                                  212
  748. Flau de Cerises à la crême                                  213
  749. Flau de frangipane                                          213
  750. Flau de pommes à l’anglaise                                 213
  751. Flau de pommes                                              213
  752. Flau d’apricots à la crême meringue                         214
  753. Flau de pêches, No. 1                                       214
  754. Flau de pêches, No. 2                                       214


STRUDEL, STRAWBERRY SHORTCAKES, BABA, SOLEIL, BRIOCHE,
SAVARIN AND DAMPFNUDELN.

 [754a. Strudel Paste                                              215]
  755. Rice Strudel                                                216
  756. Small Rice Strudels                                         216
  757. Rice Strudel with Jelly                                     216
  758. Farina Strudel                                              217
  759. Farina Strudel with Cocoanut                                217
  760. Citron Strudel                                              217
  761. Lemon Strudel                                               217
  762. Almond Strudel                                              218
  763. Chocolate Almond Strudel                                    218
  764. Chocolate Cream Strudel                                     218
  765. Apple Strudel                                               218
  766. Cherry Strudel                                              219
  767. Plum Strudel                                                219
  768. Plain Strawberry Shortcake                                  219
  769. Strawberry Shortcake, No. 1                                 220
  770. Strawberry Shortcake, No. 2                                 220
  771. Peach Shortcake                                             220
  772. Vienna Bröselcake                                           220
  773. Brioche Cake                                                221
  774. Small Brioche                                               221
  775. Baba                                                        221
  776. Savarin Cake                                                222
  777. Soleil                                                      223
  778. Compiègne                                                   224
  779. Damp Nudels                                                 224


FRUIT DUMPLINGS.

  780. Baked Apple Dumplings, No. 1                                225
  781. Baked Apple Dumplings, No. 2                                225
  782. Baked Apple Dumplings, No. 3                                226
  783. Baked Apple Dumplings with Baking Powder                    226
  784. Apple Dumplings (bain-Marie)                                227
  785. Steamed Apple Dumplings                                     227
  786. Boiled Apple Dumplings, No. 1                               227
  787. Boiled Apple Dumplings, No. 2                               228
  788. Lemon Dumplings                                             228
  789. Orange Dumplings                                            228
  790. Fruit Dumplings                                             229
  791. Strawberry Dumplings                                        229
  792. Strawberry Dumplings (another way)                          230
  793. Fine Fruit Dumplings                                        230
  794. Plain Suet Dumplings                                        230
  795. Plain Dumplings with Stewed Apples                          231
  796. Apple Dumplings with Rice                                   231


CAKES.

  797. Plain Cake                                                  231
  798. Marble Cake                                                 232
  799. Nut Cake                                                    232
  800. Citron Cake                                                 232
  801. Lady Cake                                                   233
  802. Dutchess Cake                                               233
  803. Fruit Cake                                                  233
  804. Rich Fruit Cake                                             233
  805. Orange Layer Cake                                           234
  806. Lemon Layer Cake                                            235
  807. Chocolate Layer Cake                                        235
  808. Chocolate Cream Cake                                        236
  809. Cocoanut Layer Cake                                         236
  810. Lemon Cream Cake                                            236
  811. Vanilla Cream Cake                                          237
  812. Jelly Cake, No. 1                                           237
  813. Jelly Cake, No. 2                                           237
  814. Jelly Cake, No. 3                                           238
  815. Wine Glazed Cake                                            238
  816. Wine Glazed Cream Cake                                      238
  817. Pineapple Cake                                              239
  818. Wild Rose Cake                                              239
  819. Biscuit au beurre                                           240
  820. Fine Sponge Cake                                            241
  821. Delicate Sponge Cake                                        241
  822. Marguerites                                                 242
  823. Macaroons                                                   242
  824. Cookies                                                     242
  825. Butter Cakes                                                243
  826. Butter Cakes with Baking Powder                             243
  827. Apple Cake                                                  244
  828. Cheese Cake                                                 244
  829. Chrysanthemum Cake                                          244
  830. Snowflake Cake                                              245


ROLLS AND BREAD.

  831. Parkerhouse Rolls                                           245
  832. How to Make Bread                                           246


COFFEE.

  833. How to Make Coffee                                          246


FRUIT SALADS.

  834. Watermelon Salad                                            247
  835. How to Serve Watermelon                                     248
  836. Plum and Peach Salad                                        248
  837. Orange and Cocoanut Salad                                   248
  838. Peach and Pear Salad                                        248
  839. Peach Salad                                                 248
  840. Banana Salad                                                248
  841. Raspberry and Currant Salad                                 248
  842. How to Serve Blackberries                                   249
  843. Banana and Orange Salad                                     249
  844. Pineapple Salad                                             249
  845. Cherry Salad                                                249


SALADS.

  846. Fine Mayonaise, No. 1                                       249
  847. Mayonaise, No. 2                                            250
  848. Plain Mayonaise                                             250
  849. Sauce Tartare                                               251
  850. Mayonaise without Eggs (economical)                         251
  851. Salad Dressing without Oil, No. 1                           251
  852. Salad Dressing without Oil, No. 2                           251
  853. How to Prepare Lettuce for Salad and for Garnishing         252
  854. Lettuce Salad (plain)                                       252
  855. Lettuce Salad with Mayonaise                                252
  856. Lettuce Salad with Sweet Egg Sauce                          252
  857. Lettuce Salad with Syrup Sauce (North German art)           252
  858. Lettuce Salad with Cream Sauce (North German art)           253
  859. Lettuce Salad with Cream                                    253
  860. Beet Salad                                                  253
  861. Salad Macédoine                                             253
  862. Salad à la russe                                            254
  863. Cucumber Salad                                              254
  864. Salad de laitue romaine                                     254
  865. Salad of Oyster Plant                                       254
  866. Asparagus Salad                                             255
  867. Carrot Salad                                                255
  868. Carrot Salad with Asparagus                                 255
  869. Carrot Salad with Onions                                    255
  870. Carrot Salad with Peas                                      256
  871. Celery Root Salad                                           256
  872. White Celery Salad                                          256
  873. Cabbage Salad                                               256
  874. Salad of Red Cabbage                                        256
  875. Hot Slaw                                                    256
  876. Radish Salad                                                257
  877. White Bean Salad                                            257
  878. String Bean Salad                                           257
  879. Crab Salad                                                  258
  880. Pike Salad                                                  258
  881. Tomato and Potato Salad                                     258
  882. Tomato Salad with Lettuce                                   258
  883. Tomato Salad                                                259
  884. Tomato Salad with Mayonaise                                 259
  885. Tomato and Cucumber Salad                                   259
  886. Tomato Pepper Salad                                         259
  887. Tomato Farce (à la Mayonaise)                               260
  888. Potato Salad                                                260
  889. Potato Salad (another way)                                  260
  890. Potato Salad without Oil                                    261
  891. Potato Salad without Onions                                 261
  892. Fine Potato Salad                                           261
  893. Salad Endive                                                261
  894. Beet and Cabbage Salad                                      261
  895. Vegetable Salad                                             262
  896. Beet and Potato Salad                                       262
  897. Green Pepper Salad                                          262
  898. Tripe Salad                                                 262
  899. Herring Salad                                               263
  900. Salad à L’italienne                                         263
  901. Chicken Salad                                               263
  902. How to Boil Lobster                                         264
  903. Lobster Salad                                               264
  904. Salmon Salad                                                264
  905. Shrimp Salad                                                265
  906. How to Boil Shrimp                                          265
  907. Halibut Salad                                               265
  908. Oyster Salad                                                265
  909. Oyster and Chicken Salad                                    266
  910. Tomato Jelly                                                266
  911. Tomato Jelly Salad                                          266
  912. Egg Salad                                                   267
  913. Eggs with Mayonaise                                         267
  914. Onion Salad                                                 267
  915. Alligator Pear Salad                                        267
  916. Jerusalem Artichoke Salad                                   267
  917. Sour Jelly (Aspic)                                          268
  918. Garnishing                                                  269
  919. Horseradish for Garnishing                                  269
  920. Cocoanut for Garnishing Salads                              269


ICES AND GLAZES.

  921. How to Use Icing                                            269
  922. White Icing                                                 270
  923. Clear Icing                                                 270
  924. White Icing with Wine or Liquor                             270
  925. Almond Icing                                                271
  926. Fruit Icing                                                 271
  927. Sugar Glaze                                                 271
  928. Maraschino Glaze                                            271
  929. Orange Glaze                                                272
  930. Lemon Glaze                                                 272
  931. Coffee Glaze                                                272
  932. Wine Glaze                                                  272
  933. Boiled Cinnamon Glaze                                       272
  934. Chocolate Glaze                                             272
  935. Cinnamon Glaze                                              272
  936. Cold Sugar Glaze                                            272
  937. Boiled Chocolate Glaze                                      272
  938. Transparent Glaze                                           273
  939. Rose Glaze                                                  273
  940. Spinning Sugar                                              273
  941. Boiling Sugar                                               274


APPENDIX.

CAKES.

  Cheese Torte                                                     277
  Pistachio Torte                                                  277
  Kugelhupf or Bunt Kuchen                                         278
  Jelly Roll                                                       278
  Election Cake                                                    279
  Sponge Cake                                                      279
  Apple Ringlets                                                   279
  Baking-Powder Rolls                                              280
  Waffles                                                          280
  Gateau à la Weckesser                                            280
  Lady Cake                                                        281
  Denmark Cake                                                     281
  Stullen with Baking Powder                                       281
  Wine Baba                                                        281
  Bunt Kuchen with Baking Powder                                   282
  Emelines                                                         282
  Sand Wafers                                                      282
  Cream S.                                                         283
  Aniseed Wafers                                                   283
  Cinnamon Sticks                                                  283
  Meringue Shells                                                  283
  Kisses                                                           283
  Banana Cake                                                      284
  Neapolitan Cake                                                  284
  One-Egg Cake                                                     285
  Spice Cake                                                       285
  Molasses Cake                                                    285
  Gingerbread                                                      286
  Ginger Snaps                                                     286
  Corn Bread                                                       286


FROZEN DESSERTS.

  Mignon Cream                                                     286
  Malborn Cream                                                    286
  Banana Ice Cream                                                 287
  Frozen Caramel Cream                                             287
  Ice Cream without Milk or Cream                                  287
  Lemon Sherbet                                                    287
  Strawberry Sherbet                                               287
  Coffee Frappe                                                    287
  Coffee Sorbet                                                    287


CUSTARD.

  Caramel Custard                                                  288
  Cocoanut Caramel                                                 288
  Caramel Charlotte                                                288
  Strawberry Charlotte                                             289


SAUCES.

  Bismarck Sauce                                                   289
  Transparent Sauce                                                289
  Orange Sauce                                                     289
  Cream Sauce                                                      289
  Fruit Sauce                                                      290
  Raspberry Sauce                                                  290
  Cream Cakes Glassé                                               290


WAR RECIPES

  Apricot Whip                                                     292
  Bran Muffins                                                     293
  Checkerboard Sandwiches                                          294
  Cheese Balls                                                     294
  Coffee Parfait                                                   292
  Domino Sandwiches                                                294
  Dorothy Royal                                                    292
  Economical Jelly Roll                                            291
  Filling                                                          291
  Fruit Sandwich                                                   294
  Grape Fruit Salad                                                295
  Green Pepper farcis fromage a la Cream                           295
  Horn of Plenty Salad                                             294
  Millionaire Cake                                                 291
  Minced Ham Sandwiches                                            294
  Oatmeal Cookies                                                  293
  Peach a la Melba                                                 292
  Pear farcis fromage a la Rocquefort                              295
  Praline Cream                                                    292
  Probasco Cream                                                   291
  Prune Soufflé                                                    292
  Prune Whip                                                       293
  Russian Dressing                                                 295
  Toasted Cheese Roll                                              294
  Vienna Pancakes                                                  293
  Waldorf Salad                                                    295
  War Bread                                                        293




ALPHABETICAL INDEX (added by transcriber)

Numbers are recipe numbers. Recipes in the Appendix are unnumbered.


  Alligator Pear Salad                                             915
  Allnumettes                                                      710
  Almond Blanc-Mange                                               170
  Almond Cream                                                     142
  Almond Icing                                                     925
  Almond Koch                                                      435
  Almond Koch with Snow Sauce                                      427
  Almond Paste                                                     668
  Almond Pudding                                                   343
  Almond Sauce                                                      50
  Almond Souflée                                                   375
  Almond Sponge Pudding                                            334
  Almond Strudel                                                   762
  Almond Tartelettes                                               736
  Aniseed Wafers                                                 _App._
  Apple à la Neige                                                 616
  Apple Beignets                                                   449
  Apple Bread Pudding (German art)                                 367
  Apple Cake                                                       827
  Apple Citron Pie                                                 676
  Apple Croquettes                                                 536
  Apple Custard                                                    566
  Apple Custard Pudding                                            573
  Apple Dumplings (bain-Marie)                                     784
  Apple Dumplings with Rice                                        796
  Apple Fritters                                                   400
  Apple Jelly                                                      160
  Apple Jelly Pudding                                              196
  Apple Koch with Almonds and Raisins                              431
  Apple Koch, No. 1                                                429
  Apple Koch, No. 2                                                430
  Apple Meringue                                                   599
  Apple Meringue Pie                                               677
  Apple Pancakes                                                   399
  Apple Pie, No. 1                                                 673
  Apple Pie, No. 2                                                 674
  Apple Pie, No. 3                                                 675
  Apple Pudding (German art)                                       364
  Apple Pudding (baked)                                            332
  Apple Pudding (boiled)                                           366
  Apple Pudding à l’allemande                                      370
  Apple Pudding with Almonds                                       352
  Apple Rice Pudding (German art)                                  369
  Apple Ringlets                                                 _App._
  Apple Sauce                                                      617
  Apple Sauce (economical)                                         618
  Apple Scallop                                                    538
  Apple Souflée, No. 1                                             381
  Apple Souflée, No. 2                                             382
  Apple Souflée, No. 3                                             383
  Apple Souflée, No. 4                                             384
  Apple Strudel                                                    765
  Apple Tapioca Pudding                                            582
  Apple Tarts                                                      714
  Apples Baked with Jelly                                          615
  Apples Stewed Whole with Currants                                620
  Apples Stewed with Lemons                                        619
  Apples au beurre                                                 598
  Apples in Jelly, No. 1                                           605
  Apples in Jelly, No. 2                                           606
  Apples with Currant Jelly                                        608
  Apples with Custard                                              607
  Apples with Rice Border                                          527
  Apples with Whipped Cream                                        600
  Apricot Souflée                                                  414
  Apricot Syrup                                                     81
  Apricot Whip                                                   _App._
  Apricots à la parisienne                                         602
  Armor Pudding                                                    557
  Arrack Sauce (Allemande)                                          13
  Arrack Sauce (English)                                            14
  Asparagus Salad                                                  866
  Baba                                                             775
  Baked Apple Dumplings with Baking Powder                         783
  Baked Apple Dumplings, No. 1                                     780
  Baked Apple Dumplings, No. 2                                     781
  Baked Apple Dumplings, No. 3                                     782
  Baked Apples and Cocoanut                                        612
  Baked Apples, No. 1                                              610
  Baked Apples, No. 2                                              611
  Baked Pears                                                      628
  Baking-Powder Rolls                                            _App._
  Banana Cake                                                    _App._
  Banana Float                                                     560
  Banana Ice Cream                                               _App._
  Banana Pie                                                       681
  Banana Salad                                                     840
  Banana and Orange Salad                                          843
  Batter Fruit Pudding                                             315
  Batter for Beignets                                              455
  Bavarois                                                         192
  Beet Salad                                                       860
  Beet and Cabbage Salad                                           894
  Beet and Potato Salad                                            896
  Beignet Souflée                                                  420
  Beignets de crême à la française                                 453
  Beignets of Nudels                                               457
  Beignets with Fruit                                              446
  Beignets with Zwieback                                           447
  Beignets à la Marie-Louise                                       452
  Beignets à la polonaise                                          458
  Bird’s Nest Pudding                                              357
  Biscuit Pudding                                                  311
  Biscuit au beurre                                                819
  Bishop Essence                                                    96
  Bishop Sauce                                                       5
  Bismarck Sauce                                                 _App._
  Bitter Almond Essence                                             99
  Blackberries, How to Serve                                       842
  Blackberry Pie                                                   691
  Blackberry Pudding                                               325
  Blackberry Syrup                                                  79
  Blanc-mange marbre au chocolat                                   172
  Boiled Apple Dumplings, No. 1                                    786
  Boiled Apple Dumplings, No. 2                                    787
  Boiled Bread Pudding                                             344
  Boiled Chocolate Glaze                                           937
  Boiled Cinnamon Glaze                                            933
  Boiled Paste (Pâté a choux)                                      669
  Boiled Rice Pudding                                              510
  Boiling Sugar                                                    941
  Bombe à la Altenberg                                             239
  Bombe à la parisienne                                            240
  Bran Muffins                                                   _App._
  Brandy Sauce (American), No. 1                                    16
  Brandy Sauce with Milk (“English Style”)                          15
  Brandy Sauce, No. 2                                               17
  Bread Crumbs                                                     307
  Bread Fruit Pudding                                              359
  Bread Pudding (boiled)                                           358
  Bread Pudding with Apples                                        368
  Bread Sponge Pudding                                             360
  Bread, How to Make                                               832
  Brioche Cake                                                     773
  Brioche Dough                                                    532
  Bunt Kuchen with Baking Powder                                 _App._
  Butter Cakes                                                     825
  Butter Cakes with Baking Powder                                  826
  Butter Sauce                                                       8
  Cabbage Salad                                                    873
  Cabinet Pudding                                                  346
  Calvesfoot Jelly                                                 165
  Canapes                                                          728
  Cannelous                                                        729
  Caramel Charlotte                                              _App._
  Caramel Custard                                                _App._
  Caramel Ice Cream                                                272
  Caramel Sauce                                                     60
  Carrot Salad                                                     867
  Carrot Salad with Asparagus                                      868
  Carrot Salad with Onions                                         869
  Carrot Salad with Peas                                           870
  Celery Essence                                                   101
  Celery Root Salad                                                871
  Champagne Jelly                                                  159
  Champagne Sorbet                                                 295
  Charlotte Russe, No. 1                                           476
  Charlotte Russe, No. 2                                           477
  Charlotte of Apples, No. 1                                       469
  Charlotte of Apples, No. 2                                       470
  Charlotte of Cherries                                            472
  Charlotte of Currants                                            473
  Charlotte of Peaches                                             471
  Charlotte of Pineapple                                           474
  Charlotte à la polonaise                                         475
  Charlotte à la russe                                             478
  Charlotte à la russe with Preserved or Stewed Pears              479
  Checkerboard Sandwiches                                        _App._
  Cheese Balls                                                   _App._
  Cheese Cake                                                      828
  Cheese Torte                                                   _App._
  Cherry Batter Pudding                                            322
  Cherry Croûtes                                                   604
  Cherry Fritters                                                  401
  Cherry Omelets                                                   390
  Cherry Pancakes                                                  394
  Cherry Pie                                                       680
  Cherry Pudding of Preserved Cherries                             321
  Cherry Salad                                                     845
  Cherry Souflée                                                   387
  Cherry Strudel                                                   766
  Cherry Suet Pudding                                              326
  Cherry Syrup                                                      82
  Chestnut Pudding à la dauphine                                   209
  Chestnut Souflée                                                 419
  Chicken Salad                                                    901
  Chocolate Almond Strudel                                         763
  Chocolate Blanc-Mange                                            171
  Chocolate Cream                                                  140
  Chocolate Cream Cake                                             808
  Chocolate Cream Pie                                              702
  Chocolate Cream Sauce                                             52
  Chocolate Cream Strudel                                          764
  Chocolate Eclairs                                                727
  Chocolate Fruit Custard                                          570
  Chocolate Glaze                                                  934
  Chocolate Ice Cream Pudding                                      238
  Chocolate Layer Cake                                             807
  Chocolate Plombière                                              223
  Chocolate Pudding                                                351
  Chocolate Pudding                                                544
  Chocolate Pudding à la Hollandaise                               211
  Chocolate Sauce                                                   51
  Chocolate Souflée                                                379
  Chrysanthemum Cake                                               829
  Cider Jelly                                                      161
  Cinnamon Glaze                                                   935
  Cinnamon Sticks                                                _App._
  Citron Cake                                                      800
  Citron Strudel                                                   760
  Claret Sauce                                                       4
  Clear Icing                                                      923
  Cocoanut Blanc-Mange                                             175
  Cocoanut Caramel                                               _App._
  Cocoanut Custard Pudding, No. 1                                  540
  Cocoanut Custard Pudding, No. 2                                  541
  Cocoanut Fritters                                                404
  Cocoanut Layer Cake                                              809
  Cocoanut Pie                                                     700
  Cocoanut Sauce (another way)                                      69
  Cocoanut Snow Sauce                                               68
  Cocoanut for Garnishing Salads                                   920
  Coffee Cream                                                     143
  Coffee Cream Sauce                                                61
  Coffee Essence                                                   100
  Coffee Frappe                                                  _App._
  Coffee Glaze                                                     931
  Coffee Ice Cream, No. 1                                          274
  Coffee Ice Cream, No. 2                                          275
  Coffee Parfait                                                 _App._
  Coffee Sorbet                                                  _App._
  Coffee, How to Make                                              833
  Cold Apple Pudding                                               203
  Cold Pineapple Sauce                                              72
  Cold Rice Flour Pudding                                          495
  Cold Rice Pudding with Almonds                                   499
  Cold Sponge Pudding                                              543
  Cold Sugar Glaze                                                 936
  Cold Sugar Syrup for Fruit Ice                                   286
  Compiègne                                                        778
  Compote Chaude de Marrons                                        648
  Compote de Marrons                                               647
  Compote de Melons                                                654
  Compote de Strélity                                              657
  Compote of Apples                                                656
  Compote of Apricots                                              652
  Compote of Cherries                                              639
  Compote of Dates                                                 646
  Compote of Gooseberries                                          637
  Compote of Greengages (or large Egg Plums)                       641
  Compote of Oranges                                               643
  Compote of Peaches                                               651
  Compote of Pears                                                 653
  Compote of Pineapple                                             649
  Compote of Plums                                                 642
  Compote of Prunes                                                644
  Compote of Quinces                                               650
  Compote of Raisins                                               645
  Compote of Raspberries                                           640
  Compote of Strawberries                                          638
  Compote of Watermelon                                            655
  Condés                                                           724
  Cookies                                                          824
  Corn Bread                                                     _App._
  Cornstarch Meringue                                              556
  Cornstarch Pudding                                               555
  Cottage Apple Pudding                                            314
  Cottage Pudding (baked)                                          312
  Cottage Pudding (boiled)                                         313
  Crab Salad                                                       879
  Cranberry Pie                                                    689
  Cranberry Tarts                                                  744
  Cream Blanc-Mange                                                173
  Cream Cakes Glassé                                             _App._
  Cream Koch                                                       433
  Cream Koch (boiled)                                              423
  Cream Koch with Sponge Cake                                      434
  Cream S.                                                       _App._
  Cream Sauce                                                    _App._
  Cream Sauce (plain)                                               57
  Cream Sauce with Jelly, No. 1                                     41
  Cream Sauce with Jelly, No. 2                                     42
  Cream Syrup                                                       87
  Cream Tarts                                                      740
  Cream of Rice Flour                                              524
  Cream with Pineapple                                             133
  Crême au bain-Marie au caramel                                   123
  Crême au bain-Marie au chocolat                                  124
  Crême fouettée à la Cobby                                        136
  Crême française au Café                                          118
  Crême française au Marasquin                                     120
  Crême française au Thé                                           119
  Crême française au chocolat                                      116
  Crême française au rhum                                          121
  Crême française aux amandes                                      117
  Crême française à la vanille                                     115
  Crême Frangipane à la vanille                                    144
  Croquettes of Nudels                                             535
  Cucumber Salad                                                   863
  Currant Fritters                                                 405
  Currant Pie                                                      693
  Custard                                                          565
  Custard Bread Pudding                                            564
  Custard Ice Cream                                                267
  Custard Pie                                                      699
  Damp Nudels                                                      779
  Darioles à la vanille                                            746
  Delicate Sponge Cake                                             821
  Denmark Cake                                                   _App._
  Domino Sandwiches                                              _App._
  Dorothy Royal                                                  _App._
  Dried Apple Pie                                                  678
  Dutchess Cake                                                    802
  D’Artois (or Pie of Marmalade)                                   709
  D’Artois Grilles                                                 739
  D’Artois Meringués                                               723
  Economical Jelly Roll                                          _App._
  Egg Salad                                                        912
  Eggs with Mayonaise                                              913
  Election Cake                                                  _App._
  Emelines                                                       _App._
  English Apple Pudding                                            365
  English Plum Pudding                                             310
  Essence of Lemon                                                  94
  Essence of Oranges                                                97
  Essence of Vanilla                                                95
  Family Pie Crust                                                 662
  Fanchonnettes de crême                                           722
  Fanchonnettes de pommes                                          745
  Farina Beignets                                                  587
  Farina Custard Pudding                                           583
  Farina Koch with Chocolate                                       589
  Farina Melusine with Apples                                      586
  Farina Mush                                                      594
  Farina Pudding (cold)                                            595
  Farina Pudding with Almonds                                      591
  Farina Pudding without Eggs                                      588
  Farina Souflée                                                   417
  Farina Souflée                                                   593
  Farina Souflée (Italian art)                                     416
  Farina Souflée (Vienna art)                                      415
  Farina Souflée with Almonds and Raisins                          590
  Farina Strudel                                                   758
  Farina Strudel with Cocoanut                                     759
  Fig Pudding                                                      331
  Figaro Pudding                                                   597
  Filling                                                        _App._
  Fine Cherry Pudding                                              320
  Fine Chocolate Ice Cream                                         279
  Fine Chocolate Pudding                                           200
  Fine Claret Pudding                                              201
  Fine Farina Pudding (boiled)                                     592
  Fine Farina Pudding with Vanilla Sauce                           596
  Fine Fruit Dumplings                                             793
  Fine Lemon Pie with an Upper Crust                               706
  Fine Mayonaise, No. 1                                            846
  Fine Paste for Meat Pies, Patties and Baked Apple Dumplings      663
  Fine Pie Crust                                                   661
  Fine Pineapple Tarts                                             741
  Fine Potato Salad                                                892
  Fine Rice Pudding with Oranges                                   507
  Fine Sponge Cake                                                 820
  Fine Vanilla Ice Cream                                           266
  Flau de Cerises à la crême                                       748
  Flau de frangipane                                               749
  Flau de fruits printaniers                                       747
  Flau de pommes                                                   751
  Flau de pommes à l’anglaise                                      750
  Flau de pêches, No. 1                                            753
  Flau de pêches, No. 2                                            754
  Flau d’apricots à la crême meringue                              752
  Fleurons of Puff Paste                                           721
  Floating Island                                                  559
  Florentinian Paste                                               667
  Fried Rice                                                       508
  Fromage Bavarois Cardinal                                        191
  Fromage bavarois au Café                                         182
  Fromage bavarois au Thé                                          183
  Fromage bavarois au chocolat                                     184
  Fromage bavarois au pain noir                                    193
  Fromage bavarois aux amandes                                     181
  Fromage bavarois aux pistache                                    180
  Fromage bavarois à la vanille, No. 1                             178
  Fromage bavarois à la vanille, No. 2                             179
  Frozen Apple Pudding                                             250
  Frozen Caramel Cream                                           _App._
  Frozen Chestnut Pudding                                          249
  Frozen Pudding à la Richelieu                                    248
  Frozen Puddings à la Montmorency                                 244
  Frozen Strawberry Pudding                                        234
  Fruit Cake                                                       803
  Fruit Custard Pudding                                            552
  Fruit Custard with Cake                                          571
  Fruit Dumplings                                                  790
  Fruit Ice                                                        285
  Fruit Ice Cream                                                  284
  Fruit Icing                                                      926
  Fruit Juice, To Clarify                                          148
  Fruit Pancakes                                                   391
  Fruit Sandwich                                                 _App._
  Fruit Sauce                                                    _App._
  Fruit Sauce (not boiled)                                          37
  Garnishing                                                       918
  Gateau à la Weckesser                                          _App._
  Gelatine, To Clarify                                             146
  Gelée russe                                                      163
  Gelée à la moscovite                                             167
  Ginger Snaps                                                   _App._
  Gingerbread                                                    _App._
  Gooseberry Pie                                                   690
  Gooseberry Souflée                                               388
  Gooseberry Tarts                                                 742
  Graham Flour Pudding                                             341
  Grape Fruit Salad                                              _App._
  Grape Tarts                                                      743
  Green Pepper Salad                                               897
  Green Pepper farcis fromage a la Cream                         _App._
  Green Sugar                                                      114
  Halibut Salad                                                    907
  Hanoverian Pudding                                               361
  Hard Sauce                                                        23
  Hard Sauce with Cherries                                          24
  Hard Sauce with Nuts                                              35
  Herring Salad                                                    899
  Horn of Plenty Salad                                           _App._
  Horseradish for Garnishing                                       919
  Hot Slaw                                                         875
  Huckleberry Omelet                                               465
  Huckleberry Pancakes                                             392
  Huckleberry Pie                                                  692
  Huckleberry Pudding (German style)                               362
  Huckleberry Sauce                                                 32
  Ice Cream, Directions for Making                                 264
  Ice Cream (large quantity)                                       265
  Ice Cream without Milk or Cream                                _App._
  Ice Cream without a Freezer, How to Make                         281
  Ice Cream, Simple                                                276
  Ice Pudding with Almonds                                         243
  Ice Pudding with Pumpernickel                                    242
  Ice Pudding à la Prince Pückler                                  237
  Iced Coffee                                                      306
  Iced Tea                                                         305
  Icing, How to Use                                                921
  Imperial Pudding                                                 215
  Indian Pudding (baked)                                           340
  Indian Pudding (boiled)                                          339
  Ipsilanti Pudding                                                319
  Italian Meringue                                                 107
  Jellies                                                          145
  Jelly Bag                                                        149
  Jelly Cake, No. 1                                                812
  Jelly Cake, No. 2                                                813
  Jelly Cake, No. 3                                                814
  Jelly Koch                                                       432
  Jelly Omelet                                                     467
  Jelly Roll                                                     _App._
  Jelly Tarts                                                      711
  Jelly of Peaches                                                 155
  Jerusalem Artichoke Salad                                        916
  Kisses                                                         _App._
  Koch with Chocolate Beguss                                       445
  Koch with Nut Cream                                              444
  Koch with Orange Chaudeau                                        442
  Kugelhupf or Bunt Kuchen                                       _App._
  Lady Cake                                                        801
  Lady Cake                                                      _App._
  Layer Pudding (German style)                                     317
  Lemon Cocoanut Pie                                               701
  Lemon Cream Cake                                                 810
  Lemon Cream Pie                                                  705
  Lemon Cream Pudding                                              563
  Lemon Cream Sauce                                                 49
  Lemon Custard                                                    562
  Lemon Custard Pudding                                            554
  Lemon Custard Sauce                                               44
  Lemon Dumplings                                                  788
  Lemon Fromage                                                    185
  Lemon Glaze                                                      930
  Lemon Ice                                                        293
  Lemon Jelly                                                      152
  Lemon Layer Cake                                                 806
  Lemon Meringue Pie                                               708
  Lemon Pancakes                                                   397
  Lemon Pie (plain)                                                707
  Lemon Pudding (baked)                                            347
  Lemon Rice                                                       488
  Lemon Rice Pudding                                               522
  Lemon Sauce with Liquor                                           45
  Lemon Sauce, No. 1                                                43
  Lemon Sauce, No. 2                                                48
  Lemon Sherbet                                                  _App._
  Lemon Souflée                                                    376
  Lemon Strudel                                                    761
  Lemon Sugar                                                      111
  Lemon Syrup                                                       88
  Lemon Syrup (another way)                                         90
  Lemon Syrup (plain)                                               91
  Lemon Syrup with Oil of Lemon                                     89
  Lettuce Salad (plain)                                            854
  Lettuce Salad with Cream                                         859
  Lettuce Salad with Cream Sauce (North German art)                858
  Lettuce Salad with Mayonaise                                     855
  Lettuce Salad with Sweet Egg Sauce                               856
  Lettuce Salad with Syrup Sauce (North German art)                857
  Lettuce for Salad and for Garnishing, How to Prepare             853
  Lobster Salad                                                    903
  Lobster, How to Boil                                             902
  Macaroon Meringue                                                553
  Macaroon Souflée                                                 380
  Macaroon Souflée                                                 425
  Macaroons                                                        823
  Macédoine de fruit à la russe                                    164
  Macédoine de fruits au vin du Rhine                              166
  Madeira Pudding                                                  342
  Madeira Sauce, No. 1                                               6
  Madeira Sauce, No. 2                                               7
  Malborn Cream                                                  _App._
  Manilla Pudding                                                  198
  Maraschino Glaze                                                 928
  Maraschino Ice Cream                                             271
  Maraschino Pudding                                               197
  Marble Cake                                                      798
  Marguerites                                                      822
  Marrow Pudding                                                   330
  Mayonaise without Eggs (economical)                              850
  Mayonaise, No. 2                                                 847
  Melon Ice                                                        291
  Meringue Shells                                                _App._
  Mignon Cream                                                   _App._
  Milk Cream                                                       127
  Milk Pudding                                                     551
  Millionaire Cake                                               _App._
  Mince Pie                                                        671
  Minced Ham Sandwiches                                          _App._
  Mock Mince Pie                                                   672
  Molasses Cake                                                  _App._
  Mousse à L’ananas                                                251
  Mousse à L’orange                                                253
  Mousse à la vanille                                              252
  Mousse au chocolat                                               254
  Mousse au maraskino                                              255
  Neapolitan Blanc-Mange                                           176
  Neapolitan Breads                                                734
  Neapolitan Cake                                                _App._
  Neapolitan Paste                                                 666
  Neapolitans                                                      738
  Nest with Eggs                                                   177
  Nudel Koch                                                       436
  Nudel Koch (boiled)                                              437
  Nudel Pudding                                                    353
  Nudel Scallop                                                    539
  Nudel Souflée                                                    424
  Nudels                                                           670
  Nudels with Jelly                                                537
  Nut Cake                                                         799
  Nut Ice Cream                                                    278
  Nut Koch, No. 1                                                  438
  Nut Koch, No. 2                                                  439
  Nut Pudding                                                      335
  Nut Sauce                                                         34
  Nutmeg Sauce                                                      62
  Oatmeal Cookies                                                _App._
  Old-Fashioned Apple Pudding                                      371
  Omelette Souflée Confitures                                      408
  Omelette Souflée with Chocolate                                  409
  Omelette Souflée with Cocoanut                                   410
  Omelette Souflée à la vanille                                    407
  Omelette à la française                                          468
  One-Egg Cake                                                   _App._
  Onion Salad                                                      914
  Orange Baskets with Jelly                                        168
  Orange Blossom Extract                                           105
  Orange Chaudeau                                                  443
  Orange Cream                                                     141
  Orange Cream Pie                                                 704
  Orange Cream Sauce                                                63
  Orange Dumplings                                                 789
  Orange Flower Syrup                                               93
  Orange Fritters                                                  402
  Orange Fromage                                                   186
  Orange Glaze                                                     929
  Orange Granite                                                   298
  Orange Ice                                                       292
  Orange Jelly                                                     150
  Orange Layer Cake                                                805
  Orange Omelet                                                    466
  Orange Peel Extract                                              106
  Orange Plombière                                                 224
  Orange Pudding à la maltaise                                     207
  Orange Quarters Used for Garnishing Jellies and Other Dishes     169
  Orange Sauce                                                   _App._
  Orange Souflée                                                   378
  Orange Syrup                                                      92
  Orange and Cocoanut Salad                                        837
  Orgeat of Almond Milk                                            303
  Oyster Salad                                                     908
  Oyster and Chicken Salad                                         909
  Pain à la Victoria                                               260
  Pain de pommes à la condé                                        263
  Pain de pêches                                                   259
  Pain de pêches à la Richelieu                                    261
  Pain de pêches à la condé                                        262
  Pain d’ananas                                                    257
  Pain d’ananas à la parisienne                                    258
  Pain of Strawberries                                             256
  Pancakes with Currants and Raspberries                           395
  Pannequets meringués                                             461
  Pannequets à la royale                                           459
  Pannequets à la vanille                                          460
  Parkerhouse Rolls                                                831
  Pâté à choux                                                     726
  Peach Beignets                                                   454
  Peach Custard                                                    569
  Peach Essence                                                     98
  Peach Float                                                      561
  Peach Fromage                                                    188
  Peach Ice                                                        290
  Peach Meringue                                                   574
  Peach Meringue Pie                                               686
  Peach Mountain Pie                                               687
  Peach Pancakes                                                   398
  Peach Pie                                                        685
  Peach Plombière                                                  230
  Peach Pudding with Champagne                                     205
  Peach Salad                                                      839
  Peach Sauce, No. 1                                                38
  Peach Sauce, No. 2                                                39
  Peach Shortcake                                                  771
  Peach Souflée                                                    413
  Peach Syrup                                                       80
  Peach Tarts                                                      713
  Peach a la Melba                                               _App._
  Peach and Pear Salad                                             838
  Peaches Stewed Whole                                             623
  Pear Timbale                                                     220
  Pear farcis fromage a la Rocquefort                            _App._
  Pêches à la condé                                                601
  Petits pots crême à la vanille                                   122
  Pies, Directions for Making                                      658
  Pie Crust, Quick and Good                                        659
  Pike Salad                                                       880
  Pineapple Beignets                                               456
  Pineapple Cake                                                   817
  Pineapple Chaudeau Sauce                                          66
  Pineapple Cream for Bombe à la parisienne                        241
  Pineapple Croûtes                                                603
  Pineapple Custard                                                567
  Pineapple Fromage                                                187
  Pineapple Ice                                                    288
  Pineapple Jelly                                                  154
  Pineapple Pie                                                    682
  Pineapple Pie with Meringue                                      683
  Pineapple Plombière                                              233
  Pineapple Pudding or Souflée                                     333
  Pineapple Pudding à la royale                                    206
  Pineapple Salad                                                  844
  Pineapple Sorbet                                                 296
  Pineapple Souflée                                                385
  Pineapple Syrup                                                   74
  Pistache Plombière                                               227
  Pistachio Ice Cream                                              270
  Pistachio Sauce                                                   71
  Pistachio Torte                                                _App._
  Plain Blanc-Mange                                                174
  Plain Bread Pudding (baked), No. 2                               356
  Plain Bread Pudding, No. 1                                       355
  Plain Cake                                                       797
  Plain Chocolate Ice Cream                                        277
  Plain Dumplings with Stewed Apples                               795
  Plain German Flour Pudding                                       337
  Plain German Pancakes                                            396
  Plain Ice Cream                                                  268
  Plain Ice Cream (another way)                                    269
  Plain Koch with Strawberry Chaudeau                              428
  Plain Mayonaise                                                  848
  Plain Meringue                                                   108
  Plain Omelet                                                     462
  Plain Orange Jelly                                               151
  Plain Souflée                                                    374
  Plain Strawberry Shortcake                                       768
  Plain Suet Dumplings                                             794
  Plain Suet Pudding                                               323
  Plain or Sugar Syrup                                              73
  Plombière aux Café                                               228
  Plombière of Maraschino Curaçoa                                  226
  Plum Pie                                                         688
  Plum Pudding                                                     309
  Plum Strudel                                                     767
  Plum and Peach Salad                                             836
  Poor Knight (Arme Ritter)                                        448
  Poor Man’s Rice Pudding                                          491
  Portugal Pudding                                                 318
  Potato Pudding                                                   354
  Potato Salad                                                     888
  Potato Salad (another way)                                       889
  Potato Salad without Oil                                         890
  Potato Salad without Onions                                      891
  Potato Souflée                                                   421
  Pound Sweets (baked)                                             613
  Pound Sweets in Syrup                                            614
  Poveison                                                         450
  Poveison of Pineapple                                            451
  Poveison with Prunes                                             534
  Praline Cream                                                  _App._
  Prince Regent Pudding                                            316
  Probasco Cream                                                 _App._
  Prune Pie                                                        684
  Prune Soufflé                                                  _App._
  Prune Whip                                                     _App._
  Prunelles                                                        632
  Pudding à L’allemande                                            213
  Pudding à la Duchesse de Berry                                   246
  Pudding à la Girot                                               210
  Pudding à la Princess                                            542
  Pudding à la polonaise                                           204
  Pudding à la Pückler-Muskau                                      236
  Pudding à la reine                                               212
  Pudding Form, How to Prepare a                                   308
  Pudding Glacé à la Metternich                                    245
  Pudding Glacé à la allemande                                     247
  Pudding de Savoie à L’orange                                     208
  Puff Paste                                                       664
  Puites d’amour                                                   737
  Pumpernickel Pudding                                             349
  Pumpkin Pie                                                      698
  Punch Sauce                                                       18
  Queen of Puddings with Strawberries, The                         338
  Radish Salad                                                     876
  Raspberry Chaudeau Sauce                                          67
  Raspberry Essence                                                103
  Raspberry Jelly                                                  156
  Raspberry Sauce                                                _App._
  Raspberry Sauce, No. 1                                            30
  Raspberry Sauce, No. 2                                            31
  Raspberry Souflée                                                389
  Raspberry Syrup                                                   75a
  Raspberry Syrup without Boiling                                   78
  Raspberry Syrup without Fruit                                     77
  Raspberry and Currant Salad                                      841
  Raspberry and Currant Syrup                                       76
  Red Cream Pudding                                                558
  Red Sugar                                                        113
  Rhine Wine Jelly                                                 158
  Rhubarb Custard Pie                                              694
  Rhubarb Meringue Pie                                             696
  Rhubarb Pie                                                      695
  Rhubarb Souflée                                                  386
  Rice à la Creole                                                 487
  Rice à la française                                              489
  Rice à la Malte                                                  516
  Rice Beignets                                                    482
  Rice Beignets with Chocolate                                     484
  Rice Boiled with Raisins                                         485
  Rice Brioche                                                     533
  Rice Cherry                                                      490
  Rice Coteletten                                                  486
  Rice Cream                                                       528
  Rice Cream with Chocolate                                        529
  Rice Cream with Fruit                                            530
  Rice Croquettes                                                  531
  Rice Custard Pudding                                             492
  Rice Dressed with Sugar and Cinnamon                             506
  Rice Flour, To Prepare                                           481
  Rice Flour Pudding                                               511
  Rice Flour Pudding (baked)                                       512
  Rice Flour Pudding (colored)                                     497
  Rice Fritters                                                    403
  Rice Jelly                                                       526
  Rice Kalte Schale with Cream                                     525
  Rice Kalte Schale with Wine                                      501
  Rice Koch                                                        440
  Rice Pears                                                       483
  Rice Pudding (baked)                                             509
  Rice Pudding (baked)                                             513
  Rice Pudding (minutatim)                                         493
  Rice Pudding with Almonds                                        521
  Rice Pudding with Apples                                         519
  Rice Pudding with Cherries                                       520
  Rice Pudding with Peaches                                        514
  Rice Pudding with Pineapple                                      518
  Rice Pudding à la Palerino                                       515
  Rice Pudding à la Wellington                                     517
  Rice Radetzky                                                    502
  Rice Scallop                                                     523
  Rice Snowballs                                                   494
  Rice Snowballs with Apples                                       500
  Rice Souflée                                                     496
  Rice Strudel                                                     755
  Rice Strudel with Jelly                                          757
  Rice Tarts                                                       715
  Rice with Apples                                                 504
  Rice with Marmalade                                              505
  Rice with Strawberries                                           503
  Rich Fruit Cake                                                  804
  Rich Ice Cream Pudding                                           235
  Rich Pie Crust                                                   660
  Roly-Poly                                                        372
  Roly-Poly Tutti Frutti                                           373
  Rose Essence                                                     104
  Rose Glaze                                                       939
  Rose Jelly                                                       162
  Rose Pudding                                                     584
  Rose Rice Pudding                                                498
  Rothe Grütze                                                     550
  Rum Bavarois                                                     190
  Rum Omelet                                                       463
  Rum Plombière                                                    225
  Rum Pudding                                                      199
  Rum Sauce                                                         19
  Rum or Maraschino Souflée                                        411
  Russian Cream                                                    128
  Russian Cream Pudding                                            576
  Russian Dressing                                               _App._
  Rye Bread Pudding                                                363
  Sabayon Sauce                                                     64
  Sabayon of Lemon                                                 130
  Sabayon of Oranges                                               129
  Sago Cream                                                       549
  Sago Meringue with Apples                                        548
  Sago Pudding                                                     545
  Sago Pudding (Allemande)                                         547
  Sago Pudding with Almonds                                        546
  Salad à L’italienne                                              900
  Salad à la russe                                                 862
  Salad Dressing without Oil, No. 1                                851
  Salad Dressing without Oil, No. 2                                852
  Salad Endive                                                     893
  Salad Macédoine                                                  861
  Salad de laitue romaine                                          864
  Salad of Oyster Plant                                            865
  Salad of Red Cabbage                                             874
  Salmon Salad                                                     904
  Sand Wafers                                                    _App._
  Sauce à la Cream (sweet)                                          55
  Sauce à la Diaz                                                   20
  Sauce à l’Orange                                                  46
  Sauce au Kirsch                                                   47
  Sauce of Apricots                                                 26
  Sauce of Cherries, No. 1                                          27
  Sauce of Cherries, No. 2                                          28
  Sauce of Currants and Raspberries                                 40
  Sauce of Dried Cherries                                           33
  Sauce Tartare                                                    849
  Savarin Cake                                                     776
  Sherry Wine Sauce, No. 1                                           9
  Sherry Wine Sauce, No. 2                                          10
  Sherry Wine Sauce, No. 3                                          11
  Short Paste (Mürber Teig), German art                            665
  Shrimp Salad                                                     905
  Shrimp, How to Boil                                              906
  Small Brioche                                                    774
  Small Rice Strudels                                              756
  Small Royal Cakes                                                725
  Snow Eggs                                                        480
  Snow Pudding                                                     194
  Snow Sauce with Orange Flavor                                     70
  Snowflake Cake                                                   830
  Soleil                                                           777
  Sorbet                                                           294
  Sour Jelly (Aspic)                                               917
  Spice Cake                                                     _App._
  Spinach Green for Coloring                                       109
  Spinning Sugar                                                   940
  Spongada au Café                                                 301
  Spongada au chocolat                                             300
  Spongada au marasquin                                            302
  Spongada aux pêches                                              299
  Sponge Cake                                                    _App._
  Steamed Apple Dumplings                                          785
  Steamed Apples                                                   609
  Stewed Cherries                                                  625
  Stewed Cranberries                                               633
  Stewed Dried Apples                                              621
  Stewed Dried Apricots                                            627
  Stewed Dried Peaches                                             624
  Stewed Dried Pears                                               630
  Stewed Dried Prunes                                              631
  Stewed Evaporated Apples                                         622
  Stewed Huckleberries                                             634
  Stewed Pears                                                     629
  Stewed Quinces                                                   626
  Stewed Rhubarb                                                   635
  Stewed Rhubarb with Eggs                                         636
  Strawberry Charlotte                                           _App._
  Strawberry Chaudeau Sauce                                         65
  Strawberry Custard                                               568
  Strawberry Custard Sauce                                          36
  Strawberry Dumplings                                             791
  Strawberry Dumplings (another way)                               792
  Strawberry Essence                                               102
  Strawberry Fromage                                               189
  Strawberry Hard Sauce                                             29
  Strawberry Ice                                                   287
  Strawberry Ice Cream                                             280
  Strawberry Jelly                                                 153
  Strawberry Omelet                                                464
  Strawberry Pancakes                                              393
  Strawberry Plombière                                             232
  Strawberry Pudding                                               214
  Strawberry Sauce                                                  25
  Strawberry Sherbet                                               297
  Strawberry Sherbet                                             _App._
  Strawberry Shortcake, No. 1                                      769
  Strawberry Shortcake, No. 2                                      770
  Strawberry Souflée                                               418
  Strawberry Syrup                                                  75
  String Bean Salad                                                878
  Strudel Paste                                                    754a
  Stullen with Baking Powder                                     _App._
  Suédoise of Apples                                               216
  Suédoise of Pears                                                217
  Suet Fruit Pudding                                               329
  Suet Pudding with Apples                                         324
  Suet Pudding with Nuts                                           327
  Suet Pudding with Raisins                                        328
  Sugar, To Clarify                                                147
  Sugar Color                                                      110
  Sugar Glaze                                                      927
  Sultana Pudding                                                  585
  Sweet Potato Pie                                                 697
  Tapioca Meringue                                                 578
  Tapioca Pudding                                                  577
  Tapioca Pudding (economical)                                     579
  Tapioca Pudding with Apples                                      581
  Tapioca Pudding with Lemon Sauce                                 580
  Tartelettes d’apricots                                           718
  Tartelettes of Cherries                                          716
  Tartelettes of Peaches, etc                                      717
  Tartelettes of Peaches, etc                                      719
  Tartelettes of Strawberries                                      720
  Tarts                                                            712
  Tea Ice Cream                                                    273
  Tea Plombière                                                    229
  Thé polonaise                                                    304
  Timbale à la sicilienne                                          221
  Timbale de pêche à la condé                                      218
  Timbale de riz à la napolitaine                                  219
  Timbale of Mixed Fruit                                           222
  Tipsy Parson                                                     575
  Toasted Cheese Roll                                            _App._
  Tomato Farce (à la Mayonaise)                                    887
  Tomato Jelly                                                     910
  Tomato Jelly Salad                                               911
  Tomato Pepper Salad                                              886
  Tomato Salad                                                     883
  Tomato Salad with Lettuce                                        882
  Tomato Salad with Mayonaise                                      884
  Tomato and Cucumber Salad                                        885
  Tomato and Potato Salad                                          881
  Transparent Glaze                                                938
  Transparent Sauce                                              _App._
  Tripe Salad                                                      898
  Tutti Frutti Custard                                             572
  Tutti Frutti Ice                                                 289
  Tutti Frutti Pie                                                 679
  Uncle Tom’s Pudding                                              336
  Vanilla Almond Koch                                              441
  Vanilla Cream                                                    139
  Vanilla Cream Cake                                               811
  Vanilla Cream Pie                                                703
  Vanilla Cream Sauce                                               53
  Vanilla Cream Syrup                                               86
  Vanilla Ice Cream, No. 1                                         282
  Vanilla Ice Cream, No. 2                                         283
  Vanilla Koch                                                     422
  Vanilla Plombière                                                231
  Vanilla Sauce                                                     54
  Vanilla Sauce (plain)                                             58
  Vanilla Sauce with Cognac                                         59
  Vanilla Souflée                                                  377
  Vanilla Sugar                                                    112
  Vanilla Syrup                                                     85
  Vegetable Salad                                                  895
  Vienna Bröselcake                                                772
  Vienna Lemon Cream                                               126
  Vienna Orange Cream                                              125
  Vienna Pancakes                                                _App._
  Vienna Pudding                                                   350
  Vienna Souflée                                                   412
  Viennoises                                                       735
  Vol-au-veut (an entrée)                                          730
  Vol-au-veut with Currants and Raspberries                        732
  Vol-au-veut with Peaches and Cream                               733
  Vol-au-veut with Strawberries and Whipped Cream                  731
  Waffles                                                        _App._
  Waldorf Salad                                                  _App._
  Walnut Fritters                                                  406
  War Bread                                                      _App._
  Watermelon Salad                                                 834
  Watermelon, How to Serve                                         835
  Whipped Cream                                                    131
  Whipped Cream with Cherries                                      138
  Whipped Cream with Chocolate                                     134
  Whipped Cream with Oranges                                       135
  Whipped Cream with Peaches                                       137
  Whipped Cream with Strawberries                                  132
  White Bean Salad                                                 877
  White Celery Salad                                               872
  White Icing                                                      922
  White Icing with Wine or Liquor                                  924
  White Sauce                                                       56
  White Wine Pudding                                               202
  White Wine Sauce                                                   2
  Wild Cherry Bark Syrup                                            84
  Wild Cherry Syrup                                                 83
  Wild Rose Cake                                                   818
  Wine Baba                                                      _App._
  Wine Chaudeau                                                      1
  Wine Chaudeau with Rum                                            21
  Wine Cream Sauce                                                   3
  Wine Glaze                                                       932
  Wine Glazed Cake                                                 815
  Wine Glazed Cream Cake                                           816
  Wine Jelly                                                       157
  Wine Pudding                                                     195
  Wine Sauce with Almonds and Raisins                               22
  Wine or Brandy Sauce                                              12
  Zwieback Koch                                                    426
  Zwieback Pudding, No. 1                                          345
  Zwieback Pudding, No. 2                                          348
