I. Spring
     II. Summer
     III. Autumn
     IV. Winter




I

SPRING


Spring always seems to begin on the morning that the Imp, in a bright
pink nightgown, comes rushing into my room without knocking, and throws
himself on my bed, with a sprig of almond blossom in his hand. You see,
the almond blossom grows just outside the Imp's window, and the Imp
watches it very carefully. We are none of us allowed to see it until it
is ready, and then, as soon as there is a sprig really out, he picks it
and flies all round the house showing it to everybody. For the Imp loves
the Spring, and we all know that those beautiful pink blossoms mean that
Spring is very near.

"Spring!" shouts the Imp, waving his almond blossoms, and we begin to
keep a little note-book, and write down in it after the almond blossom
day all the other days of the really important things, the day when we
first see the brimstone butterfly, big and pale and golden yellow,
flitting along the hedgerow near the ground, and the day of picking the
first primrose and the finding of the first bird's nest.

And then walks begin to be real fun. No dull jig-jog, jig-jog, just so
many miles before going home to lunch, when all the time you would much
rather have stayed at home altogether. The Imp and the Elf love Spring
walks, and are always running ahead trying to see things. There are such
a lot of things to see, and every one of them means that Summer is a
little nearer. And that is a jolly piece of news, is it not?

The Imp and the Elf have a nurse to take them for walks, and a very nice
old nurse she is, with lots of fairy tales. But somehow she is not much
interested in flowers, or birds, or mice, or even in the Spring, so that
very soon after the day of the apple blossom those two children start
coming to my door soon after breakfast. They knock both at once very
quietly. I pretend not to hear. They knock again, and still I do not
answer. Then they thunder on the door. Do you know how to thunder on a
door? You do it by doubling up your fist and hitting hard with the podgy
part that comes at the end where your thumb is not. You can make a
tremendous noise that way, And then suddenly I jump up and roar out,
"Who's there?" as if I were a terrible giant. And the Imp and the Elf
come tumbling in, and stand in front of me, and bow and say, "Oh, Mr.
Ogre, we hope you are not very really truly busy, because we want you to
come for a walk."

And then we stick our things on, and away we go through the garden and
into the fields, with our three pairs of eyes as wide open as they will
go, so as not to miss anything.

We watch the lark rise high off the ploughed lands and sing up into the
sky. He is a little speckled brown bird with a very conceited head, if
only you can get near enough to see him. The Imp says he ought not to be
so proud just because he has a fine voice. And certainly, if you watch
the way he swings into the air, with little leaps of flying, higher and
higher and higher, you cannot help thinking that perhaps he does think a
little too much of himself. He likes to climb higher than all the other
birds, just as if he were a little choir boy perched up in the organ
loft. He climbs up and up the sky till you can scarcely see him, but he
takes care that you do not forget him even if he is so high as to be out
of sight. He sings and sings and sings. The Imp and the Elf like to wait
and watch him till he drops down again in long jumps, just as if he were
that little choir boy coming down the stairs ten steps at a time. "Now
he's coming," says the Imp, as he sees the lark poise for an instant.
"Now he's coming," the Elf cries, as he drops a foot or two. But we
always think he is coming before he really is.

As we go through the fields we keep a good look out for primroses and
cowslips. The primroses come long before the cowslips. Cowslips really
belong to the beginning of the Summer. But early in the Spring there are
plenty of woods and banks we know, where we are sure of finding
primroses with their narrow, furry, green leaves, and the pale yellow
flowers on a long stalk sprouting out of the heart of the leaves.

In the primrose-wood where we always go in the Spring, we find lots and
lots of primroses, and some of them are not yellow at all, but pale pink
and purple coloured. The Elf collects them for her garden, and she
carries a little trowel and digs deep down into the earth all round them
so as not to hurt their roots and then pulls them up, and puts them in
the basket to plant in her garden at home. You see, they really belong
to gardens, for they are not quite proper primroses, but the children of
primroses and polyanthuses. You know polyanthuses. The Imp says their
names are much too long for them. But you know them quite well, just
like cowslips, they are, only all sorts of colours.

About the same time that the primroses are out the wild dog violets
begin to show themselves. We always know when to look for them, for wild
ones bloom as soon as the sweet ones in our garden are over. The Elf
watches the garden violets and picks the last bunch of them, and ties
them up with black cotton and puts them on my plate ready for me when I
come down late to breakfast. Yes, I do come down late for breakfast. I
know it is naughty, but you see even grown-ups are naughty sometimes.
The Imp thinks I am very naughty indeed, and so one day, when I was
late, he took my porridge, and got on a high chair, and put it on the
top of the grandfather clock for a punishment. You see, whenever the Imp
and the Elf are late they have to go without porridge. That is why they
are very seldom late. Well, as soon as I came down I saw my blue
porridge bowl smiling over the top of the clock, and I just reached up
and took it down and ate it, and very good porridge it was, too. But the
Imp said, "It's horrid of you, Ogre, to be so big," and then he laughed,
and I laughed, and it was all right.

Oh, yes, I was just telling you that the Elf put the last bunch of the
sweet violets on my plate. Well, when that happens we all know that our
next walk will be to the places where the wild violets grow for they are
sure to be just coming out.

The wild violets are just like the sweet ones in liking cool, shady
places for their homes. We find them nestling in the banks under the
hedge that runs along the side of the wood. They cuddle close down to
the ground, with their tiny heart-shaped leaves and wee pale purple
flowers, just like little untidy twisted pansies.

The Elf reminds me that I am to tell you about the daffodils. I had
forgotten all about them. Really, you know it is the Imp and the Elf who
are writing this book. If it were not for them I should be forgetting
nearly everything. There are such a lot of things to remember In the
wood where we find the coloured primroses there are great banks of
daffodils under the green larches. They are just like bright yellow
trumpets growing out of pale yellow stars. The Imp says they are the
golden horns the fairies blow when they go riding through the woodland
in the moonlight on their fairy coaches. I do not know if he is right,
but anyhow they are very pretty. They have lots of long flat leaves
growing close round each flower, like sword blades sticking up out of
the ground, and the buds look at first as if they were two leaves
tightly rolled together. And then the green opens and a pale spike comes
out, and a thin covering bursts off the spike, and the spike opens into
the five-pointed star, leaving the brilliant golden trumpet in the
middle. Gardeners, and that sort of person grow double daffodils that
look like two flowers one inside the other, but the ordinary wild
daffodil is far the prettier. At least the Imp and the Elf think so, and
I think so, too.

We go to the wood and lie down on the dried leaves from last year, and
watch the flowers and talk about them and the little mice who live in
the undergrowth. Sometimes, if we are not too lazy, the Elf makes us
pick primroses and daffodils and violets to send to children we know in
town--pale-faced children who think we must be dull in the country, with
nothing to do, and no pantomimes. Really, of course, there is such a lot
to do in the country that we have always got the next thing planned
before we have done what we are doing. And as for pantomimes this very
wood is just like a theatre, with mice and rabbits and birds for actors,
and the most beautiful transformation scenes. Why, just now in Spring it
is yellow with primroses and daffodils, with pale larches wearing their
new green dresses. But soon all the trees will be green, and the whole
wood will be carpeted in blue, deep rich blue, the colour of the wild
blue-bells, whose leaves we can see coming up all over the place. Spiky
green leaves they are, and the children see them at once. "Blue-bells
are coming," sing the Imp and the Elf, and so they are, and with the
blue-bells comes Summer.

Besides the lark and cuckoo, who is going to be talked about in a
minute, besides the flowers, there are other things we watch for signs
of Summer, and those are the trees themselves.

We watch the trees for flowers and for buds. From the high windows of
the house we can see over the fields to the woods, and see them change
colour from the dead bareness of Winter very early in the Spring. And
when we go to the woods in daffodil time we all three of us watch the
buds coming out on every branch farthest out on the lowest boughs, which
for Imps and Elves are also easiest to see.

Earlier than this we look for catkins on the hazel trees. The Elf calls
the hazels "the little children of the wood" because they grow low, and
the other trees, the oaks, and beeches, and elms, and chest-nuts, and
birches, tower above them. In some parts of the country catkins are
called lambstails, because they hang down just like the flabby little
tails of the Spring lambs. What do you think they really are? The Elf
would not believe me when I told her they were hazel flowers. "Trees
don't have flowers," she said. I reminded her of hawthorns and wild
roses, and she said, "Oh, yes, but these things are greeny-brown and not
like flowers at all." But they _are_ flowers. They are the flowers of
the hazel tree, and they are almost the very first of the Spring things
that we see. If you look about when you are in the woods you will find
that lots of other trees have green flowers, too, and many of them just
the same shape as the lambstails.

The Imp and the Elf are early on the look-out for another tree-flower
that is one of the Spring signs, and that is the flower that people who
know nothing about it call "palm." Hundreds of men and women from the
towns come out into the country to gather it, and a horrible mess they
make of our country lanes and fields. The Elf calls them the
"Ginger-beer-bottle-and-paper-bag-people" and hates them with all her
small heart.

Really, that flower that those people come to gather belongs to the
sallow, which is a kind of willow. You know it quite well, with its
beautiful straight, tall, bendable stems that look as if they were
simply made for bows and arrows. In Spring-time the sallow flowers in
pretty little silvery tufts, soft and silky to touch, clinging all along
its twigs. The Elf always picks the first bit that she can find that is
really out and carries it home in triumph, and puts it in a jampot full
of water to remind her that Winter is really over and gone.

On the way to the woods we have to pass through broad green fields full
of grey sheep with long tangled wool all nibbling at the grass. And very
early in the Spring a day comes when by the side of one of the old grey
sheep there is something small and white. And the Elf says nothing, but
slips her hand into mine, so that I can feel it shaking with excitement.
She touches the Imp, so that he sees the white thing, too, and then we
all three go across the field as quietly as ever we can to see the
little new lamb as near as possible. But little lambs and their grey
mothers are very nervous, and long before we are really close to them
the grey sheep moves away, and the little white lamb jumps up and
scampers after her.

Before the Spring is half through nearly all the grey sheep have one or
two little white woolly children trotting about with them, and we watch the
lambs chasing each other and skipping over tussocks of grass like little
wild mountain goats. The Imp and the Elf are always wondering what they
think about in those queer little heads of theirs, with the big ears and
great round puzzled eyes.

But of all the Spring signs the oldest and sweetest and dearest is the
cry of the cuckoo that comes when Spring is just going to change into
Summer. For hundreds of years English children have listened for the
cuckoo in the Spring, and the very oldest English song that was ever
written down is all about the cuckoo's cry.

     "Summer is a coming in,
         Loudly sing cuckoo.
     Groweth seed and bloweth mead,
     And springeth the wood now.
     Ewe bleateth after lamb,
     Lowth after calf the cow,
     Bullock starteth,
     Buck now verteth,
     Merry sing cuckoo.
         Sing cuckoo,
     Well singeth thou, cuckoo, cuckoo.
     Nor cease thou ever now."

The Imp and the Elf love that little song and know it by heart. It was
written by an old monk in the Spring-time years and years and years ago,
and some of the words he used are difficult to understand now. Verteth
is an old word meaning going on the green grass. Nearly all the other
words I have made as much like our own as I can.

[Illustration]

It is much easier to hear the cuckoo than to see him. He is a biggish
grey gentleman with stripes across his middle, and he is horribly hard
to notice unless we get quite close to him. He is very shy, and that
makes it harder still. But sometimes when you hear him cry, cuckoo,
cuckoo, if you are very quick indeed, you can see him flying across a
field from hedge to hedge.

Mrs. Cuckoo is the laziest mother that ever was. The Elf thinks her
perfectly horrid. I wonder if you know why? She is so gay and fond of
flying about that she finds she has no time to build a nest or bring up
her little ones as all good mothers do. So she just leaves her egg in
someone else's home, and flies happily away, leaving the someone else to
hatch the egg and bring up the little cuckoo. She often chooses quite
small birds like the little greenfinches or even the sparrows. And when
the young cuckoo comes tumbling out of his egg, instead of being kind
and polite to the children to whom his nursery really belongs he just
wriggles his big naked body under them and tumbles them out of the nest.
That is why, though we love to hear the cuckoo, we think him rather a
lazy bird, and his wife a very second-rate kind of mother.

When we come back from the walk on which we have heard the first cuckoo
of the year, we really begin to long for the Summer. All the Spring
signs have come. When we get back to my room, the Imp and the Elf sit on
my table and swing their legs and say, "Brimstone butterfly, palm,
catkins, daffodils, violets, primroses, blue-bells, and cuckoo; Summer
is coming, don't you think, Ogre?" And I say yes. And they say, "Tell us
what Summer is like, do, please." And I tell them, though they know
already, and they sit on the table and wriggle at all the nicest parts
of the telling, and we are all very happy indeed.




II

SUMMER


And what are the things we know the Summer by? Summer clothes say little
girls, and big straw hats say boys. Well, and what do they mean but the
heat? The Imp wears a huge straw hat and a loose holland overall but he
goes about panting, and lies flat on the ground with the straw hat over
his nose to keep the sun from burning his face. And the Elf wears an
overall, too, and a pale blue calico sunbonnet over her curls. All the
same she is often too hot to enjoy anything except sitting in the swing
in the orchard and listening to fairy tales. And I, well, I am often too
hot to tell fairy tales. For fairyland is a cool, comfortable place, and
big, hot Ogres melt it away like an ice palace.

"Yes, yes, yes," you say, "but what do you do? It can't always be too
hot to do anything." I asked the Elf what we do do in Summer time, and
her eyes grew bigger and bigger, and she clapped her hands and said,
"Do? Why, everything." And now I am going to try to tell you a few of
the things that make the everything so delightful.

First of all there are cowslip balls. We go, the three of us, to the
field where the cowslips grow. Little cousins of the primroses the
cowslips are, as you know already. Well, we take a long piece of string
and fasten one end to a bush, and pick piles of flowers close to the
top of the long stalk and hang them over the thread, so that some of the
flowers hang on one side and some on the other. And when we have a great
row hanging on the thread we take its two ends and tie them together.
And all the cowslips tumble into the middle and crowd up against each
other, and when the thread is tied they are packed so close that they
make a beautiful ball, with nothing but cowslip faces to be seen all
over it. And that is a cowslip ball.

Close under the moor, not so very far away from the house, there is a
gate where the lane divides into three or four rough paths that run over
the heather to the moorland farms. And just by the gate there is a
hawthorn tree. The flowers of the hawthorn are not, like the catkins,
over before the hazel shows its leaves. They wait till all the tree is
vivid green, and then sparkle out all over it in brilliant white or
coral colour. We call the hawthorn May. And a long time ago all over
England on May-Day people used to pick the May and make a crown of it
and decorate a high pole in the middle of each village. And then they
danced round the pole, and crowned the prettiest of the girls and called
her the Queen of the May. She had a sprig of hawthorn blossom for a
sceptre, and everybody did what she told them. It must have been rather
nice for the little girl who was chosen Queen.

But now nearly everybody has forgotten about May-Day fun. Perhaps they
would not enjoy it even if they remembered. But here, when the May is
out, the country children from the farms over the moorland and from this
end of the valley choose a fine day and come to the tree. The Imp and
the Elf always take care to find out when they are coming. Then they
bang on the study door for me and away we go, with plenty of buns and
sandwiches in our pockets. And always when we get to the tree we find
that some of the country children are there before us. And soon the fun
begins. They all dance round the tree, and after eating all the buns and
things they choose a King and Queen, and play Oranges and Lemons, the
King and Queen leading off. This year they chose the Imp and the Elf,
and you just can't imagine how proud they were, and how the Imp strutted
about with his hawthorn sceptre, and the Elf kept re-arranging her curls
under her green and starry crown. The sun shone all day, and we were all
as happy as anyone could wish to be.

Then, too, in Summer we go quietly and softly through the little wood at
the back of the house and wait at the other side of it and peep over the
hedge. There is a steep bank on the other side and then a row of little
trees, the remains of an old hedge, and then another bank. And the other
bank is full of holes, and the holes are full of rabbits. And in the
Summer evening we go there and watch the little rabbits skipping about
and nibbling the grass. And of course as the Summer goes on the grass
grows very high, and when we walk through it we can sometimes see
nothing but the ears of the little rabbits peeping up above it. You
can't imagine how funny they look. Once the Imp fell right over the top
of one of them that was hidden in the grass. It jumped out under his
feet and he was so startled that he fell forward, and felt something
warm and furry wriggling in his hands, and found that he had caught a
baby rabbit. The Elf and the Imp patted and stroked it till it was not
frightened any more, and then we put it on the ground and let it go. It
hopped gaily away through the grass and disappeared into its burrow in
the bank. I do not wonder that it was a little afraid and trembly when
the Imp, who must seem a giant to it though he only seems a boy to me,
came bumping down on it out of the sky.

[Illustration]

Besides the rabbits we find all sorts of other charming things in the
long grass that swishes so happily round our ankles. Buttercups are
there which send a golden light over your chin if you hold them near
enough, buttercups, and dandelions, and purple thistles, and wild
orchids. You know thistles and dandelions, of course, but I wonder if
you know an orchid when you see one? They are quite common things, but
lots of even country children do not bother to look for them. Next time
you are in the fields in Summer just look about you for a spike of tiny
purple flowers with speckled lips rising out of a little cluster of
green leaves with brown spots on them. Soon after these have begun to
flower we often find another kind, with speckled flowers too, only far
paler purple. And later still there is a meadow where we can usually
discover just a very few Butterfly orchids. They have a spike of
delicate fluttery flowers, not so close together as the purple kinds,
and with green in the veins of their white petals. They are a great
prize and the Elf always picks one, leaving the rest, and brings it very
carefully home and keeps it in water for as long as she can for it is a
treasure indeed.

In another bank, not so very far from the home of the rabbits, another
little furry creature lives, a pretty little brown-coated, long-tailed
person, a great hunter, and much feared by the rabbits. He has a long,
thin body, and a sharp little head, and a wavy tail. He is a weasel. His
bank is just by the side of a pleasant little trickling beck, and not
very far from the wood where the pheasants live. Some day he will be
shot by the keeper for I am afraid he is rather fond of pheasant. There
are plenty of stories about him among the country people. They say that
if you whistle near his hole he will come running out to see what is
the matter; and if you go on whistling he will come nearer and nearer
until you can catch him with your hands. I have never tried, so I do not
know if this is true. But I should not like to catch him in my hands for
his teeth are as sharp as a rat's. At any rate there is one thing that
is far more certain to bring him out of his hole than any whistle, and
that is want of rabbit. Once, as we walked through the fields in the
Summer twilight, we heard a short squeal and saw a poor little rabbit
hopping feebly away with Mr. Weasel running nimbly along after him. And
the funny thing is that the rabbit instead of scampering away as fast as
he could go, was going quite slowly, and in the end stopped altogether,
when the weasel ran up and killed him. The Elf said it was cruel of the
weasel and silly of the rabbit. The Imp said he did not know about the
weasel, but the rabbit deserved to be killed for being so slow in
getting away. But our old gardener, who is wisest of us all, says that
the weasel has to kill rabbits to keep alive, and that it isn't the
rabbit's fault that it cannot run fast. He says that when a rabbit is
chased by a weasel it cannot help going slower and slower, and being
terribly frightened because it knows that it cannot escape.

The sheep in the fields are just as interesting as the rabbits or the
weasels. One of the most exciting of all the Summer things has to do
with them. Towards the end of May the Elf and the Imp are always
bothering the farmers round about, to find out when shearing and washing
time is going to be. There is an old rhyme that the farmers' wives tell
us, and it says:

     "Wash in May,
     Wash wool away.
     Wash in June,
     The wool's in tune."

What it means is that if the farmers wash the sheep in May the wool is
not so strong and healthy as it is later, and comes off in the water.
While, if they wash them in June the wool is quite crisp and stands on
end, and so is very easy to cut. Usually the farmers wash the sheep in
the beginning of June, and these two children always manage to find out
the day before. They come and bang at my door as usual, but when they
come in they bring my hat and walking-stick with them, for they know
quite well that on sheep-washing day I am sure to want to come with
them. And then off we go along the road that leads by the hawthorn tree,
over the moor and down on the other side, to where a little river runs
between two farms about a mile from each. The river widens into a broad
shallow pool, and here the farmers bring the sheep. The Imp and the Elf
and I have a fine seat in the boughs of a big oak that overhangs the
water. Here we sit in a row and have a splendid view. The sheep are all
crowded together in pens at each side of the water, and the farmers wade
out into the stream taking the sheep between their legs, and wash them
one after the other. I told you there were two farms who use this
washing place. Well, every year they race in their sheep-washing, and
see who can get most sheep washed in the shortest time. The Elf takes
one side and the Imp takes the other, and it is really quite exciting.

When the sheep are all clean they are turned loose in the fields again
for a whole week in which to get properly dry. Then they are driven into
the farmyards or into pens in the fields, and the farmers clip the wool
off them close to the skin. They only shear the old sheep and last
year's lambs; and that is why, after shearing time, the new lambs have
so much finer and longer coats than those of their mothers. We always
wondered why that was, until we found out that the farmers only clip the
tails of the lambs, but leave their coats on, while they take all the
wool off the old sheep, and send it away to be made into nightgowns and
things for Imps and Elves and you and me and everybody else.

After the sheep-shearing comes the haymaking, and that is the piece of
Summer fun that the Imp loves best of all. We watch the grass growing
taller and taller, till the buttercups no longer tower above it, and the
orchids die away. We notice all the different grasses, the beautiful
feathery ones that the fairy ladies use as fans in the warm midsummer
nights, and those like spears, and those like swords, flat and green and
horribly sharp at the edges. We see them all grow up and up, and change
their colour under the Summer sun. And then at last comes the day when
the farmers of the farm across the meadow harness old Susan, the big
brown horse, to a scarlet clattering rattling mowing machine that
glitters in the sunlight. And then we hear it singing down the field,
making a noise like somebody beating two sticks together very fast
indeed. As soon as we hear that, we climb through the hedge at the
bottom of the garden or over it, and run round the field, because if we
came straight across it, we should trample the grass, and then the
farmer would not smile at us so pleasantly. And we shout for Dick the
labourer who sometimes lets the Imp or the Elf ride Susan home from the
fields. We find him sitting on the little round seat at the back of the
mowing machine holding the long ropes which do instead of reins. And
Susan is tramping solidly ahead, and the machine drags after her, and
the hay falls behind flat on the ground in great wisps. And the Imp runs
along by the side of the machine, and tells Dick that he is going to be
a farmer, too, when he is big enough. Do you know I never met a little
boy yet, who did not want to be a farmer when the hay is being cut? I
was quite certain that I was going to be a farmer myself, long ago when
I was a little boy, and not an Ogre at all.

And then, when the hay is cut we toss it and dry it, and that is even
jollier than the cutting. The farmer's daughters and Dick's wife come
into the field and join in tossing the grass and turning it over with
long wooden hayrakes, until it is quite dry. And they laugh at the Elf
and the Imp, and throw great bundles of hay over the top of them. And
the Imp and the Elf throw the hay back at them, and tease them until
they are allowed to do a little raking and tossing for themselves. But
they soon tire of that. Presently the Imp throws a wisp of hay over the
Elf, and the Elf throws hay over the Imp, and then they throw hay over
each other, as much and as fast as they can. And then they creep up to
me, where I am sitting as a quiet comfortable Ogre should, smoking or
reading. And suddenly it seems as if all the hay in all the world were
being tumbled over my head and shoulders. The Imp and the Elf cover me
all over with hay, and then sit on top of me, and pretend that I am a
live mountain out of a fairy tale, and that they are giants, a giant and
a giantess taking a rest. And suddenly the live mountain heaves itself
up in the middle, and upsets the giant and the giantess one on each
side. And then we all get up covered with hay and very warm, and laugh
and laugh until we are too hot to laugh any longer.

[Illustration]

When the sun falls lower in the sky, and the hedge throws a broad cool
shadow over the clipped grass, we all sit under it out of the sunlight,
the farmer's daughters in their bright pink blouses and blue skirts, the
farmer and Dick and I smoking our pipes together, and the Elf and the
Imp in their holland smocks. We all meet under the shadow of the hedge
as soon as we see two figures leave the farmyard and come towards us
over the fields. One of them is the maid who helps in the farm and the
other is the farmer's wife. Each of them carries a big round basket.
They come up to us blinking their eyes against the sun, red in the face,
and smiling and jolly. And we help them to unload the baskets, which are
full of food and drink. Great big slices of bunloaf, dark and full of
soft, juicy raisins, and tea, the best tea you ever tasted, for tea
never tastes so nice as when you drink it under a hedge and out of a
ginger beer bottle.

Haymaking is better fun than sheep-washing and lasts longer. It is not
all over in a day. There are such a lot of things to do. The hay has to
be cut and tossed and dried and piled into haycocks before it is ready
to be heaved high on pitchforks on the top of a waggon that is to carry
it away to the farm. And after all when you have made hay in one field
you can go and make it another. And there are such a lot of fields about
here.

But when the hay is dry and ready in big, lumpy haycocks, the Imp and
the Elf shout for joy to see old Susan harnessed to the big waggon come
lumbering into the field, and to see the men throw the huge bundles of
hay into the cart. One man stands amid the hay in the waggon and takes
each new bundle as soon as it is pitchforked up, and packs it neatly
with the hay already there. The hay rises higher and higher in the
waggon, and the Imp loves to be in the waggon with the man, and to climb
higher with the hay until at last he is high above the hedges, for by
the time the cart is fully loaded you would think it was a great house
of hay, ready to topple over the next minute. But the men do not seem to
be afraid of that. They just fling a rope across the top and fasten it
to keep all safe. And the Imp lies flat on his stomach on the very top
of everything, and hears the farmer below him sing out, "Gee hoa,
Susan!" and Susan swings herself forward and with one great jerk starts
the waggon, and the Elf waves her pocket-handkerchief as they go
rumbling away across the rough field and out on the lane to the farm,
taking the hay that is to keep the cows fat and healthy through the
winter.

When the last of all the carts of hay has rumbled away like that, Dick's
wife, who knows all the old songs, reminds the Elf and the Imp of this
one:

     "With the last load of hay
     Light-heart Summer trips away,
     When the cuckoo's double note
     Chokes within his mottled throat,
     Then we country children say,
     Light-heart Summer trips away."

Though Summer does not go quite yet, there is a sad sound already in the
woods, for the cuckoo who told us that Summer was coming, sings cuckoo
no longer, but only a melancholy cuck, cuck, as if he were too hot and
tired to finish his song. And that means that he is going soon.

     "Cuckoo, cuckoo,
     How do you?
     In April
     I open my bill;
     In May
     I sing by night and day;
     In June
     I change my tune;
     In July
     Away I fly;
     In August
     Away I must."

It is very hard to tell when Summer ends and Autumn begins. But as soon
as we hear the cuckoo drop the last note of his song we know that we
must soon expect the time of golden corn, and after that of crimson
leaves and orange. And when we hear the cuckoo no more at all, the Imp
and Elf and I take marmalade sandwiches and bottled tea for a picnic in
the hazel wood that is now thick with leaves, and so thickly peopled
with caterpillars that they tumble on the Imp's big hat and get
entangled in the Elf's hair as we pick our way through the trees. We
have our picnic on a bank there, the very bank where we find violets and
primroses in the spring, and the Elf lying close to the warm ground
whispers "Good-bye, Summer," and even the cheerful Imp feels a little
sad.

[Illustration]




III

AUTUMN


I told you that we are sad when we know that Summer is passing away; but
that is only because we love the Summer, with her gay flowers and fair
green clothes, and not because we do not like the Autumn. The Imp and
the Elf laugh at me when I tell them that all Ogres and Ogresses, all
people who are grown up and can never be Imps and Elves again, love the
Autumn and the Spring even better than the Summer herself. And then, to
make them understand, I tell them a fairy story, how, once upon a time,
Spring and Summer and Winter and Autumn were four beautiful little
girls. Winter wore a white frock with red berries in her hair; Summer
was dressed in deep green, with a crown of hawthorn and blue hyacinths;
and Spring had a dress of vivid green, the colour of the larches in the
woods, and a beautiful wreath of primroses and violets on her head;
while Autumn was only allowed Summer's old dresses when they were faded
and nearly worn out Autumn was very unhappy, for she loved pretty
dresses like every little girl. But she went about bravely, with a
smiling brown face, and never said anything about it. And then one day a
fairy Godmother, just like Cinderella's, came into the garden, and asked
to see all her little Godchildren. And Spring and Summer and Winter all
put on their best frocks and came to be kissed by her. But poor Autumn
could only tidy up Summer's old dress, which she did as well as she
could, and then came out after the others. But she was shy because she
knew that her dress was only an old faded one, and not so pretty as the
spick and span clothes of her sisters. So she hung back and was kissed
last of all. The Godmother kissed the others on the forehead, but when
she came to Autumn she saw that all was not quite well, and looked at
her very tenderly and said, "Tell me all about it," just as all the
nicest fairy Godmothers do. And Autumn whispered that she was sorry that
she was not looking as pretty as the others, but that she really could
not help it, because she had no frocks of her own.

[Illustration]

The Godmother laughed, and took her in her arms and kissed her on the
lips. And then the Godmother put her arm round Autumn's neck, and,
walking hand in hand, they went together down the garden under the
bending trees to the edge of the pond. "Look into the water, my dear,"
said the Godmother, and Autumn looked and knew that a magic had been
done, for her old faded dress was red and gold, and a rich gold crown
lay on her dark hair. And she turned to thank the Godmother, and found
that she had gone. She only heard a little laugh in the air, and then
she laughed, too, and went away singing happily over the green grass.
She has been happy ever since.

And really that is a true tale, and it happens once every year. You can
see it happening for yourself after the end of the Summer, just as the
Imp and the Elf and I watch it in the fields and woods. First you will
see that Autumn is wearing Summer's old clothes, getting shabbier and
shabbier and shabbier, and then the fairy Godmother comes, and you see
the dusty green grow dim and dark, and then blaze in scarlet and orange,
and even before this you will have seen the green corn pale and turn to
deepening gold. And when these things have happened you can be very
happy, for you will know that Autumn is smiling happily to herself, for
she has her own dress at last.

The cutting of the golden corn is almost as jolly as the haymaking, so
think the Imp and the Elf. Not quite so jolly, but very nearly. As soon
as the hay is cut and tossed and dried and carted away to the stacks we
begin watching the corn turn yellower and yellower while its golden
grains hang heavily down. And at last, when the fields are bright gold
in the sun, and the sky promises us clear weather for a day or two, the
scarlet machine comes out again, and Susan has more work to do. This
time it is not the hay, but the tall corn that falls swishing (with a
noise just like that) behind the machine. And men go behind and bind it
into corn-sheaves, great big bundles of corn, and then the corn-sheaves
are piled into corn shocks. Eight sheaves stand on end in two rows of
four leaning on each other. In some parts of the country they only have
three in each row. As soon as the shocks are made the Imp has some
delightful games. He loves to lie flat on the stubbly ground, and
wriggle his way into the tunnel between the sheaves of corn until he
crawls out at the other end covered with little bits of straw and
prickling all over. The Elf does not like this part of it quite so much,
but she does it sometimes, and once, when I was littler, I used to do
it, too. But that was a very long time ago.

The girls from the farm come into the field to pick up all the stray
corn that the men have dropped in making and carrying the sheaves, so
that none is wasted at all. That is called gleaning. A long time ago
rich farmers used to let poor women come into their fields and keep all
the corn that they could glean, all that the reapers had left. In those
days, instead of one man sitting on a scarlet reaping machine, they had
many reapers, who took the corn in bundles in their arms and cut it off
close to the ground with a curved knife called a sickle. This used to be
done everywhere till the machines came, and even now there is a little
farm we know over the hills where they use the sickle still.

[Illustration]

Autumn is the gathering-in time of all the year. In Spring the farmers
sow their corn. It grows all the Summer and in Autumn is harvested. In
Autumn we gather the garden fruit. In Autumn we pick blackberries, and
is not that the finest fun of all the year?

We go blackberrying with deep baskets, and parcels of sandwiches and
cakes. We have several good blackberry walks. One of them takes us past
the hawthorn tree and along the edge of the moors, and then down into a
valley through a long lane with high banks covered with brambles and
black with the squashy berries. As we pass the hawthorn tree the Elf
always look up at it, and though she says nothing I know she is thinking
of the Mayday and the dancing and the playing at Oranges and Lemons.

We have a basket each when we go blackberrying, and we race to see who
can pick most blackberries. It is a curious thing that the Elf always
wins, though the Imp and I work just as hard. Partly I think it is
because little girls' fingers are so nimble. Perhaps from making doll's
clothes. What do you think?

You see just grabbing blackberries is no use at all. We have to pull
them carefully from their places, so as to get the berries and nothing
else; just the soft black lumps that drop with such nice little plops
into the baskets, and go squish in the mouth with such a pleasant taste.
Oh, yes, pleasant taste, that reminds me of another reason why when we
get home we always find the Elf's basket more full of blackberries than
the Imp's. The Imp is like me, and eats nearly as many as he picks.
Blackberries are easier to carry that way.

Away behind the house there is an orchard, where there are pears and
damsons and apples and quinces, all the very nicest English fruits. And
all along the high wall of the orchard on the garden side grow plums,
broad trees flat against the wall fastened up to it by little pieces of
black stuff with a nail on each side of the boughs.

When the Autumn comes the Imp and the Elf slip slily round the garden
path to the plum trees and pinch the beautiful purple and golden plums
and the round greengages to see if they are soft. For as soon as they
are soft they are ripe, and as soon as they are ripe comes picking time.
And then the old gardener comes with big flat baskets and picks the
plums, taking care not to bruise them. And the Imp and the Elf help as
much as he allows them and he gives them plums for wages. And then they
come to my study with mouths sticky and juicy with ripe plum bringing a
plum or perhaps a couple of greengages for me. "For Ogres like plums
even if they are busy," says the Elf, as she sits on my knee and crams
half a plum and several sticky fingers into my mouth.

[Illustration]

Then come the joyous days of apple-gathering and damson picking. When we
sit on the orchard wall eating the cake that the cook sends out to us
for lunch in the morning we wonder and wonder when the damsons will be
ready. Long ago they have turned from green to violet, and now are deep
purple. And the Imp wriggles down from the wall and climbs up the
easiest of the trees and shouts out that they are quite soft. And at
last the tremendous day comes when the gardener, and the gardener's boy,
and the cook, and the kitchenmaid, and the housemaid all troop into the
orchard with ladders and baskets. And the gardener climbs a ladder into
the highest apple tree and drops the red round apples into the hands of
the maids below. The Imp and the Elf seize the step-ladder from the
scullery and climb up into a beautiful little apple tree that has a
broad low branch that is heavy with rosy-cheeked apples. They wriggle
out along the branch and eat some of the apples and drop the rest into
the basket on the ground beneath them. And other people pluck the
damsons from the damson trees and soon the baskets are full of crimson
apples and purple damsons, and away they go into the house where the
cook takes a good lot of them to make into a huge damson and apple tart
that we shall eat to-morrow.

The old gardener then takes the longest of all the ladders and props it
up against the quince tree, for the quince is the highest of all the
trees in the orchard. One of the maids climbs half-way up below the
gardener and he gathers the green and golden quinces and passes them to
her and she passes them to the kitchenmaid, who stands ready on the
ground to put them into the basket. And the Imp and the Elf sit in their
apple tree and eat apples and laugh and then pretend that they are two
wise little owls and call tuwhit tuwhoo, tuwhit tuwhoo, till I take up a
walking-stick and pretend to shoot them, and then they throw apples at
me and we have a game of catch with the great round red-cheeked balls.
Oh, it is a jolly time, the apple-gathering, as the Imp and the Elf
would tell you.

About now the fairy Godmother works her miracle for Autumn. We look up
to the moors and find them no longer dark and dull for the green
brackens have been turned a gorgeous orange by the early frosts in the
night-times. And when we look over the farm land to the woods we find
the trees no longer green, and the Elf says, "Do you see Ogre, the
Godmother has crowned Autumn now?" and sure enough, for the leaves are
turned like the brackens into a glory of splendid colours. And then we
go and picnic in the golden woods, and sometimes when the sun is hot we
could almost fancy it was summer if it were not for the colour. We
picnic under the trees and do our best to get a sight of a squirrel, and
watch the leaves blowing down from the trees like ruddy golden rain.
Once, before we went to the woods, I asked the Imp and the Elf which
leaves fall first, the leaves on the topmost branches of the trees or
the leaves on the low boughs, The Imp said the top ones, the Elf said
the low, and the Elf was right, although I do not think that either of
them really knew. Usually the Imp is right, and when I said the low
leaves fell the first, he said, "But isn't the wind stronger up above,
and don't the high leaves get blown hardest?" Yes, one would think that
the high leaves would be the first to drop. Can you guess why they are
not? Shall I tell you? Well, you just remember in Spring how the first
buds to open were the low ones. Then you will see why they are the first
to fall. They are the oldest. When we came to the woods we found that
this was just what was happening. All the leaves at the bottom fall, and
sometimes many of the trees in the woods kept little plumes of leaves on
their topmost twigs after all the others had gone fluttering down the
wind.

I am only going to remind you of three more things that belong to
Autumn. And one of them is pretty, and one of them is exciting, and one
of them is a little sad.

The first is a garden happening. Close under the house we have a broad
bed, and for some time before the real Autumn it is full of a very tall
plant with lots and lots of narrow dark green leaves. And after a little
it is covered with buds, rather like daisy buds only bigger. And then
one day the Imp leans out of the window and gives a sudden wriggle.
"Come and hold on to my legs, Ogre, but you must not look." And I hold
on to his round fat legs and keep my eyes the other way. And he leans
farther and farther out of the window, puffing and panting for breath,
until he can reach what he wants. And then the fat legs kick backwards,
and I pull him in, and when he is quite in he says, "The first," and
there in his hand is a beautiful flower like a purple daisy with a
golden middle to it. And sure enough it is the first Michaelmas daisy.
That is the really most autumnal of all flowers, just as the primrose is
the most special flower of Spring.

The second of the three happenings belongs to the moorland. Up on the
high moors, where there is a broad flat place with a little marshy pond
in it, the Elf and the Imp have a few very special friends. There are
the curlews, with their speckly brown bodies and long thin beaks and
whistling screams, and the grouse who make a noise like an old clock
running down in a hurry when they leap suddenly into the air. But these
are not the favourites. The birds that the Imp and the Elf love best of
all on the moorland have a beautiful crest on the tops of their heads,
and they are clothed in white and dark green that looks like black from
a little way off. They cry pe-e-e-e-wi, pe-e-e-e-e-wi, and the Imp cries
"peewit" back to them. Some people call them plovers, and some people
call them lapwings, because of the way they fly, but we always call them
the "peewits." All through the spring and summer they are there, and it
is great fun to watch them, for they love to fly into the air and turn
somersaults, and throw themselves about as if they were in a circus,
just for fun, you know, and because it is jolly to be alive.

But in the Autumn many of the birds do strange things. Some, like the
swallows and martins, fly far away over the seas to warmer countries for
the winter. Some only come here to spend the winter months, living in
cooler countries through the summer. And the peewits, when Autumn comes,
collect in tremendous flocks. All the friends and relations of our
peewits on the moor seem to come and join them, and then they move away
all over the country from place to place, wherever they can get food.
When we go up to the moor just at this time, we see not two or three or
half-a-dozen peewits, but crowds and crowds of them flying low, and
strutting on the ground, with their crests high up over their heads.

The last of the three happenings is the saddest. Do you remember the
haymaking and what the hay was carted away for? You remember how the
farmers stored it to feed the cows in winter. At the end of the Autumn
comes an evening when the cows are driven home for milking, and do not
go back again. The fields are left empty all the Winter, while the red
and white cows are fastened up in the byre (a byre is a nice name for a
cowshed) to eat the hay. When that day comes the Imp and the Elf always
walk home from the fields with the cows, and pat them and say good-bye
to them at the door of the byre, and promise to come and visit them
during the Winter. And then they come home to the house, and knock sadly
on the door of my study, and come in and say, "Ogre, the cows have been
shut up for the Winter, and nurse says we are to begin our thicker
things to-morrow." And then we are all sad, for that means Winter. And I
have to tell all sorts of jolly stories of King Frost and the Snow Queen
before we are cheerful enough to go to bed.




IV

WINTER


In Winter, real Winter, we get up with our teeth chattering to tell each
other how cold it is, and we find the water frozen in the basin, and the
soap frozen to the soap-dish, and the sponge frozen hard. That is what
Winter is like indoors, and it is not very nice. But there is a nice
indoor Winter too, when the fire is burning in the study grate with logs
on it from old broken ships, making blue flames that lick about the
chimney-hole. The Imp and the Elf plant cushions on the floor, and I sit
in a big chair and read stories to them out of a book or tell them out
of my head, making them up as I go along. That is the greatest fun,
because I do not know any better than the children what is going to
happen, whether the green pigmy or the blue will win in the battle in
the water lily, or whether the little boy with scarlet shoes will be
eaten by the giant, or whether he will make friends with him and be
asked to stop to tea. We can make the stories do just what we want, be
happy if we are happy, or full of scrapes if we are feeling naughty.

When we are in the middle of stories like this, we hear a tremendous
screaming, screaming, screaming outside, and a white cloud passes the
window with a great, shrill shriek, and we all jump up crying, "The
gulls, the gulls!"

And in the meadow and in the garden and flying in the air, screaming and
laughing with their weird voices, are hundreds of seagulls, blown inland
from the sea, bringing wild weather with them. You know the place where
we live is only a few miles from the sea, where it runs up into the land
in a broad, sandy bay that ends in wide marshes. There are seagulls in
the bay all the year round, and we sometimes see them in the fields in
Summer before the storms reach us from the west. But in Winter when the
cold and windy weather is coming, they fly in great flocks like clouds
of huge snow-flakes, and we watch them from the window and wonder how
soon the storm will follow them. And the next day or the day after, or
sometimes the very day when they come, the air is white again, this time
with driving snow. It comes flying past the windows, to be whirled up
high by the gale and dropped again till we see the ground speckled with
white, and then white everywhere except close round the big tree trunks.
Even the branches of the trees are heaped with snow, so they look like
white boughs with black shadows beneath them.

It snows all day and all night, and when our eyes are tired of looking
at the shining dazzling white, we come away from the window and sit down
by the fire, and talk about it, and think of children long ago, who used
to tell each other, when it was snowing, that geese were being plucked
in Heaven.

The Imp and the Elf put the matter another way. The Imp says, "It's old
King Frost freezing the rain, isn't it, Ogre?" I say "yes." And the Elf
goes on, "He does it because he wants to run about and play without
hurting the poor little plants. He knows that he is so cold that they
would die, like the children in the story book, if he danced about on
top of them, without covering them with a blanket So he just freezes the
rain into a big cosy white blanket for them and lays It gently down."

Presently, after we have been talking and telling stories for a little,
the Imp cries out, "Ogre, Ogre, we have forgotten all about the
cocoanut," and the Elf shouts, "Oh yes, the cocoanut," and away they
fly, leaving the door open and a horrible draught in the room. But soon
they run back again, with a saw and a gimlet, and a round, hard, hairy
cocoanut. We bore a few holes with the gimlet, to let the cocoanut milk
run out. The Imp likes cocoanut milk, but the Elf hates it, and says it
is just like medicine. Then comes the difficult part. I have to hold the
cocoanut steady on the edge of a chair, and saw away at it, all round
the end, while the Imp and the Elf stand watching, till the hard shell
is cut through. Then we knock the end off and the cocoanut is ready.
Ready for what, you want to know? Look out of the window and then you
will understand. All the ground is covered with snow, and the poor birds
are finding it difficult to find their food. The Imp and the Elf, who
love all live things, and the birds above all, could tell you a little
about that, for every winter day, as soon as breakfast is over, they
collect all the scraps off everybody's plates, and the crumbs off the
bread-board, and throw a great bowl of food out on the snowy lawn. And
then there is a fine clutter and a fuss. Starlings, and jackdaws, and
sparrows, and blackbirds, and thrushes, and sometimes rooks, and once,
one exciting day, a couple of magpies, all squabble and fight for the
food, and of course the sparrows get the best of it, because though they
are so small they are the cheekiest little birds that ever are. When all
the food is done the birds fly away, and leave the snow covered with the
marks of their feet, like very delicate tracery, or like that piece of
embroidery that the Elf is trying to do for a Christmas present, when
she is not busy with something else.

Well, well, but still you have not told us what you want to do with the
cocoanut. Wait just a minute, just half a minute, while I tell you about
the robin. Little Mr. Redbreast does not let us see much of himself
in summer, when he is off to the hedges and the hazel woods, having as
gay a time as a happy little bird knows how to enjoy. But he is a lazy
small gentleman, and as soon as the cold weather comes, he flies back to
the houses where he has a chance of scraps. He even flies in at the
pantry window and chirps at the cook till she gives him some food.

There are some other little birds just like the robin in this and these
are the tits. In the Summer we can see them in the woods if we go to
look for them, but they do not trouble about repaying our call; they do
not come to our gardens very often. But when Winter comes things are on
quite a different footing. They are very fond of suet or fat or the
white inside of a cocoanut, and as soon as the snow comes so do they,
looking for their food. We tie the cocoanut up with string and hang it
outside the study window from a big nail, and before it has been there
very long there is a fluttering of wings and a little blue-capped bird
with a green coat, blue splashes on his wings, and a golden waistcoat,
perches on the top of it. He puts his head first on this side and then
on that, and then he nimbly hops to the end of the cocoanut, just above
the hole, bends over, and peeps in. He flutters off into the air and
perches again, this time in the mouth of the hole; and then suddenly he
plunges his head in and has a good peck at the juicy white stuff inside.
Presently another blue tit comes flying, and then another. They perch on
the top of the cocoanut and quarrel and flap about till the first tit
has finished, and then they both try to get into the hole together and
find that it is not big enough. We all watch them and would like to clap
our hands at the performance but dare not for fear of frightening them.

At the beginning of the Winter the tits are very shy, but later on, if
the window is open, they often alight on the window-sill and have a good
look about the room when they have had their turn at the cocoanut and
are waiting till the others have done to have a second peck.

I think all the Seasons are jolly in their own way, and perhaps it is a
good thing that they are all so different. Do you remember the Autumn
fairy story? Well the Seasons really are just like a family of sisters,
and we should find them very dull if they were all exactly the same.
After the snowstorms, when we go out together, things are quite
different, and we are quite different. The Imp and the Elf wear red
woolly caps instead of sunbonnet and straw hat. They wear thick, fluffy
coats and piles of things underneath them, and thick furry gloves. Why,
the Elf carries a muff just like any grown-up. And the ground has
changed as much as they. It is all white with snow, so that it is
difficult to believe that the hayfield where we played in Summer is
really the same place. We put on our thickest boots, and they go crunch,
crunch in the crisp snow. And we gather the snow in our hands and make
snowballs and throw them at each other. And then we make a giant
snowball, The Imp makes the biggest snowball he can in his hands and
then puts it on the ground and rolls it about. Everywhere it rolls the
snow clings to it, and it gets bigger and bigger till at last it is
nearly as big as the Imp himself and it takes all three of us to roll
it. We roll another and put it on the top of the first, and then a
smaller one and put it on the top of that, and then we roll snow into
long lumps for arms, and there we have our snow-man. We make eyes for
him with little blobs of earth, and a nose and a mouth, and in his mouth
we always put one of my pipes to make the poor fellow comfortable.

When we are tired of making snowballs and snow-men we go out of the
garden and across the road and along the field paths to the wood,
tramping through the shining snow. And we drag something behind us: can
you guess what it is? Do you remember in the fairy stories about the
people who lived near the forests? When the winter came they used to
shiver and rub their cold hands and go to the forests for firewood. And
as there were wolves in the forest they used to take a sledge so that
they could carry the sticks quickly back again before the wolves could
catch them. Well, when we go to the woods in winter we pretend that we
are going to the forests for firewood and we drag the Imp's big wooden
sledge behind us, and keep a bright look-out for wolves, though, of
course, there are no wolves in England now. All the same it is very good
fun to pretend that there are.

A jolly time we have on the way to the woods. The hedges are all bright
with hips and haws, coral colour and scarlet, the fruits of the wild
rose and the hawthorn. They glitter like crimson jewels in the white
hedges, where the birds are eating them as fast as they can. The
sunlight shimmers on the snow of the fields and the snow of the woods,
and the broad white shining slopes of the distant hills. And, of course,
all the way we watch carefully for the tracks of the wolves. We do not
find them, but we find the tracks of birds that have gone hop, hop, hop,
leaving each time the print of their feet in the snow, and the little
paddy tracks of the rabbits, and the flap tracks made by the rooks'
wings as they flag up from the ground.

For a long time the road is all up hill, but then we come to a deep
slope down, when the Elf and the Imp sit on the sledge, and I give them
a push off, and away they slide, quicker and quicker all the way to the
bottom; and then, instead of going straight on to the wood, they drag
the sledge up and go down again, and then once more, and then we all go
down together and sometimes end in a heap on the snow.

[Illustration]

When we leave the sliding hill we go up into the woods, and sometimes
really do find the tracks of a big four-footed animal. The Imp and the
Elf cry, "Wolf, wolf," but we know that really it is not a wolf, but a
big red fox with a bushy tail, who has passed that way in the night,
perhaps after stealing a chicken from the yard of one of the farms.

The woods are like fairy woods now, just as if the fairies had hung them
with glittering jewels, for they are covered with snow and frost, and
icicles, too, when the snow on the boughs has begun to melt and then
been frozen again. We hear crunch, crash, crash, crunch, and then the
woods are very still for a moment, and then we hear a great heavy
crunch, and perhaps see a mass of caked snow tumble off a branch to the
ground.

If it is near Chrismas time we do not bother about looking for sticks
and dead branches. We walk straight along the edge of the wood to where
three stout holly bushes grow close together. You cannot think how
pretty they look, with their dark green leaves and red berries, and the
white snow resting on the leaves, and you just cannot think how prickled
we get in picking the branches of holly. But we think of Christmas fun,
and do not mind the prickles much, while the Elf sings:

     "Get the pale mistletoe,
      And the red holly.
        Hang them up,
        Hang them up,
      We will be jolly.

     "Kiss under mistletoe,
      Laugh under holly,
        Hang them up,
        Hang them up,
      We will be jolly."

[Illustration]

The mistletoe is not so easy to find as the holly. I remember once after
we had piled the sledge with holly and dragged it home, the Elf pouted
her lips and looked very unhappy and said, "There isn't a mistletoe tree
anywhere in all the world, not even in the Long Wood. We shan't have any
mistletoe for Christmas." Things really did look rather sad, so I sent
her off to ask the old gardener about it, and the Imp went too. In about
an hour they came running back all smiles and happiness, and with their
arms as full as they could be. I shouted out to them as they went past
the window, "Where did you get all that mistletoe?" And they laughed
and said that it grew on the apple tree in the orchard, and that the old
gardener had cut it for them, and promised to let them bob for apples in
a bucket in the wood-shed if they were quick back. That is really and
truly the way the mistletoe grows. It is just like a baby that will not
leave its nurse. It pines away and will do nothing by itself, so it has
to be stuck into another tree to grow there more happily.

But you know the snow does not last all the Winter. After Christmas, and
before, there are weeks without any snow at all, and then we find it
rather sorrowful to walk over the bleak bare fields. But the hips and
haws are bright in the hedges, and whenever there is sunshine everything
is made jolly. And then, too, it is great fun to watch them ploughing
the land ready for next year's corn.

"Old Susan isn't pulling hay carts now," says the Elf, and we look up
and there is Susan side by side with another of the farm horses
harnessed to a plough. And a boy, a big strong boy, holds the handles of
the plough and the reins at the same time, and shouts to the horses, and
they cross the field slowly, tramp, tramp, tramp, and the rough earth is
turned over by the steel ploughshare, all dark and earthy, ready for the
seed. In the middle of one of the fields is a special friend of the
Imp's. He wears a battered hat and an old green coat, and a red worsted
scarf that flaps in the wind. He is made of two sticks, one stuck in the
earth and one nailed across it, and he is called Sir John Scarecrow,
because it is his duty to scare the birds from the field. But we have
laughed many a day to see the rooks perched on his broken hat and
tattered arms.

When we think of sowing seeds we think of Spring with the new corn green
on the red ground, and when we think of Spring we think of Summer, when
it is tall and wavy in the wind, and when we think of Summer we think of
Autumn when the corn is golden and cut, and then, why, then we come to
Winter again. And now the Imp and the Elf say that I have told you
enough about our Seasons, and that I must tell them fairy stories till
it is time for them to go to bed. So here is good-bye to you and a piece
of advice. If you have got any grown-ups near at hand and it is not
quite bedtime, if I were you I would ask them to tell you stories, too.
INTRODUCTION                                     xi
       I. THE CLOCK STRIKES ONE                       1
      II. ALONG THE HIGHWAY OF THE FOX                9
     III. IN THE TOADFISH’S SHOE                     21
      IV. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO SEE THIS FALL       29
       V. WHIPPED BY EAGLES                          36
      VI. THANKSGIVING AT GRANDFATHER’S FARM         46
     VII. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO DO THIS FALL        52
    VIII. THE MUSKRATS ARE BUILDING                  61
      IX. THE NORTH WIND DOTH BLOW                   67
       X. AN OUTDOOR LESSON                          76
      XI. LEAFING                                    80
     XII. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO HEAR THIS FALL      88
    XIII. HONK, HONK, HONK!                          96
          NOTES AND SUGGESTIONS                     105




    ILLUSTRATIONS


    “ONE OF THE EAGLES STRUCK ME A STINGING BLOW
        ON THE HEAD”                                    _Frontispiece_
    THE FALL OF THE YEAR                                             1
    INITIAL, CHAPTER I                                               1
    INITIAL, CHAPTER II                                              9
    “OVER THE HILL IN A WHIRLWIND OF DUST AND HOWLS”                18
    INITIAL, CHAPTER III                                            21
    “HERE I FOUND HIM KEEPING HOUSE”                                24
    INITIAL, CHAPTER IV                                             29
    A SILKY SKEIN OF COBWEB                                         30
    “A WILD CREATURE, THAT WON’T GET OUT OF YOUR WAY”               32
    THE PYXIE                                                       32
    THE FIELD OF CORN IN THE SHOCK                                  33
    THE WINGED, AND PLUMED, AND BALLOONED SEEDS                 34, 35
    INITIAL, CHAPTER V                                              36
    INITIAL, CHAPTER VI                                             46
    “THE LANTERN FLICKERS, THE MILK FOAMS, THE STORIES FLOW”        48
    INITIAL, CHAPTER VII                                            52
    A COON                                                          54
    QUAILS                                                          55
    SHAGBARKS                                                       56
    WILD SEA FOWL                                                   57
    BLACK HAWTHORN BERRIES                                          58
    INITIAL, CHAPTER VIII                                           61
    “TO-NIGHT THERE IS NO LOAFING ABOUT THE LODGE”                  62
    TAILPIECE                                                       66
    INITIAL, CHAPTER IX                                             67
    A WHITEFOOT                                                     68
    A CHIPMUNK                                                      70
    A WOODCHUCK                                                     72
    FIVE DAYS OF LIFE AND PLENTY FOR THE BIRDS                      74
    INITIAL, CHAPTER X                                              76
    INITIAL, CHAPTER XI                                             80
    “BUT COME, BOYS, GET AFTER THOSE BAGS!”                         84
    INITIAL, CHAPTER XII                                            88
    A LOON                                                          89
    WHEN NIGHT COMES                                                90
    A BLUE JAY                                                      91
    A RED SQUIRREL                                                  92
    A KINGLET                                                       93
    INITIAL, CHAPTER XIII                                           96
    WILD GEESE                                                     102
    TAILPIECE                                                      103




NOTE


It is interesting to observe that the subject of the initial for
chapter IV is witch-hazel; that for chapter VII, the cocoons of the
cecropia, the promethea, and the basket worm; and that for chapter
VIII, a sprig of alder, with the old fruit and a budded catkin. The
subjects of the other initials require no identification.




INTRODUCTION


There are three serious charges brought against nature books of the
present time, namely, that they are either so dull as to be
unreadable, or so fanciful as to be misleading, or so insincere as to
be positively harmful. There is a real bottom to each of these
charges.

Dull nature-writing is the circumstantial, the detailed, the
cataloguing, the semi-scientific sort, dried up like old Rameses and
cured for all time with the fine-ground spice of measurements, dates,
conditions--observations, so called. For literary purposes, one
observation of this kind is better than two. Rarely does the watcher
in the woods see anything so new that for itself it is worth
recording. It is not what one sees, so much as the manner of the
seeing, not the observation but its suggestions that count for
interest to the reader. Science wants the exact observation;
nature-writing wants the observation exact and the heart of the
observer along with it. We want plenty of facts in our nature books,
but they have all been set down in order before; what has not been set
down before are the author’s thoughts and emotions. These should be
new, personal, and are pretty sure therefore to be interesting.

More serious than dullness (and that is serious enough) is the charge
that nature books are untrustworthy, that they falsify the facts, and
give a wrong impression of nature. Some nature books do, as some
novels do with the facts of human life. A nature book all full of
extraordinary, better-class animals who do extraordinary stunts
because of their superior powers has little of real nature in it.
There are no such extraordinary animals, they do no such extraordinary
things. Nature is full of marvels--Niagara Falls, a flying swallow, a
star, a ragweed, a pebble; but nature is not full of dragons and
centaurs and foxes that reason like men and take their tea with lemon,
if you please.

I have never seen one of these extraordinary animals, never saw
anything extraordinary out of doors, because the ordinary is so
surprisingly marvelous. And I have lived in the woods practically all
of my life. And you will never see one of them--a very good argument
against anybody’s having seen them.

The world out of doors is not a circus of performing prodigies, nor
are nature-writers strange half-human creatures who know wood-magic,
who talk with trees, and call the birds and beasts about them as did
one of the saints of old. No, they are plain people, who have seen
nothing more wonderful in the woods than you have, if they would tell
the truth.

When I protested with a popular nature-writer some time ago at one of
his exciting but utterly impossible fox stories, he wrote back,--

“The publishers demanded that chapter to make the book sell.”

Now the publishers of this book make no such demands. Indeed they have
had an expert naturalist and woodsman hunting up and down every line
of this book for errors of fact, false suggestions, wrong sentiments,
and extraordinaries of every sort. If this book is not exciting it is
the publishers’ fault. It may not be exciting, but I believe, and
hope, that it is _true_ to all of my out of doors, and not untrue to
any of yours.

The charge of insincerity, the last in the list, concerns the author’s
style and sentiments. It does not belong in the same category with the
other two, for it really includes them. Insincerity is the mother of
all the literary sins. If the writer cannot be true to himself, he
cannot be true to anything. Children are the particular victims of the
evil. How often are children spoken to in baby-talk, gush, hollow
questions, and a condescension as irritating as coming teeth! They are
written to, also, in the same spirit.

The temptation to sentimentalize in writing of the “beauties of
nature” is very strong. Raptures run through nature books as regularly
as barbs the length of wire fences. The world according to such books
is like the Garden of Eden according to Ridinger, all peace, in spite
of the monstrous open-jawed alligator in the foreground of the
picture, who must be smiling, I take it, in an alligatorish way at a
fat swan near by.

Just as strong to the story-writer is the temptation to blacken the
shadows of the picture--to make all life a tragedy. Here on my table
lies a child’s nature-book every chapter of which ends in
death--nothing but struggle to escape for a brief time the bloody jaws
of the bigger beast--or of the superior beast, man.

Neither extreme is true of nature. Struggle and death go on, but,
except where man interferes, a very even balance is maintained, peace
prevails over fear, joy lasts longer than pain, and life continues to
multiply and replenish the earth. “The level of wild life,” to quote
my words from “The Face of the Fields,” “of the soul of all nature is
a great serenity. It is seldom lowered, but often raised to a higher
level, intenser, faster, more exultant.”

This is a divinely beautiful world, a marvelously interesting world,
the best conceivable sort of a world to live in, notwithstanding its
gypsy moths, tornadoes, and germs, its laws of gravity, and of cause
and effect; and my purpose in this series of nature books is to help
my readers to come by this belief. A clear understanding of the laws
of the Universe will be necessary for such a belief in the end, and
with the understanding a profound faith in their perfect working
together. But for the present, in these books of the Seasons, if I can
describe the out of doors, its living creatures and their doings, its
winds and skies with their suggestions--all of the out of doors, as it
surrounds and supports me here in my home on Mullein Hill, Hingham, so
that you can see how your out of doors surrounds and supports you,
with all its manifold life and beauty, then I have done enough. If
only I can accomplish a fraction of this I have done enough.

    DALLAS LORE SHARP.
    MULLEIN HILL, September, 1911.




THE FALL OF THE YEAR




CHAPTER I

THE CLOCK STRIKES ONE


    “The clock strikes one,
      And all is still around the house!
    But in the gloom
      A little mouse
    Goes creepy-creep from room to room.”

The clock of the year strikes one!--not in the dark silent night of
winter, but in the hot light of midsummer.

It is a burning July day,--one o’clock in the afternoon of the
year,--and all is still around the fields and woods. All is still. All
is hushed. But yet, as I listen, I hear things in the dried grass, and
in the leaves overhead, going “creepy-creep,” as you have heard the
little mouse in the silent night.

I am lying on a bed of grass in the shade of a great oak tree, as the
clock of the year strikes one. I am all alone in the quiet of the hot,
hushed day. Alone? Are you alone in the big upstairs at midnight, when
you hear the little mouse going “creepy-creep” from room to room? No;
and I am not alone.

High overhead the clouds are drifting past; and between them, far
away, is the blue of the sky--and how blue, how cool, how far, far
away! But how near and warm seems the earth!

I lie outstretched upon it, feeling the burnt crisp grass beneath me,
a beetle creeping under my shoulder, the heat of a big stone against
my side. I throw out my hands, push my fingers into the hot soil, and
try to take hold of the big earth as if I were a child clinging to my
mother.

And so I am. But I am not frightened, as I used to be, when the little
mouse went “creepy-creep,” and my real mother brought a candle to
scare the mouse away. It is because I am growing old? But I cannot
grow old to my mother. And the earth is my mother, my second mother.
The beetle moving under my shoulder is one of my brothers; the hot
stone by my side is another of my brothers; the big oak tree over me
is another of my brothers; and so are the clouds, the white clouds
drifting, drifting, drifting, so far away yonder, through the blue,
blue sky.

The clock of the year strikes one. The summer sun is overhead. The
flood-tide of summer life has come. It is the noon hour of the year.

The drowsy silence of the full, hot noon lies deep across the field.
Stream and cattle and pasture-slope are quiet in repose. The eyes of
the earth are heavy. The air is asleep. Yet the round shadow of my oak
begins to shift. The cattle do not move; the pasture still sleeps
under the wide, white glare.

But already the noon is passing--to-day I see the signs of coming
autumn everywhere.

Of the four seasons of the year summer is the shortest, and the one we
are least acquainted with. Summer is hardly a pause between spring and
autumn, simply the hour of the year’s noon.

We can be glad with the spring, sad with the autumn, eager with the
winter; but it is hard for us to go softly, to pause and to be still
with the summer; to rest on our wings a little like the broad-winged
hawk yonder, far up in the wide sky.

But now the hawk is not still. The shadow of my oak begins to
lengthen. The hour is gone; and, wavering softly down the languid air,
falls a yellow leaf from a slender birch near by. I remember, too,
that on my way through the woodlot I frightened a small flock of
robins from a pine; and more than a week ago the swallows were
gathering upon the telegraph wires. So quickly summer passes. It was
springtime but yesterday, it seems; to-day the autumn is here.

It is a July day. At dawn the birds were singing, fresh and
full-throated almost as in spring. Then the sun burned through the
mist, and the chorus ceased. Now I do not hear even the chewink and
the talkative vireo. Only the fiery notes of the scarlet tanager come
to me through the dry white heat of the noon, and the resonant song of
the indigo bunting--a hot, metallic, quivering song, as out of a “hot
and copper sky.”

There are nestlings still in the woods. This indigo bunting has eggs
or young in the bushes of the hillside; the scarlet tanager by some
accident has but lately finished his nest in the tall oaks. I looked
in upon some half-fledged cuckoos along the fence. But all of these
are late. Most of the year’s young are upon the wing.

A few of the spring’s flowers are still opening. I noticed the bees
upon some tardy raspberry blossoms; here and there is a stray
dandelion. But these are late. The season’s fruit has already set, is
already ripening. Spring is gone; the sun is overhead; the red
wood-lily is open. To-day is the noon of the year.

High noon! and the red wood-lily is aflame in the old fields, and in
the low tangles of sweet-fern and blackberry that border the upland
woods.

The wood-lily is the flower of fire. How impossible it would be to
kindle a wood-lily on the cold, damp soil of April! It can be lighted
only on this kiln-dried soil of July. This old hilly pasture is baking
in the sun; the low mouldy moss that creeps over its thin breast
crackles and crumbles under my feet; the patches of sweet-fern that
blotch it here and there crisp in the heat and fill the smothered air
with their spicy breath; while the wood-lily opens wide and full,
lifting its spotted lips to the sun for his scorching kiss. See it
glow! Should the withered thicket burst suddenly into a blaze, it
would be no wonder, so hot and fiery seem the petals of this flower of
the sun.

How unlike the tender, delicate fragrant flowers of spring are these
strong flowers of the coming fall! They make a high bank along the
stream--milkweed, boneset, peppermint, turtle-head, joe-pye-weed,
jewel-weed, smartweed, and budding goldenrod! Life has grown lusty and
lazy and rank.

But life has to grow lusty and rank, for the winter is coming; and as
the woodchucks are eating and eating, enough to last them until spring
comes again, so the plants are storing fat in their tap-roots, and
ripening millions of seeds, to carry them safely through the long dead
months of winter.

The autumn is the great planting time out of doors. Every autumn wind
is a sower going forth to sow. And he must have seeds and to
spare--seeds for the waysides for the winter birds to eat, seeds for
the stony places where there is no depth of soil for them, seeds for
the ploughed fields where they are not allowed to grow, seeds for
every nook and corner, in order that somewhere each plant may find a
place to live, and so continue its kind from year to year.

Look at the seeds of the boneset, joe-pye-weed, milkweed, and
goldenrod! Seeds with wings and plumes and parachutes that go
floating and flying and ballooning.

    “Over the fields where the daisies grow,
      Over the flushing clover,
    A host of the tiniest fairies go--
    Dancing, balancing to and fro,
      Rolling and tumbling over.

    “Quivering, balancing, drifting by,
      Floating in sun and shadow--
    Maybe the souls of the flowers that die
    Wander, like this, to the summer sky
      Over a happy meadow.”

So they do. They wander away to the sky, but they come down again to
the meadow to make it happy next summer with new flowers; for these
are the seed-souls of thistles and daisies and fall dandelions seeking
new bodies for themselves in the warm soil of Mother Earth.

Mother Earth! How tender and warm and abundant she is! As I lie here
under the oak, a child in her arms, I see the thistle-down go floating
by, and on the same laggard breeze comes up from the maple swamp the
odor of the sweet pepper-bush. A little flock of chickadees stop in
the white birches and quiz me. “Who are you?” “Who are you-you-you?”
they ask, dropping down closer and closer to get a peek into my face.

Perhaps they don’t know who I am. Perhaps I don’t know who they are.
They are not fish hawks, of course; but neither am I an alligator or a
pumpkin, as the chickadees surely know. This much I am quite sure of,
however: that this little flock is a family--a family of young
chickadees and their two parents, it may be, who are out seeing the
world together, and who will stay together far into the cold coming
winter.

They are one of the first signs of the autumn to me, and one of my
surest, sweetest comforts as the bleak cold winds come down from the
north. For the winds will not drive my chickadees away, no matter how
cold and how hard they blow, no matter how dark and how dead the
winter woods when, in the night of the year, the clock strikes twelve.

The clock to-day strikes one, and all is still with drowsy sleep out
of doors. The big yellow butterflies, like falling leaves, are
flitting through the woods; the thistledown is floating, floating
past; and in the sleepy air I see the shimmering of the spiders’ silky
balloons, as the tiny aeronauts sail over on their strange voyages
through the sky.

How easy to climb into one of their baskets, and in the fairy craft
drift far, far away! How pleasant, too, if only the noon of the year
would last and last; if only the warm sun would shine and shine; if
only the soft sleepy winds would sleep and sleep; if only we had
nothing to do but drift and drift and drift!

But we have a great deal to do, and we can’t get any of it done by
drifting. Nor can we get it done by lying, as I am lying, outstretched
upon the warm earth this July day. Already the sun has passed
overhead; already the cattle are up and grazing; already the round
shadow of the oak tree begins to lie long across the slope. The noon
hour is spent. I hear the quivering click-clack of a mowing-machine in
a distant hay field. The work of the day goes on. My hour of rest is
almost over, my summer vacation is nearly done. Work begins again
to-morrow.

But I am ready for it. I have rested outstretched upon the warm earth.
I have breathed the sweet air of the woods. I have felt the warm
life-giving sun upon my face. I have been a child of the earth. I have
been a brother to the stone and the bird and the beetle. And now I am
strong to do my work, no matter what it is.




CHAPTER II

ALONG THE HIGHWAY OF THE FOX


With only half a chance our smaller wild animals--the fox, the mink,
the ’coon, the ’possum, the rabbit--would thrive, and be happy forever
on the very edges of the towns and cities. Instead of a hindrance,
houses and farms, roads and railways are a help to the wild animals,
affording them food and shelter as their natural conditions never
could. So, at least, it seems; for here on Mullein Hill, hardly twenty
miles from the heart of Boston, there are more wild animals than I
know what to do with--just as if the city of Boston were a big skunk
farm or fox farm, from which the countryside all around (particularly
my countryside) were being continually restocked.

But then, if I seem to have more foxes than a man of chickens needs to
have, it is no wonder, living as I do on a main traveled road in
Foxland, a road that begins off in the granite ledges this side of
Boston, no one knows where, and, branching, doubling, turning, no one
knows how many times, comes down at last along the trout brook to the
street in front of my house, where, leaping the brook and crossing the
street, it runs beside my foot-path, up the hill, to the mowing-field
behind the barn.

When I say that last fall the hunters, standing near the brook where
this wild-animal road and the wagon road cross, shot seven foxes, you
will be quite ready to believe that this is a much-traveled road, this
road of the foxes that cuts across my mowing-field; and also that I am
quite likely to see the travelers, now and then, as they pass by.

So I am, especially in the autumn, when game grows scarce; when the
keen frosty air sharpens the foxes’ appetites, and the dogs, turned
loose in the woods, send the creatures far and wide for--chickens!

For chickens? If you have chickens, I hope your chicken-coop does not
stand along the side of a fox road, as mine does. For straight across
the mowing-field runs this road of the foxes, then in a complete
circle right round the chicken yard, and up the bushy ridge into the
wood.

How very convenient! Very, indeed! And how thoughtful of me! Very
thoughtful! The foxes appreciate my kindness; and they make a point of
stopping at the hen-yard every time they pass this way.

It is interesting to know, too, that they pass this way almost every
night, and almost every afternoon, and at almost every other odd time,
so that the hens, with hundreds of grubby acres to scratch in, have to
be fenced within a bare narrow yard, where they can only be _seen_ by
the passing foxes.

Even while being driven by the dogs, when naturally they are in
something of a hurry, the foxes will manage to get far enough ahead of
the hounds to come by this way and saunter leisurely around the coop.

I have a double-barreled gun and four small boys; but terrible as that
combination sounds, it fails somehow with the foxes. It is a
two-barreled-four-boyed kind of a joke to them. They think that I am
fooling when I blaze away with both barrels at them. But I am not.
Every cartridge is loaded with BB shot. But that only means
_Blank-Blank_ to them, in spite of all I can do. The way they jump
when the gun goes off, then stop and look at me, is very irritating.

This last spring I fired twice at a fox, who jumped as if I had hit
him (I must have hit him), then turned himself around and looked all
over the end of the barn to see where the shots were coming from. They
were coming from the back barn window, as he saw when I yelled at him.

It was an April morning, cold and foggy, so cold and foggy and so very
early that my chattering teeth, I think, disturbed my aim.

It must have been about four o’clock when one of the small boys
tiptoed into my room and whispered, “Father, quick! there’s a fox
digging under Pigeon Henny’s coop behind the barn.”

I was up in a second, and into the boys’ room. Sure enough, there in
the fog of the dim morning I could make out the moving form of a fox.
He was digging under the wire runway of the coop.

The old hen was clucking in terror to her chicks. It was she who had
awakened the boys.

There was no time to lose. Downstairs I went, down into the basement,
where I seized the gun, and, slipping in a couple of shells, slid out
of the cellar door and crept stealthily into the barn.

The back window was open. The thick wet fog poured in like dense
smoke. I moved swiftly in my bare feet and peered down upon the field.
There stood the blur of the coop,--a dark shadow only in the fog,--but
where was the fox?

Pushing the muzzle of my double-barreled gun across the window-sill, I
waited. And there in the mist stood the fox, reaching in with his paw
under the wire that inclosed the coop.

Carefully, deliberately, I swung the gun on the window-sill until the
bead drew dead upon the thief; then, fixing myself as firmly as I
could with bare feet, I made sure of my mark and fired.

I do not wonder that the fox jumped. I jumped, myself, as both barrels
went off together. A gun is a sudden thing at any time of day, but so
early in the morning, and when everything was wrapped in silence and
ocean fog, the double explosion was extremely startling.

The fox jumped, as naturally he would. When, however, he turned
deliberately around and looked all over the end of the barn to see
where I was firing from, and stood there, until I shouted at him--I
say it was irritating.

But I was glad, on going out later, to find that neither charge of
shot had hit the coop. The coop was rather large, larger than the
ordinary coop; and taking that into account, and the thick, uncertain
condition of the atmosphere, I had not made a bad shot after all. It
was something not to have killed the hen.

But the fox had killed eleven of the chicks. One out of the brood of
twelve was left. The rascal had dug a hole under the wire; and then,
by waiting as they came out, or by frightening them out, had eaten
them one by one.

There are guns and guns, and some, I know, that shoot straight. But
guns and dogs and a dense population have not yet availed here against
the fox.

One might think, however, when the dogs are baying hard on the heels
of a fox, that one’s chickens would be safe enough for the moment from
that particular fox. But there is no pack of hounds hunting in these
woods swift enough or keen enough to match the fox. In literature the
cunning of the fox is very greatly exaggerated. Yet it is, in fact,
more than equal to that of the hound.

A fox, I really believe, enjoys an all-day run before the dogs. And as
for house dogs, I have seen a fox, that was evidently out for mischief
and utterly tired of himself, come walking along the edge of the knoll
here by the house, and, squatting on his haunches, yap down lonesomely
at the two farm dogs below.

This very week I heard the hounds far away in the ledges. I listened.
They were coming toward me, and apparently on my side of the brook. I
had just paused at the corner of the barn when the fox, slipping along
the edge of the woods, came loping down to the hen-yard within easy
gun-shot of me. He halted for a hungry look at the hens through the
wire fence, then trotted slowly off, with the dogs yelping fully five
minutes away in the swamp.

How many minutes would it have taken that fox to snatch a hen, had
there been a hen on _his_ side of the fence? He could have made
chicken-sandwiches of a hen in five minutes, could have eaten them,
too, and put the feathers into a bolster--almost! How many of my hens
he has made into pie in less than five minutes!

As desserts go, out of doors, he has a right to a pie for fooling the
dogs out of those five crowded minutes. For he does it against such
uneven odds, and does it so neatly--sometimes so very thrillingly! On
three occasions I have seen him do the trick, each time by a little
different dodge.

One day, as I was climbing the wooded ridge behind the farm, I heard a
single foxhound yelping at intervals in the hollow beyond. Coming
cautiously to the top, I saw the hound below me beating slowly along
through the bare sprout-land, half a mile away, and having a hard time
holding to the trail. Every few minutes he would solemnly throw his
big black head into the air, stop stock-still, and yelp a long doleful
yelp, as if begging the fox to stop its fooling and try to leave a
reasonable trail.

The hound was walking, not running; and round and round he would go,
off this way, off that, then back when, catching the scent again, he
would up with his muzzle and howl for all the woods to hear. But I
think it was for the fox to hear.

I was watching the curious and solemn performance, and wondering if
the fox really did hear and understand, when, not far from me, on the
crown of the ridge, something stirred.

Without moving so much as my eyes, I saw the fox, a big beauty, going
slowly and cautiously round and round in a small circle among the
bushes, then straight off for a few steps, then back in the same
tracks; off again in another direction and back again; then in and
out, round and round, until, springing lightly away from the top of a
big stump near by, the wily creature went gliding swiftly down the
slope.

The hound with absolute patience worked his sure way up the hill to
the circle and began to go round and round, sniffling and whimpering
to himself, as I now could hear; sniffling and whimpering with
impatience, but true to every foot-print of the trail. Round and
round, in and out, back and forth, he went, but each time in a wider
circle, until the real trail was picked up, and he was away with an
eager cry.

I once again saw the trick played, so close to me, and so
deliberately, with such cool calculating, that it came with something
of a revelation to me of how the fox may feel, of what may be the
state of mind in the wild animal world.

It was a late October evening, crisp and clear, with a moon almost
full. I had come up from the meadow to the edge of the field behind
the barn, and stood leaning back upon a short-handled hayfork,
looking. It was at everything that I was looking--the moonlight, the
gleaming grass, the very stillness, so real and visible it seemed at
the falling of this first frost. I was listening too, when, as far
away as the stars, it seemed, came the cry of the hounds.

You have heard at night the passing of a train beyond the mountains?
the sound of thole-pins round a distant curve in the river? the
closing of a barn door somewhere down the valley? Strange it may seem
to one who has never listened, but the far-off cry of the hounds is
another such friendly and human voice, calling across the vast of the
night.

They were coming. How clear their tones, and bell-like! How mellow in
the distance, ringing on the rim of the moonlit sky, as round the
sides of a swinging silver bell. Their clanging tongues beat all in
unison, the sound rising and falling through the rolling woodland, and
spreading like a curling wave as the pack broke into the open over the
level meadows.

I waited. Rounder, clearer, came the cry. I began to pick out the
individual voices as now this one, now that, led the chorus across
some mighty measure of The Chase.

Was it a twig that broke? Some brittle oak leaf that cracked in the
path behind me? A soft sound of feet! Something breathed, stopped,
came on--and in the moonlight before me stood the fox!

The dogs were coming, but I was standing still. And who was I, anyway?
A stump? A post? No, he saw instantly that I was more than an ordinary
post. How much more?

The dogs were coming!

“Well,” said he, as plainly as anything was ever said, “I don’t know
what you are. But I will find out.” And up he came and sniffed at my
shoes. “This is odd,” he went on, backing carefully off and sitting
down on his tail in the edge of a pine-tree shadow. “Odd indeed. Not a
stump; not a man, in spite of appearances, for a man could never stand
still so long as that.”

The dogs were crashing through the underbrush below, their fierce
cries quivering through the very trees about me.

The fox got up, trotted back and forth in front of me for the best
possible view, muttering, “Too bad! Too bad! What an infernal nuisance
a pack of poodles can make of themselves at times! Here is something
new in the woods, and smells of the hen-yard, as I live! Those silly
dogs!” and trotting back, down the path over which he had just come,
he ran directly toward the coming hounds, leaped off into a pile of
brush and stones, and vanished as the hounds rushed up in a yelping,
panting whirl about me.

Cool? Indeed it was! He probably did not stop, as soon as he was out
of sight, and make faces at the whole pack. But that is because they
have politer ways in Foxland.

It is no such walking-match as this every time. It is nip and tuck,
neck and neck, a dead heat sometimes, when only his superior knowledge
of the ground saves the fox a whole skin.

Perhaps there are peculiar conditions, at times, that are harder for
the fox than for the dogs, as when the undergrowth is all adrip with
rain or dew, and every jump forward is like a plunge overboard. His
red coat is longer than the short, close hair of the hound, and his
big brush of a tail, heavy with water, must be a dragging weight over
the long hard course of the hunt. If wet fur to him means the same as
wet clothes to us, then the narrow escape I witnessed a short time ago
is easily explained. It happened in this way:--

I was out in the road by the brook when I caught the cry of the pack;
and, hurrying up the hill to the “cut,” I climbed the gravel bank for
a view down the road each way, not knowing along which side of the
brook the chase was coming, nor where the fox would cross.

[Illustration: “OVER THE HILL IN A WHIRLWIND OF DUST AND HOWLS”]

Not since the Flood had there been a wetter morning. The air could not
stir without spilling; the leaves hung weighted with the wet; the very
cries of the hounds sounded thick and choking, as the pack floundered
through the alder swamp that lay at the foot of the hill where I was
waiting.

There must be four or five dogs in the pack, I thought; and surely now
they are driving down the old runway that crosses the brook at my
meadow.

I kept my eye upon the bend in the brook and just beyond the big swamp
maple, when there in the open road stood the fox.

He did not stand; he only seemed to, so suddenly and unannounced had
he arrived. Not an instant had he to spare. The dogs were smashing
through the briars behind him. Leaping into the middle of the road,
he flew past me straight up the street, over the ridge, and out of
sight.

I turned to see the burst of the pack into the road, when flash! a
yellow streak, a rush of feet, a popping of dew-laid dust in the road,
and back was the fox, almost into the jaws of the hounds, as he shot
into the tangle of wild grapevines around which the panting pack was
even then turning!

With a rush that carried them headlong past the grapevines, the dogs
struck the warm trail in the road and went up over the hill in a
whirlwind of dust and howls.

They were gone. The hunt was over for that day. Somewhere beyond the
end of the doubled trail the pack broke up and scattered through the
woods, hitting a stale lead here and there, but not one of them, so
long as I waited, coming back upon the right track to the grapevines,
through whose thick door the hard-pressed fox had so narrowly won his
way.




CHAPTER III

IN THE TOADFISH’S SHOE


I was winding up my summer vacation with a little fishing party all by
myself, on a wharf whose piles stood deep in the swirling waters from
Buzzards Bay. My heavy-leaded line hummed taut in the swift current;
my legs hung limp above the water; my back rested comfortably against
a great timber that was warm in the September sun. Exciting? Of course
not. Fishing is fishing--any kind of fishing is fishing to me. But the
kind I am most used to, and the kind I like best, is from the edge of
a wharf, where my feet dangle over, where my “throw-out” line hums
taut over my finger, in a tide that runs swift and deep and dark below
me.

For what may you not catch in such dark waters? And when there are no
“bites,” you can sit and wait; and I think that sitting and waiting
with my back against a big warm timber is just as much fun now as it
used to be when I was a boy.

But after all it is fish that you want when you go fishing; and it is
exciting, moreover, just to sit as I was sitting on the wharf, with
all the nerves of your body concentrated in the tip of your right
forefinger, under the pressure of your line. For how do you know but
that the next instant you may get a bite? And how do you know what the
fish may be?

When you whip a trout stream for trout--why, you expect trout; when
you troll a pond for pickerel, you expect pickerel; but when you sit
on a wharf with your line far out in big, deep waters--why, you can
expect almost anything--except shoes!

Shoes? Yes, old shoes!

As I sat there on the wharf of Buzzards Bay, there was suddenly a
sharp tug at my line. A short quick snap, and I hooked him, and began
quickly hauling him in.

How heavily he came! How dead and stupid! Even a flounder or a cod
would show more fight than this; and very naturally, for on the end of
my line hung an old shoe!

“Well,” I thought, “I have fished for soles, and down on the Savannah
I have fished for ’gators, but I never fished for shoes before”; and
taking hold of my big fish (for it must have been a No. 12 shoe), I
was about to feel for the hook when I heard a strange grunting noise
inside, and nearly tumbled overboard at sight of two big eyes and a
monstrous head filling the whole inside of the shoe!

“In the name of Davy Jones!” I yelled, flinging line and shoe and
_thing_ (whatever it might be) far behind me, “I’ve caught the Old Man
of the Sea with his shoe on!” And, scrambling to my feet, I hurried
across the wharf to see if it really were a fish that now lay flapping
close beside the shoe.

It was really a fish; but it was also a hobgoblin, nightmare, and
ooze-croaker!--if you know what that is!

I had never seen a live toadfish before, and it is small wonder that I
sighed with relief to see that he had unhooked himself; for he looked
not only uncanny, but also dangerous! He was slimy all over, with a
tremendous head and a more tremendous mouth (if that could be), with
jaws studded on the inside with rows of sharp teeth, and fringed on
the outside with folds of loose skin and tentacles. Great glaring eyes
stared at me, with ragged bits of skin hanging in a ring about them.

Ugly? Oh, worse than ugly? Two thirds of the monster was head; the
rest, a weak, shapeless, slimy something with fins and tail, giving
the creature the appearance of one whose brain had grown at the
expense of the rest of his body, making him only a kind of living
head.

I looked at him. He looked at me, and croaked.

“I don’t understand you,” said I, and he croaked again. “But you are
alive,” said I; “and God made you, and therefore you ought not to look
so ugly to me,” and he flapped in the burning sun and croaked again.

Stooping quickly, I seized him, crowded him back into the old shoe,
and dipped him under water. He gasped with new life and croaked again.

“Now,” said I, “I begin to understand you. That croak means that you
are glad to taste salt water again”; and he croaked again, and I
dipped him in again.

Then I looked him over thoughtfully. He was about fifteen inches long,
brown in color, and coarsely marbled with a darker hue, which ran
along the fins in irregular wavy lines.

“You are odd, certainly, and peculiar, and altogether homely,” said I;
“but really you are not very ugly. Ugly? No, you are _not_ ugly. How
could anybody be ugly with a countenance so wise and learned?--so
thoughtful and meditative?” And the toadfish croaked and croaked
again. And I dipped him in again, and understood him better, and liked
him better all the time.

Then I took him in his shoe to the edge of the wharf.

“I am glad to have made your acquaintance, sir,” said I. “If I come
this way next summer, I shall look you up; for I want to know more
about you. Good-by.” And I heard him croak “Good-by,” as he and his
shoe went sailing out and dropped with a splash into the deep dark
water of the Bay.

[Illustration: “HERE I FOUND HIM KEEPING HOUSE”]

I meant what I said, and the next summer, along the shores of the Bay
I hunted him up. He was not in an old shoe this time, but under
certain rather large stones that lay just below ebb-tide mark, so that
they were usually, though not always, covered with water. Here I found
him keeping house; and as I was about to keep house myself, my heart
really warmed to him.

I was understanding him more and more, and so I was liking him better
and better. Ugly? Wait until I tell you what the dear fellow was
doing.

He was keeping house, and he was keeping it all alone! Now listen, for
this is what I learned that summer about the strange habits of Mrs.
Toadfish, and the handsome behavior of her husband.

It is along in June that the toadfish of our New England bays begin to
look round for their summer homes. As far as we now know, it is the
female who makes the choice and leaves her future mate to find her and
her home. A rock is usually chosen, always in shallow water, and
sometimes so far up on the shore that at low tide it is left high and
almost dry. The rock may vary in size from one as small as your hat up
to the very largest.

Having selected the place for her nest, she digs a pathway down under
the rock, and from beneath scoops out a hollow quite large enough to
swim round in. This completes the nest, or more properly burrow, in
which her little toadfish babies are to be reared.

She now begins to lay the eggs, but not in the sand, as one would
suppose; she deliberately pastes them on the under surface of the
rock. Just how she does this no one knows.

The eggs are covered with a clear, sticky paste which hardens in
contact with water, and is the means by which the mother sticks them
fast to the rock. This she must do while swimming on her back,
fastening one egg at a time, each close beside its neighbor in regular
order, till all the cleared surface of the rock is covered with
hundreds of beautiful amber eggs, like drops of pure, clear honey.

The eggs are about the size of buckshot; and, curiously enough, when
they hatch, the young come out with their heads all turned in the same
direction. Does the mother know which is the head end of the egg? Or
has some strange power drawn them around? Or do they turn themselves
for some reason?

It will be noticed, in lifting up the rocks, that the heads of the
fish are always turned toward the entrance to their nest, through
which the light and fresh water come; and it is quite easy to see that
these two important things have much to do with the direction in which
the little fish are turned.

After Mrs. Fish has finished laying her eggs, her maternal cares are
over. She leaves both eggs and cares to the keeping of Mr. Fish, swims
off, and crawls into a tin can--or old shoe!--to meditate in sober
satisfaction for the rest of the summer.

So it was _she_ that I caught, and not the gallant Mr. Toadfish at
all! I am glad of it. I have a deal of sympathy and down-right
admiration for Mr. Fish. He behaves most handsomely.

However, Mrs. Fish is very wise, and could not leave her treasures in
better keeping. If ever there was a faithful parent, it is a Father
Toadfish. For three weeks he guards the eggs before they hatch out,
and then they are only half hatched; for it has taken the little fish
all this time to get out on the top side of the eggs, to which they
are still attached by their middles, so that they can move only their
heads and tails.

They continue to wiggle in this fashion for some weeks, until the yolk
of the egg is absorbed, and they have grown to be nearly half an inch
long. They are then free from the rock and swim off, looking as much
like their parents as children can, and every bit as ugly.

Ugly? Did I say ugly? Is a baby ever ugly to its mother? Or a baby
toadfish to its father? No. You cannot love a baby and at the same
time see it ugly. You cannot love the out of doors with all your
_mind_ as well as with all your heart, and ever see it ugly.

All this time the father has been guarding the little toadfish; and
if, during the whole period, he goes out to get a meal, I have not
been able to find when it is, for I always find him at home, minding
the babies.

The toadfish lives entirely unmolested by enemies, so far as I can
learn; and his appearance easily explains the reason of it. I know of
nothing that would willingly enter a croaking, snapping, slimy
toadfish’s nest to eat him; and it takes some courage to put one’s
hand into his dark hole and pull him out.

His principal diet seems to be shrimp, worms and all kinds of small
fish. Yet he may be said to have no principal diet; for, no matter
what you are fishing for, or what kind of bait you are using, if there
is a toadfish in the vicinity you are sure to catch him. If fishing
along a wharf in September, you may catch the fish, and an old shoe
along with him--with _her_, perhaps I should say.

And if you do, please notice how wise and thoughtful the face, how
beautifully marbled the skin, how courageous the big strong jaw!

Ugly? Not if you will put yourself in the toadfish’s shoe.




CHAPTER IV

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO SEE THIS FALL


I

You ought to see the sky--every day. You ought to see, as often as
possible, the breaking of dawn, the sunset, the moonrise, and the
stars. Go up to your roof, if you live in the city, or out into the
middle of the Park, or take a street-car ride into the edge of the
country--just to see the moon come up over the woods or over a rounded
hill against the sky.


II

You ought to see the light of the October moon, as it falls through a
roof of leafless limbs in some silent piece of woods. You have seen
the woods by daylight; you have seen the moon from many places; but to
be in the middle of the moonlit woods after the silence of the October
frost has fallen is to have one of the most beautiful experiences
possible out of doors.


III

You ought to see a wooded hillside in the glorious colors of the
fall--the glowing hickories, the deep flaming oaks, the cool, dark
pines, the blazing gums and sumacs! Take some single, particular
woodland scene and look at it until you can see it in memory forever.


IV

You ought to see the spiders in their airships, sailing over the
autumn meadows. Take an Indian Summer day, lazy, hazy, sunny, and lie
down on your back in some small meadow where woods or old rail fences
hedge it around. Lie so that you do not face the sun. The sleepy air
is heavy with balm and barely moves. Soon shimmering, billowing,
through the light, a silky skein of cobweb will come floating over.
Look sharply, and you will see the little aëronaut swinging in his
basket at the bottom of the balloon, sailing, sailing--

    Away in the air air--
    Far are the shores of Anywhere,
    Over the woods and the heather.


V

You ought to see (only _see_, mind you,) on one of these autumn
nights, when you have _not_ on your party clothes--you ought to see a
“wood pussy.” A wood pussy is not a house pussy; a wood pussy is a
wood pussy; that is to say, a wood pussy is a--_skunk_! Yes, you ought
to see a skunk walking calmly along a moonlit path and not caring a
fig for you. You will perhaps never meet a wild buffalo or a grizzly
bear or a jaguar in the woods nearest your house; but you may meet a
wild skunk there, and have the biggest adventure of your life. Yes,
you ought to see a skunk some night, just for the thrill of meeting a
wild creature that won’t get out of your way.


VI

You ought to see the witch-hazel bush in blossom late in November. It
is the only bush or tree in the woods that is in full bloom after the
first snow may have fallen. Many persons who live within a few
minutes’ walk of the woods where it grows have never seen it. But
then, many persons who live with the sky right over their heads, with
the dawn breaking right into their bedroom windows, have never seen
the sky or the dawn to think about them, and wonder at them! There are
many persons who have never seen anything at all that is worth
seeing. The witch-hazel bush, all yellow with its strange blossoms in
November, is worth seeing, worth taking a great deal of trouble to
see.

There is a little flower in southern New Jersey called pyxie, or
flowering moss, a very rare and hidden little thing; and I know an old
botanist who traveled five hundred miles just to have the joy of
seeing that little flower growing in the sandy swamp along Silver Run.
If you have never seen the witch-hazel in bloom, it will pay you to
travel five hundred and five miles to see it. But you won’t need to go
so far,--unless you live beyond the prairies,--for the witch-hazel
grows from Nova Scotia to Florida and west to Minnesota and Alabama.

There is one flower that, according to Mr. John Muir (and he surely
knows!), it will pay one to travel away up into the highest Sierra to
see. It is the fragrant Washington lily, “the finest of all the Sierra
lilies,” he says. “Its bulbs are buried in shaggy chaparral tangles, I
suppose for safety from pawing bears; and its magnificent panicles
sway and rock over the top of the rough snow-pressed bushes, while
big, bold, blunt-nosed bees drone and mumble in its polleny bells. A
lovely flower worth going hungry and footsore endless miles to see.
The whole world seems richer now that I have found this plant in so
noble a landscape.”

[Illustration: “A WILD CREATURE THAT WON’T GET OUT OF YOUR WAY”]

And so it seemed to the old botanist who came five hundred miles to
find the tiny pyxie in the sandy swamps of southern New Jersey. So it
will seem to you--the whole world will not only _seem_ richer, but
will _be_ richer for you--when you have found the witch-hazel bush all
covered with summer’s gold in the bleak woods of November.


VII

You ought to see a big pile of golden pumpkins in some farmhouse shed
or beside the great barn door. You ought to see a field of corn in the
shock; hay in a barn mow; the jars of fruit, the potatoes, apples, and
great chunks of wood in the farmhouse cellar. You ought to see how a
farmer gets ready for the winter--the comfort, the plenty, the
sufficiency of it all!


VIII

You ought to see how the muskrats, too, get ready for the winter, and
the bees and the flowers and the trees and the frogs--everything.
Winter is coming. The cold will kill--if it has a chance. But see how
it has no chance. How is it that the bees will buzz, the flowers open,
the birds sing, the frogs croak again next spring as if there had been
no freezing, killing weather? Go out and see why for yourselves.


IX

You ought to see the tiny seed “birds” from the gray birches,
scattering on the autumn winds; the thistledown, too; and a dozen
other of the winged, and plumed, and ballooned, seeds that sail on the
wings of the winds. You should see the burdock burs in the cows’ tails
when they come home from the pasture, and the stick-tights and
beggar-needles in your own coat-tails when you come home from the
pastures. And seeing that, you should _think_--for that is what real
seeing means. Think what? Why, that you are just as good as a cow’s
tail to scatter Nature’s seeds for her, and not a bit better, as she
sees you.


X

You ought to see the migrating birds as they begin to flock on the
telegraph wires, in the chimneys, and among the reeds of the river.
You ought to see the swallows, blackbirds, robins, and bluebirds, as
they flock together for the long southern flight. There are days in
late September and in early October when the very air seems to be half
of birds, especially toward nightfall, if the sun sets full and clear:
birds going over; birds diving and darting about you; birds along the
rails and ridge-poles; birds in the grass under your feet--birds
everywhere. You should be out among them where you can see them. And
especially you should see--without fail, this autumn and every
autumn--the wedge of wild geese cleaving the dull gray sky in their
thrilling journey down from the far-off frozen North.




CHAPTER V

WHIPPED BY EAGLES


As you head into Maurice River Cove from Delaware Bay by boat, the
great eagle’s nest of Garren’s Neck Swamp soon looms into view. It is
a famous nest, and an ancient nest; for it has a place in the chart of
every boat that sails up the river, and has had for I don’t know how
many years. From the river side of the long swamp the nest is in sight
the year round, but from the land side, and from the house where we
lived, the nest could be seen only after the leaves of the swamp had
fallen. Then all winter long we could see it towering over the swamp;
and often, in the distance, we could see the eagles coming and going
or soaring in mighty circles high up in the air above it.

That nest had a strange attraction for me. It was the home of eagles,
the monarchs of this wide land of swamp and marsh and river.

Between me and the great nest lay a gloomy gum swamp, wet and wild,
untouched by the axe and untraveled, except in winter by the
coon-hunters. The swamp began just across the road that ran in front
of the house; and often at night I would hear the scream of a wild cat
in the dark hollows; and once I heard the _pat, pat_ of its feet as it
went leaping along the road.

Then beyond the swamp and the nest stretched a vast wild marsh-land,
where the reeds grew, and the tides came in, and the mud-hens lived.
And beyond that flowed the river, and beyond the river lay another
marsh, and beyond the marsh another swamp. And over all this vast wild
world towered the nest of the eagles, like some ancient castle; and
over it all--swamp and marsh and river--ruled the eagles, as bold and
free as the mighty barons of old.

Is it any wonder that I often found myself gazing away at that nest on
the horizon and longing for wings?--for wings with which to soar above
the swamp and the bay and the marsh and the river, to circle about and
about that lofty eyrie, as wild as the eagles and as free? Is it any
wonder that I determined some day to stand up in that nest, wings or
no wings, while the eagles should scream about me, and away below me
should stretch river and marsh and swamp?

To stand up in that nest, to yell and wave my arms with the eagles
wheeling and screaming over me, became the very peak of my boy
ambitions.

And I did it. I actually had the eggs of those eagles in my hands. I
got into the nest; but I am glad even now that I got out of the nest
and reached the ground.

It must have been in the spring of my fourteenth year when, at last, I
found myself beneath the eagle tree. It was a stark old white oak,
almost limbless, and standing out alone on the marsh some distance
from the swamp. The eagle’s nest capped its very top.

The nest, I knew, must be big; but not until I had climbed up close
under it did I realize that it was the size of a small haystack. There
was certainly half a cord of wood in it. I think that it must
originally have been built by fish hawks.

Holding to the forking top upon which the nest was placed, I reached
out, but could not touch the edge from any side.

I had come determined to get up into it, however, at any hazard; and
so I set to work. I never thought of how I was to get down; nor had I
dreamed, either, of fearing the eagles. A bald eagle is a bully. I
would as soon have thought of fearing our hissing old gander at home.

As I could not get out to the edge of the nest and scale the walls,
the only possible way up, apparently, was through the nest. The sticks
here in the bottom were old and quite rotten. Digging was easy, and I
soon had a good beginning.

The structure was somewhat cone-shaped, the smaller end down. It had
grown in circumference as it grew in years and in height, probably
because at the bottom the building materials had decayed and gradually
fallen away, until now there was a decided outward slant from bottom
to top. It had grown lopsided, too, there being a big bulge on one
side of the nest near the middle.

The smallness of the bottom at first helped me; there was less of the
stuff to be pulled out. I easily broke away the dead timbers and
pushed aside the tougher sticks. I intended to cut a channel clear to
the top and go up through the nest. Already my head and shoulders were
well into it.

Now the work became more difficult. The sticks were newer, some of
them being of seasoned oak and hickory, which the birds had taken from
cord-wood piles.

I had cut my channel up the side of the nest nearly halfway when I
came to a forked branch that I could neither break off nor push aside.
I soon found that it was not loose, but that it belonged to the oak
tree itself. It ran out through the nest horizontally, extending a
little more than a foot beyond the rough walls.

Backing down, I saw that this fork was the support of the bulge that
had given the nest its lopsided appearance. A few large timbers had
been rested across it, small loose pieces had gradually lodged upon
these, and thus in time brought about the big bulge.

I pushed off this loose stuff and the few heavy timbers and found that
the fork would bear my weight. It now projected a little way from the
walls of the nest. I got a firm hold on the forks out at their ends,
swung clear, and drew myself up between them. After a lively scramble,
I got carefully to my feet, and, clutching the sticks protruding from
the side, stood up, with my eyes almost on a level with the rim of the
great nest. This was better than cutting a channel, certainly--at
least for the ascent, and I was not then thinking of the descent.

I looked over the protruding sticks of the rim. I caught a glimpse of
large dull white eggs!

Eggs of shining gold could not have so fascinated me. There were
thousands of persons who could have gold eggs if they cared. But
eagles’ eggs! Money could not buy such a sight as this.

I was more than ever eager now to get into the nest. Working my
fingers among the sticks of the rim for a firm grip, I stuck my toes
into the rough wall and began to climb. At some considerable hazard
and at the cost of many rents in my clothing, I wriggled up over the
edge and into the hollow of the nest where the coveted eggs lay.

The eagles were wheeling and screaming overhead. The weird _cac, cac,
cac_ of the male came down from far above me; while the female,
circling closer, would swoop and shrill her menacing, maniacal
half-laugh almost in my ears.

Their wild cries thrilled me, and their mighty wings, wheeling so
close around me, seemed to catch me in their majestic sweep and almost
to carry me in swift, swinging circles through the empty air. An
ecstasy of excitement overcame me. I felt no body, no weight of
anything. I lost my head completely, and, seizing the eggs, rose to my
feet and stood upright in the nest.

The eagles swept nearer. I could feel the wind from their wings. I
could see the rolling of their gleaming eyes, and the glint of the sun
on their snow-white necks. And as they dipped and turned and careened
over me, I came perilously near trying to fly myself.

What a scene lay under me and rolled wide and free to the very edge of
the world! The level marsh, the blue, hazy bay, the far-off, unblurred
horizon beyond the bending hill of the sea! The wild, free wind from
the bay blew in upon my face, the old tree trembled and rocked beneath
me, the screaming eagles wove a mazy spell of double circles about me,
till I screamed back at them in wild delight.

The sound of my voice seemed to infuriate the birds. The male turned
suddenly in his round and swooped directly at me. The movement was
instantly understood by his mate, who, thus emboldened, cut under him
and hurled herself downward, passing with a vicious grab at my face. I
dodged, or she would have hit me.

For the moment I had forgotten where I stood; and, in dodging the
eagle, I almost stepped over the edge of the nest. I caught my balance
and dropped quickly to my knees, completely unnerved.

Fear like a panic took instant hold on me. Only one desire possessed
me--to get down. I crept to the edge and looked over. The sight made
me dizzy. Sixty feet of almost empty air! Far down, a few small limbs
intervened between me and the ground. But there was nothing by which
to descend.

I was dismayed; and my expression, my posture--something, betrayed my
confusion to the eagles. They immediately lost all dread of me. While
I was looking over, one of them struck me a stinging blow on the head,
knocking my cap off into the air.

That started me. I must climb down or be knocked over. If only I had
continued with my channel to the top! If only that forked branch by
which I ascended were within reach! But how could I back over the
flaring rim to my whole length and swing my body under against the
inward-slanting nest until my feet could touch the fork? But if I ever
got down, that was what I must do; for the eagles gave me no chance to
cut a channel now.

Laying the eggs back for the time in the hollow, I began tearing away
the rim of the nest in order to clear a place over which to back down.

I was momentarily in danger of being hurled off by the birds; for I
could not watch them and work, too. And they were growing bolder with
every dash. One of them, driving fearfully from behind, flattened me
out on the nest. Had the blow been delivered from the front, I should
have been knocked headlong to the ground.

I was afraid to delay longer. A good-sized breach was opened in the
rim of the nest by this time. And now, if the sticks would not pull
out, I might let myself over and reach the fork. Once my feet touched
that, I could manage the rest, I knew.

Digging my hands deep into the nest for a firm hold, I began
cautiously to back over the rough, stubby rim, reaching with my feet
toward the fork.

The eagles seemed to appreciate the opportunity my awkward position
offered them. I could not have arranged myself more conveniently to
their minds, I am sure. And they made the most of it. I can laugh now;
but the memory of it can still make me shiver, too.

I had wriggled over just so that I could bend my body at the waist and
bring my legs against the nest when a sharp stub caught in my clothes
and held me. I could get neither up nor down. My handhold was of the
most precarious kind, and I dared not let go for a moment to get off
the snag.

I tried to back out and push off from it, but it seemed to come out
with me. It must be broken; and pulling myself up, I dropped with all
the force I could put into my body. That loosened, but did not break
it. Suddenly, while I was resting between the efforts, the thing gave
way.

I was wholly unprepared. All my weight was instantly thrown upon my
hands. The jagged sticks cut into my wrists, my grip was pried off,
and I fell.

Once, twice, the stubs in the wall of the nest caught and partly
stopped me, then broke. I clutched frantically at them, but could not
hold. Then, almost before I realized that I was falling, I hung
suspended between two limbs--the forks of the white oak branch in the
side of the nest.

I had been directly above it when the stub broke, and had fallen
through it; and the two branches had caught me right under both of my
arms.

For a second I was too dazed to think. Then a swish of wings, a hard
blow on the neck, and a shooting pain made my position clear. I was
not down yet nor out of danger. The angry birds still had me in reach.

Hanging with one arm, I twisted round until the other arm was free,
then seized the branches and swung under, but not before the eagles
had given me another raking dab.

Here beneath the branches, close up to the bottom of the nest, I was
quite out of the reach of the birds; and through the channel I had cut
in my ascent, I climbed quickly down into the tree.

It was now a mere matter of sliding to the ground. But I was so
battered and faint that I nearly tumbled. I was a sorry-looking
boy--my clothing torn, my hands bleeding, my head and neck clawed in a
dozen places.

But what did I do with the eagles’ eggs? Why, I allowed the old eagles
to hatch them. What else could I do? or what better?




CHAPTER VI

THANKSGIVING AT GRANDFATHER’S FARM


Thanksgiving at Grandfather’s farm was more than a holiday. It was a
great date on the calendar, for it divided the year in halves as no
other single day of the three hundred and sixty-five did. It marked
the end of the outdoors, and the beginning of the indoors--the day
when everybody came home; when along with them into the house came all
the outdoors, too, as if the whole farm were brought in to toast its
toes before the great hearth fire!

For the hearth fire was big enough and cheery enough. And so was the
farmhouse--that is, if you added the big barn and the crib-house and
the wagon-house and the dog-house and the hen-house and the
“spring-house!”

Oh, there was plenty of room inside for everybody and for everything!
And there needed to be; for did not everybody come home to
Grandfather’s for Thanksgiving? And did not everything that anybody
could need for the winter, grow on Grandfather’s farm?

And it all had to be brought in by Thanksgiving Day--everything
brought in, everything housed and stored and battened down tight. The
preparations began along in late October, continuing with more speed
as the days shortened and darkened and hurried us into November. And
they continued with still more speed as the gray lowering clouds
thickened in the sky, and the wind began to whistle through the oak
grove. Then, with the first real cold snap, the first swift flurry of
snow, how the husking and the stacking and the chopping went on!

Thanksgiving must find us ready for winter indoors and out.

The hay-mows were full to the beams where the swallows built; the
north and west sides of the barnyard were flanked with a deep
wind-break of corn-fodder that ran on down the old worm-fence each
side of the lane in yellow zigzag walls; the big wooden pump under the
turn-o’-lane tree by the barn was bundled up and buttoned to the tip
of its dripping nose; the bees by the currant bushes were
doubled-hived, the strawberries covered with hay, the wood all split
and piled, the cellar windows packed, and the storm-doors put on.

The very cows had put on an extra coat, and turned their collars up
about their ears; the turkeys had changed their roost from the
ridge-pole of the corn-crib to the pearmain tree on the sunny side of
the wagon-house; the squirrels had finished their bulky nests in the
oaks; the muskrats of the lower pasture had completed their lodges;
the whole farm--house, barn, fields, and wood-lot--had shuffled into
its greatcoat and muffler and settled comfortably down for the winter.

The old farmhouse was an invitation to winter. It looked its joy at
the prospect of the coming cold. Low, weather-worn, mossy-shingled,
secluded in its wayward garden of box and bleeding-hearts, sheltered
by its tall pines, grape-vined, hop-vined, clung to by creeper and
honeysuckle, it stood where the roads divided, halfway between
everywhere, unpainted, unpretentious, as much a part of the landscape
as the muskrat-lodge, and, like the lodge, roomy, warm, and
hospitable.

Round at the back, under the wide, open shed, a door led into the
kitchen; another led into the living-room; another, into the
store-room; and two big, slanting double-doors, scoured and slippery
with four generations of sliders, covered the cavernous way into
the cellar. But they let the smell of apples up, as the garret door
let the smell of sage and thyme come down; while from the door of the
store-room, mingling with the odor of apples and herbs, filling the
whole house and all my early memories, came the smell of broom-corn,
came the sound of Grandfather’s loom.

[Illustration: “THE LANTERN FLICKERS, THE MILK FOAMS, THE STORIES
FLOW”]

For Grandfather in the winter made brooms--the best brooms, I think,
that ever were made. The tall broom-corn was grown on the farm in the
summer, ripened and cut and seeded, and then, as soon as winter set
in, was loomed and wired and sewed into brooms.

But the cured and seeded broom-corn was not the main thing, after all,
that was brought in for the winter. Behind the stove in the kitchen,
stood the sweet-potato box (a sweet potato, you know, must be kept dry
and warm). An ample, ten-barrel box it was, fresh-papered like the
walls, full of Jersey sweets that _were_ sweet--long, golden, syrupy
potatoes, such as grow only in the warm sandy soil of southern New
Jersey.

Against that big box in Grandmother’s kitchen stood the sea-chest,
fresh with the same kitchen paper and piled with wood. There was
another such chest in the living-room near the old fireplace, and
still another in Grandfather’s work-room behind the “template” stove.

But wood and warmth and sweet smells were not all. There was music
also, the music of life, of young life and of old life--grandparents,
grandchildren (about twenty-eight of the latter). There were seven of
us alone--a girl at each end of the seven and one in the middle.
Thanksgiving always found us all at Grandfather’s and brimming full of
thanks.

That, of course, was long, long ago. Things are different nowadays.
There are as many grandfathers, I suppose, as ever; but they don’t
make brooms in the winter and live on farms.

They live in flats. The old farm with its open acres has become a city
street; the generous old farmhouse has become a speaking-tube,
kitchenette, and bath--all the “modern conveniences”; the cows have
evaporated into convenient cans of condensed “milk”; the ten-barrel
box of potatoes has changed into a convenient ten-pound bag, the
wood-pile into a convenient five-cent bundle of blocks tied up with a
tarred string, the fireplace into a convenient gas log, the seven
children into one or none, or into a little bull-terrier pup.

But is it so? No, it is not so--not so of a million homes. For there
is many an old-fashioned farmhouse still in the country, and many a
new-fashioned city house where there are more human children than
little bull-terrier pups.

And it is not so in my home, which is neither a real farm nor yet a
city home. For here are some small boys who live very much as I did
when I was a boy. No, they are not farmer’s boys; for I am not a
farmer, but only a “commuter”--if you know what that is. I go into a
great city for my work; and when the day’s work is done, I turn
homeward here to Mullein Hill--far out in the country. And when the
dark November nights come, I hang the lantern high in the stable, as
my father used to do, while four shining faces gather round, as four
small boys seat themselves on upturned buckets behind the cow. The
lantern flickers, the milk foams, the stories flow--“Bucksy” stories
of the noble red-man; and stories of the heroes of old; and marvelous
stories of that greatest hero of all--their father, far away yonder
when he was a boy, when there were so many interesting things to do on
Grandfather’s farm just before Thanksgiving Day.




CHAPTER VII

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO DO THIS FALL


I

You ought to go out into the fields and woods as many as six times
this fall, even though you have to take a long street-car ride to get
out of the city. Let me give you just six bits of sound advice about
going afield:--

First, go often to the same place, so that you can travel over and
over the same ground and become very familiar with it. The first trip
you will not see much but woods and fields. But after that, each
succeeding walk will show you _particular_ things--this dead tree with
the flicker’s hole, that old rail-pile with its rabbit-hole--until, by
and by, you will know every turn and dip, every pile of stones, every
hole and nest; and you will find a thousand things that on the first
trip you didn’t dream were there.

Secondly, when you go into the woods, go _expecting_ to see something
in particular--always looking for some particular nest, bird, beast,
or plant. You may not find that particular thing, but your eyes will
be sharpened by your expectation and purpose, and you will be pretty
sure therefore to see something. At worst you will come back with a
disappointment, and that is better than coming back without a thing!

Thirdly, go off when you can alone. Don’t be selfish, unsociable,
offish--by no means that. But you must learn to use your own eyes and
ears, think your own thoughts, make your own discoveries, and follow
the hints and hopes that you alone can have. Go with the school class
for a picnic, but for woodcraft go alone.

Fourthly, learn first of all in the woods to be as silent as an Indian
and as patient as a granite rock. Practice standing still when the
mosquitoes sing, and fixing your mind on the hole under the stump
instead of the hole the mosquito is boring between your eyes.

Fifthly, go out in every variety of weather, and at night, as well as
during the day. There are three scenes to every day--morning, noon,
and early evening--when the very actors themselves are changed. To one
who has never been in the fields at daybreak, the world is so new, so
fresh and strange, as to seem like a different planet. And then the
evening--the hour of dusk and the deeper, darker night! Go once this
autumn into the woods at night.

And lastly, don’t go into the woods as if they were a kind of Noah’s
Ark; for you cannot enter the door and find all the animals standing
in a row. You will go a great many times before seeing them all. Don’t
be disappointed if they are not so plentiful there as they are in your
books. Nature books are like menageries--the animals are caught and
caged for you. The woods are better than books and just as full of
things, as soon as you learn to take a hint, to read the signs, to put
two and two together and get--four--four paws--black paws, with a long
black snout, a big ringed and bushy tail--a coon!


II

Whether you live in the heart of a great city or in the open country,
you ought to begin this fall to learn the names and habits of the
birds and beasts (snakes, lizards, turtles, toads!) that live wild in
your region. Even when all the summer birds have gone south for the
winter, there will remain in your woods and fields crows, jays,
juncos, tree sparrows, chickadees, kinglets, nuthatches, screech owls,
barred owls,--perhaps even snowy owls,--quails, partridges,
goldfinches, with now and then a flock of crossbills, snow buntings,
and other northern visitors, and even a flicker, robin, and bluebird
left over from the fall migrations. These are plenty to begin on; and
yet, as they are so few, compared with the numbers of the summer, the
beginner’s work is thus all the easier in the autumn.


III

You should go out one of these frosty mornings for chestnuts, if they
grow in your woods; or for “shagbarks,” if you live in New England;
for black walnuts, if you live in the Middle States; for pecan nuts,
if you live in the Gulf States; for butternuts, if you live in the
states of the Middle West; for--what kind of nuts can you not go for,
if you live in California where they make everything grow! It matters
little whether you go for paper-shelled English walnuts or for
plate-armored pignuts so long as you _go_. It is the going that is
worth while.


IV

You ought to go “cocooning” this fall--to sharpen your eyes. But do
not go often; for once you begin to look for cocoons, you are in
danger of seeing nothing else--except brown leaves. And how many brown
leaves, that look like cocoons, there are! They tease you to vexation.
But a day now and then “cocooning” will do you no harm; indeed, it
will cultivate your habit of concentration and close seeing as will no
other kind of hunting I know.

Bring home with you the big brown silky cocoons of cecropia--the
largest cocoon you will find, lashed all along its length to its twig,
and usually near the ground. Look on the black cherry, the barberry,
sassafras, and roadside and garden trees for the harder, whiter cocoon
of the promethea moth. This hangs by its tip, because the caterpillar
has begun his house by using the leaf, spinning it into the cocoon as
part of its walls, much as does the wretched “brown-tail.” The gray
cocoons, or rather nests, of this “brown-tail” moth you must bring
home to burn, for they are one of our greatest pests. You will find
them full of tiny caterpillars as you tear them open.

Bring home your collection and, with the help of such a book as “Moths
and Butterflies” by Mary C. Dickerson, identify them and hang them up
for their “coming out” in the spring.


V

If you live in the city, you ought to go up frequently to your roof
and watch for the birds that fly over. If in one of our many cities
near the water, you will have a chance that those in the country
seldom have, of seeing the seabirds--the white herring gulls (the
young gulls are brown, and look like a different species), as they
pass over whistling plaintively, and others of the wild seafowl, that
merely to hear and see in the smoky air of the city, is almost as
refreshing as an ocean voyage. Then there are the parks and public
gardens--never without their birds and, at the fall migrating time,
often sheltering the very rarest of visitors.


VI

In order to give point and purpose to one of these autumn outings, you
should take your basket, or botanizing can, and scour the woods and
fields for autumn berries. No bunch of flowers in June could be
lovelier than the bunch of autumn berries that you can gather from
thicket and wayside to carry home. And then, in order to enjoy the
trip all over again, read James Buckham’s exquisite story, “A Quest
for Fall Berries,” in his book, “Where Town and Country Meet.”


VII

Take your botany can on a trip toward the end of November and see how
many blossoming flowers you can bring home from the woods. Wild
flowers _after_ Thanksgiving in any northern state? Make the search,
on all the southern slopes and in all the sheltered corners and see
for yourselves. When you get back, you will want to read Mr. Bradford
Torrey’s account of the flowers that he found blossoming out of doors
in New England in the month of November. But who is Mr. Bradford
Torrey? and where can you find this account of his November walk? You
do not know? Well, then there is something more for you to do this
fall.


VIII

While you are finding out who Mr. Torrey is and what he has written,
you should also get acquainted with John Burroughs, Olive Thorne
Miller, Thoreau, Frank Bolles, William Hamilton Gibson, C. C. Abbott,
Edward Breck, Gilbert White, and--but these will do for _this_ fall.
Don’t fail to read dear old Gilbert White’s “Natural History of
Selborne”; though perhaps we grown-ups like it better than you may
this fall. If you don’t understand Gilbert White, then read this year
“The Life of a Scotch Naturalist” by Samuel Smiles, and Arabella
Buckley’s two books, “Life and Her Children,” and “Winners in Life’s
Race.”


IX

You ought to tie up a piece of suet for the birds; keep your cat in
the house, except during the middle of the day, and--but I shall tell
you no more. There is no end to the interesting things to do in your
study of the out of doors and in your tramps afield this autumn.




CHAPTER VIII

THE MUSKRATS ARE BUILDING


We have had a week of almost unbroken rain, and the water is standing
over the swampy meadow. It is a dreary stretch,--this wet, sedgy land
in the cold twilight,--drearier than any part of the woods or the
upland pastures. They are empty; but the meadow is flat and wet, it is
naked and all unsheltered. And a November night is falling.

The darkness deepens. A raw wind is rising. At nine o’clock the moon
swings round and full to the crest of the ridge, and pours softly
over. I button my heavy ulster close, and in my rubber boots go down
to the stream and follow it out to the middle of the meadow, where it
meets the main ditch. There is a sharp turn here toward the swamp;
and here at the bend, behind a clump of black alders, I sit quietly
down and wait.

I have come out to the bend to watch the muskrats building; for that
small mound up the ditch is not an old haycock, but a half-finished
muskrat house.

As I wait, the moon climbs higher over the woods. The water on the
meadow shivers in the light. The wind bites through my heavy coat and
drives me back, but not before I have seen one, two, three little
creatures scaling the walls of the house with loads of mud-and-reed
mortar. I am driven back by the cold, but not before I know that here
in the desolate meadow is being rounded off a lodge, thick-walled and
warm, and proof against the longest, bitterest of winters.

This is near the end of November. My fire-wood is in the cellar; I am
about ready to put on the double-windows and the storm-doors. The
muskrats are even now putting on theirs, for their house is all but
finished. Winter is at hand: but we are prepared, the muskrats and I.

Throughout the summer the muskrats had no house, only their tunnels
into the sides of the ditch, their roadways out into the grass, and
their beds under the tussocks or among the roots of the old stumps.
All those months the water was low in the ditch, and the beds among
the tussocks were safe and dry enough.

[Illustration: “TO-NIGHT THERE IS NO LOAFING ABOUT THE LODGE”]

Now the November rains have filled river and ditch, flooded the
tunnels, and crept up into the beds under the tussocks. Even a muskrat
will creep out of his bed when cold, wet water creeps in. What shall
he do for shelter? He knows. And long before the rains begin, he picks
out the place for a house. He does not want to leave his meadow,
therefore the only thing to do is to build,--move from under the
tussock out upon the top of the tussock; and here, in its deep, wiry
grass, make a new bed high and dry above the rising water; and close
this new bed in with walls that circle and dome, and defy the very
winter.

Such a house will require a great deal of work to build. Why should
not two or three muskrats combine--make the house big enough to hold
them all, save labor and warmth, too, and, withal, live sociably
together? So they left, each one his single bed, and, joining efforts,
started, about the middle of October, to build this winter house.

Slowly, night after night, the domed walls have been rising, although
for several nights at a time I could see no apparent progress with the
work. The builders were in no hurry. The cold was far off. But it is
coming, and to-night it feels near and keen. And to-night there is no
loafing about the lodge.

When this house is done, when the last hod of mud plaster has been
laid on,--then the rains may descend and the floods come, but it will
not fall. It is built upon a tussock; and a tussock--did you ever try
to pull up a tussock?

Winter may descend, and boys and foxes may come--and they will come,
but not before the walls are frozen. Then, let them come. The house
will stand. It is boy-proof, almost; it is entirely rain-, cold-, and
fox-proof. I have often seen where the fox has gone round and round
the house in the snow, and where, at places, he has attempted to dig
into the frozen mortar. But it was a foot thick, as hard as flint, and
utterly impossible for his pick and shovel.

I said the floods, as well as the fox, may come. So they may,
ordinarily; but along in March, when one comes as a freshet and rises
to the dome of the house, then it fills the bed-chamber to the ceiling
and drowns the dwellers out. I remember a freshet once in the end of
February that flooded Lupton’s Pond and drove the muskrats of the
whole pond village to their ridgepoles, to the bushes, and to whatever
wreckage the waters brought along.

    “The best-laid schemes o’ mice and men
    Gang aft agley”

--and of muskrats, too.

But not very often do the muskrats’ plans go thus agley. For muskrats
and wood mice and birds and bees, and even the very trees of the
forest, have a kind of natural foresight. They all look ahead, at the
approach of autumn, and begin to provide against the coming cold.
Yet, weather-wise as a muskrat may be, still he cannot know all that
may happen; he cannot be ready for everything. And so, if now and
then, he should prove foresight to be vain, he only shows that his
plans and our plans, his life and our lives, are very much alike.

Usually, however, the muskrat’s plans work out as he would have them.
His foresight proves to be equal to all that the winter can bring. On
the coldest winter days I shall look out over the bleak white waste to
where his house shows, a tiny mound in the snow, and think of him safe
and warm inside, as safe and warm as I am, in my house, here on the
hilltop.

Indeed, I think the muskrat will be the warmer; for my big house here
on Mullein Hill is sometimes cold. And the wind! If only I could drive
the winter wind away from the corners of the house! But the house down
in the meadow has no corners. It has walls, mud walls, so thick and
round that the shrieking wind sweeps past unheard by the dwellers
within; and all unheeded the cold creeps over and over the low thatch,
to crawl back and stiffen upon the meadow.

The doors of this meadow house swing wide open throughout the winter;
for they are in the bottom of the house, beneath the water, where only
the muskrat can enter. Just outside the doors, down under the water
and the roof of ice that covers all the flooded meadow, are fresh
calamus roots, and iris and arum--food in abundance, no matter how
long the winter lasts.

No, the winter has not yet come; but it is coming, for the muskrats
are building. Let it come. Let the cold crawl stiff and gray across
the meadow. Let the whirling snow curl like smoke about the pointed
top of the little tepee down by the meadow ditch. Let the north wind
do its worst. For what care the dwellers in that thick-walled lodge
beneath the snow? Down under the water their doors are open; their
roadways up the ditches as free as in the summer; and the stems of the
sedges just as juicy and pink and tender.

The muskrats are building. The buds are leaving. Winter is coming. I
must get out my own storm-windows and double-doors; for even now a
fire is blazing cheerily on my wide, warm hearth.




CHAPTER IX

THE NORTH WIND DOTH BLOW


    “The north wind doth blow,
    And we shall have snow,
    And what will poor Robin do then,
            Poor thing?”

And what will Muskrat do? and Chipmunk? and Whitefoot, the wood mouse?
and Chickadee? and the whole world of poor things out of doors?

Never fear. Robin knows as well as you that the north wind doth blow,
and is now far away on his journey to the South; Muskrat knows, too,
and is building his warm winter lodge; Chipmunk has already made his
bed deep down under the stone wall, where zero weather is unheard of;
Whitefoot, the wood mouse, has stored his hollow poplar stub full of
acorns, and, taking possession of Robin’s deserted nest near by, has
roofed it and lined it and turned it into a cosey, cold-proof house,
while Chickadee, dear thing--has done nothing at all. Not so much as
a bug or a single beetle’s egg has he stored up for the winter. But he
knows where there is a big piece of suet for him on a certain lilac
bush. And he knows where there is a snug little hole in a certain elm
tree limb. The north wind may blow, blow, blow! It cannot get through
Chickadee’s feathers, nor daunt for one moment his brave little heart.

The north wind sweeping the bare stubble fields and winding its
shivering horn through the leafless trees does sometimes pierce my
warm coat and strike a chill into my heart. Then how empty and cold
seems the outdoor world! How deadly the touch of the winter! How
fearful the prospect of the coming cold!

Does Muskrat think so? Does Whitefoot? Does Chickadee? Not at all, for
they are ready.

The preparations for hard weather may be seen going on all through the
autumn, beginning as far back as the flocking of the swallows late in
July. Up to that time no one had thought of a coming winter, it would
seem; but, one day, there upon the telegraph-wires were the
swallows--the first sign that the getting ready for winter has begun.

The great migratory movements of the birds are very mysterious; but
they were in the beginning, I think, and are still, for the most part,
mere shifts to escape the cold. Yet not so much to escape the cold
itself do the birds migrate, as to find a land of food. When the
northland freezes, when river and lake are sealed beneath the ice and
the soil is made hard as flint, then the food supplies for most of the
birds are utterly cut off, causing them to move southward ahead of the
cold, or starve.

There are, however, a few of the seed-eating birds, like the quail,
and some of the insect-eaters, like the chickadee, who are so well
provided for that they can stay and survive the winter. But the great
majority of the birds, because they have no storehouse nor barn, must
take wing and fly away from the lean and hungry cold.

And I am glad to see them go. The thrilling honk of the flying wild
geese out of the November sky tells me that the hollow forests and
closing bays of the vast desolate North are empty now, except for the
few creatures that find food and shelter in the snow.

Here in my own small woods and marshes there is much getting ready,
much comforting assurance that Nature is quite equal to herself, that
winter is not approaching unawares. There will be great lack, no
doubt, before there is plenty again; there will be suffering and
death. But what with the building, the strange deep sleeping, and the
harvesting, there will be also much comfortable, much joyous and
sociable, living.

Long before the muskrats began to build, even before the swallows
commenced to flock, my chipmunks started their winter stores. I don’t
know which began his work first, which kept harder at it, Chipmunk or
the provident ant. The ant has a great reputation for thrift, and
verses have been written about her. But Chipmunk is just as thrifty.
So is the busy bee.

It is the thought of approaching winter that keeps the bee busy far
beyond her summer needs. Much of her labor is entirely for the winter.
By the first of August she has filled the brood chamber of the hive
with honey--forty pounds of it, enough for the hatching bees and for
the whole colony until the willows tassel again. But who knows what
the winter may be? how cold and long drawn out into the coming May? So
the harvesting is pushed with vigor on, until the frosts kill the last
of the autumn asters--on, until fifty, a hundred, or even three
hundred pounds of honey are sealed in the combs, and the colony is
safe should the sun not shine again for a year and a day.

The last of the asters have long since gone; so have the witch-hazels.
All is quiet about the hives. The bees have formed into their warm
winter clusters upon the combs; and except “when come the calm, mild
days,” they will fly no more until March or April. I will half close
their entrances--and so help them to put on their storm-doors.

The whole out of doors around me is like a great beehive, stored and
sealed for the winter, its swarming life close-clustered, and safe and
warm against the coming cold.

I stand along the edge of the hillside here and look down the length
of its frozen slope. There is no sign of life. The brown leaves have
drifted into the mouths of the woodchuck holes, as if every burrow
were forsaken; sand and sticks have washed in, too, littering and
choking the doorways. A stranger would find it hard to believe that
all of my forty-six woodchucks are gently snoring at the bottoms of
these old uninteresting holes. Yet here they are, and quite out of
danger, sleeping the sleep of the furry, the fat, and the forgetful.

The woodchuck’s manner of providing for winter is very curious. Winter
spreads far and fast, and Woodchuck, in order to keep ahead, out of
danger, would need wings. But wings weren’t given him. Must he perish
then? Winter spreads far, but it does not go deep--down only about
four feet; and Woodchuck, if he cannot escape overland, can, perhaps,
escape _under_land. So down he goes _through_ the winter, down into a
mild and even temperature, _five feet away_--only five feet, but as
far away from the snow and the cold as Bobolink among the reeds of the
distant Orinoco.

Indeed, Woodchuck’s is a farther journey and even more wonderful than
Bobolink’s; for these five feet carry him to the very gates of death.
That he will return with Bobolink, that he will come up alive with the
spring out of this dark way, is passing strange.

Muskrat built him a house, and under the spreading ice turned all the
meadow into a well-stocked cellar. Beaver built him a dam, cut and
anchored under water a plenty of green sticks near his lodge, so that
he too would be under cover when the ice formed, with an abundance of
tender bark at hand. Chipmunk spent half of his summer laying up food
near his underground nest. But Woodchuck simply digged him a hole,--a
grave,--then ate until no particle more of fat could be got within his
baggy hide, then crawled into his bed to sleep until the dawn of
spring!

This is his shift! This is the length to which he goes, because he has
no wings, and because he cannot cut, cure, and store away, in the
depths of the stony hillside, clover hay enough to last him through
the winter. The beaver cans his fresh food in cold water; the chipmunk
selects long-keeping things and buries them; but the woodchuck simply
fattens himself, then buries himself, and sleeps--and lives!

    “The north wind doth blow,
    And we shall have snow,”

but what good reason is there for our being daunted at the prospect?
Robin and all the others are well prepared. Even the wingless frog,
who is also without fur or feathers or fat, even he has no fear at the
sound of the cold winds. Nature provides for him, too, in her own
motherly way. All he has to do is to dig into the mud at the bottom of
the ditch and sleep--and sometimes freeze!

No matter. If the cold works down and freezes him into the mud, he
never knows. He will thaw out as good as new; he will sing again for
joy and love as soon as his heart warms up enough to beat. I have seen
frogs frozen into the middle of solid lumps of ice. Drop the lump on
the floor, and the frog would break out like a fragment of the ice
itself. And this has happened more than once to the same frog without
causing him the least ache or pain. He would gradually limber up, and
croak, and look as wise as ever.

The north wind _may_ blow, for it is by no means a cheerless prospect,
this wood-and-meadow world of mine in the gray November light. The
grass-blades are wilting, the old leaves are falling; but no square
foot of greensward will the winter kill, nor a single tree perhaps in
all my wood-lot. There will be little less of life next April because
of this winter. The winter birds will suffer most, and a few may die.

Last February, I came upon two partridges in the snow, dead of hunger
and cold. It was after an extremely long “severe spell”; but this was
not the only cause. These two birds since fall had been feeding
regularly in the dried fodder corn that stood shocked over the field.
One day all the corn was carted away. The birds found their supply of
food suddenly cut off, and, unused to foraging the fence-rows and
tangles for wild seeds, they seem to have given up the struggle at
once, although within easy reach of plenty.

Hardly a minute’s flight away was a great thicket of dwarf sumac
covered with berries. There were bayberries, rosehips, greenbrier,
bittersweet, black alder, and checkerberries that they might have
found. These berries would have been hard fare, doubtless, after an
unstinted supply of sweet corn; but still they were plentiful and
would have been sufficient had the birds made use of them.

The smaller birds that stay through the winter, like the tree sparrow
and the junco, feed upon the weeds and grasses that ripen unmolested
along the roadsides and in the waste places. A mixed flock of these
small birds lived several days last winter upon the seeds of the
ragweed in my mowing-field.

The weeds came up in the early fall after the field was sowed to
clover and timothy. They threatened to choke out the grass. I looked
at them and thought with dismay of how they would cover the field by
another fall. After a time the snow came, a foot and a half of it,
till only the tops of the seedy ragweeds showed above the level white.
Then the juncos, goldfinches, and tree sparrows came; and there was a
five-day shucking of ragweed seed on the crusty snow--five days of
life and plenty for the birds.

Then I looked again, and thought that weeds and winters, which were
made when the world was made--that even ragweeds and winters have a
part in the beautiful divine scheme of things.

    “The north wind doth blow
    And we shall have snow”--

but the wild geese are going over; the wild mice have harvested their
acorns; the bees have clustered; the woodchucks have gone to sleep;
the muskrats have nearly finished their lodge; the sap in the big
hickory tree by the side of the house has crept down out of reach of
the fingers of the frost. And what has become of Robin, poor thing?




CHAPTER X

AN OUTDOOR LESSON


I have had many a person ask me, “What is the best way to learn about
the out of doors?” and I always answer, “Don’t try to learn _about_
it, but first go out of the house and get into the out of doors. Then
open both eyes, use both of your ears, and stand in one place stock
still as long as you can; and you will soon know the out of doors
itself, which is better than knowing about it.”

“But,” says my learner, “if I go out of the house, I don’t get into
the out of doors at all, but into a city street!”

Look there--in the middle of the street! What is it? An English
sparrow? Yes, an English sparrow--six English sparrows. Are they not a
part of the out of doors? And look up there, over your head--a strip
of sky? Yes--is not a strip of blue sky a part of the out of doors?

Now let me tell you how I learned an outdoor lesson one night along a
crowded city street.

It was a cold, wet night; and the thick, foggy twilight, settling down
into the narrow streets, was full of smoke and smell and chill. A raw
wind blew in from the sea and sent a shiver past every corner. The
street lights blinked, the street mud glistened, the street noises
clashed and rattled, and the street crowds poured up and down and bore
me along with them.

I was homesick--homesick for the country. I longed to hear the sound
of the wind in the pine trees; I longed to hear the single far-away
bark of the dog on the neighboring farm, or the bang of a barndoor, or
the clack of a guinea going to roost. It was half-past five, and
thousands of clerks were pouring from the closing stores; but I was
lonely, homesick for the quiet, the wideness, the trees and sky of the
country.

Feeling thus, and seeing only the strange faces all about me, and the
steep narrow walls of the street high above me, I drifted along, until
suddenly I caught the sound of bird voices shrill and sharp through
the din.

I stopped, but was instantly jostled out of the street, up against a
grim iron fence, to find myself peering through the pickets into an
ancient cemetery in the very heart of Boston.

As I looked, there loomed up in the fog and rain overhead the outlines
of three or four gaunt trees, whose limbs were as thick with sparrows
as they had ever been with leaves. A sparrow roost! Birds, ten
thousand birds, gone to roost in the business section of a great city,
with ten thousand human beings passing under them as they slept!

I got in behind a big waste-barrel by the iron fence and let the crowd
surge past. It was such a sight as I had never seen. I had seen
thousands of chimney swallows go to roost in the deserted chimneys of
a great country house; I had many a time gone down at night to the
great crow-roost in the pines at Cubby Hollow; but I had never
stumbled upon a bird-roost on a crowded city street before!

The hurrying throng behind me thinned and straggled while I waited,
watching by the iron fence. The wind freshened, the mist thickened
into fine rain that came slanting down through the half-lighted trees;
the sleeping sparrows twittered and shifted uneasily on the limbs.

The streets were being deserted. It was going to be a wild night on
the water, and a wild night in the swaying, creaking tops of these old
elm trees. I shivered at the thought of the sparrows sleeping out in
such a night as this, and turned away toward my own snug roost hardly
two blocks away.

The night grew wilder. The wind rattled down our street past a hundred
loose shutters; the rain slapped against the windows, and then stopped
as a heavy gust curled over the line of roofs opposite. I thought of
the sparrows. Had they been driven from the tossing limbs? Could they
cling fast in such a wind, and could they sleep?

Going to the window I looked down into the street. Only the electric
light at the corner showed through the blur of the storm. The street
was empty.

I slipped into my coat and went out; not even a policeman was in
sight. Only the whirling sheets of rain, only the wild sounds of the
wind were with me. The lights flared, but only to fill the streets
with fantastic shadows and to open up a yawning cavern in every deep,
dark doorway.

Keeping in the lee of the shuttered buildings, I made my way to the
sparrow roost. I shall never forget the sight! Not a sparrow had left
his perch, but every bird had now turned, facing the wind--breasting
the wind, I should say; for every head was under a wing, as near as I
could make out, and every breast was toward the storm. Here, on the
limbs, as close as beads on a string, they clung and rocked in the
arms of the wind, every one with his feathers tight to his body, his
tail lying out flat on the storm.

Now there is the outdoor lesson I learned, and that is how I learned
it. And what was the lesson? Why, this: that you are not shut away
from Nature even in the heart of a great city; that the out of doors
lies very close about you, as you hurry down a crowded city street.




CHAPTER XI

LEAFING


No, you never went “leafing”--not unless you are simon-pure
country-bred. You do not know what the word means. You cannot find it
in the unabridged dictionary--not in the sense in which I am using it.
But there are many good words we country people use that are not,
perhaps, in the dictionary.

And what do I mean by “leafing”? Get down that bundle of meal sacks,
hitch into the one-horse hay-rig, throw in the rakes, and come. We are
going into the woods for pig-bedding, for leaves to keep the pigs dry
and warm this winter!

You never went after leaves for the pigs? Perhaps you never even had a
pig. But a pig is worth having, if only to see the comfort he takes in
the big bed of dry leaves you give him in the sunny corner of his pen.
And if leafing had no other reward, the thought of the snoozing,
snoring pig buried to his winking snout in the bed, would give joy and
zest enough to the labor.

But leafing, like every other humble labor, has its own rewards, not
the least of them being the leaves themselves and the getting of them!

We jolt across the bumpy field, strike into the back wood-road, and
turn off upon an old stumpy track over which cord wood was carted
years ago. Here in the hollow at the foot of a high wooded hill, the
winds have whirled the oak and maple leaves into drifts almost
knee-deep.

We are off the main road, far into the heart of the woods. We straddle
stumps; bend down saplings; stop while the horse takes a bite of sweet
birch; tack and tip and tumble and back through the tight squeezes
between the trees; and finally, after a prodigious amount of whoa-ing
and oh-ing and squealing and screeching, we land right side up and so
headed that we can start the load out toward the open road.

You can yell all you want to when you go leafing; yell at every stump
you hit; yell every time a limb knocks off your hat or catches you
under the chin; yell when the horse stops suddenly to browse on the
twigs and stands you meekly on your head in the bottom of the rig. You
can screech and howl and yell like the wild Indian that you are, you
can dive and wrestle in the piles of leaves and cut all the crazy
capers you know; for this is a Saturday, these are the wild woods and
the noisy leaves, and who is there looking on besides the mocking jays
and the crows?

The leaves pile up. The wind blows keen among the tall, naked trees;
the dull cloud hangs low above the ridge; and through the cold gray of
the maple swamp below you, peers the face of Winter.

You start up the ridge with your rake and draw down another pile,
thinking, as you work, of the pig. The thought is pleasing. The warm
glow all over your body strikes into your heart. You rake away as if
it were your own bed you were gathering--as really it is. He that
rakes for his pig, rakes also for himself. A merciful man is merciful
to his beast; and he that gathers leaves for his pig spreads a blanket
of down over his own winter bed.

Is it to warm my feet on winter nights that I pull on my boots at ten
o’clock and go my round at the barn? Yet it warms my feet through and
through to look into the stalls and see the cow chewing her cud, and
the horse cleaning up his supper hay, standing to his fetlocks in his
golden bed of new rye-straw; and then, going to the pig’s pen, to hear
him snoring louder than the north wind, somewhere in the depths of his
leaf-bed, far out of sight. It warms my heart, too!

So the leaves pile up. How good a thing it is to have a pig to work
for! What zest and purpose it lends to one’s raking and piling and
storing! If I could get nothing else to spend myself on, I should
surely get me a pig. Then, when I went to walk in the woods, I should
be obliged, occasionally, to carry a rake and a bag with me--much
better things to take into the woods than empty hands, and sure to
scratch into light a number of objects that would never come within
the range of opera-glass or gun or walking stick. To see things
through a twenty-four-toothed rake is to see them very close, as
through a microscope magnifying twenty-four diameters.

And so, as the leaves pile up, we keep a sharp lookout for what the
rake uncovers--here, under a rotten stump, a hatful of acorns,
probably gathered by the white-footed wood mouse. For the stump gives
at the touch of the rake, and a light kick topples it down the hill,
spilling out a big nest of feathers and three dainty little creatures
that scurry into the leaf-piles like streaks of daylight. They are the
white-footed wood mice, long-tailed, big-eared, and as clean and
high-bred looking as greyhounds.

Combing down the steep hillside with our rakes, we dislodge a large
stone, exposing a black patch of fibrous roots and leaf mould, in
which something moves and disappears. Scooping up a double handful of
the mould, we capture a little red-backed salamander.

This is not the “red” salamander that Mr. Burroughs tells us is “the
author of that fine plaintive piping to be heard more or less
frequently, according to the weather, in our summer and autumn woods.”
His “red” salamander is really a “dull orange, variegated with minute
specks or spots,” a species I have never found here in my New England
woods.

Nor have I ever suspected my red-backed salamander of piping; though
he may do it, as may the angleworms, for aught I am able to hear, so
filled with whir of iron wheels are my dull ears. But listen!
Something piping! Above the rustle of the leaves we also hear a “fine
plaintive” sound--no, a shrill and ringing little racket, rather,
about the bigness of a penny whistle.

Dropping the rake, we cautiously follow up the call--it seems to speak
out of every tree trunk--and find the piper clinging to a twig, no
salamander at all, but a tiny tree-frog, Pickering’s hyla, his little
bagpipe blown almost to bursting as he tries to rally the scattered
summer by his tiny, mighty “skirl.” Take him nose and toes, he is
surely as much as an inch long, not very large to pipe against the
north wind turned loose in the leafless woods.

We go back to our raking. Above us, among the stones of the slope,
hang bunches of Christmas fern; around the foot of the trees we
uncover trailing clusters of gray-green partridge vine, glowing with
crimson berries; we rake up the prince’s pine, pipsissewa, creeping
jennie, and wintergreen red with ripe berries,--a whole bouquet of
evergreens,--exquisite, fairy-like forms, that later shall gladden our
Christmas table.

[Illustration: “BUT COME, BOYS, GET AFTER THOSE BAGS!”]

But how they gladden and cheer the October woods! Summer dead? Hope
all gone? Life vanished away? See here, under this big pine, a whole
garden of arbutus, green and budded, almost ready to bloom! The snows
shall come before their sweet eyes open; but open they will at the
very first touch of spring. We will gather a few, and let them wake up
in saucers of clean water in our sunny south windows.

Leaves for the pig, and arbutus for us! We make a clean sweep down the
hillside, “jumping” a rabbit from its form, or bed, under a
brush-pile; discovering where a partridge roosts in a low-spreading
hemlock; coming upon a snail cemetery, in a hollow hickory stump;
turning up a yellow-jacket’s nest, built two-thirds underground;
tracing the tunnel of a bobtailed mouse in its purposeless windings in
the leaf mould; digging into a woodchuck’s--

“But come, boys, get after those bags! It is leaves in the hay-rig
that we want, not woodchucks at the bottom of woodchuck holes.” Two
small boys catch up a bag and hold it open, while the third boy stuffs
in the crackling leaves. Then I come along with my big feet and pack
the leaves in tight, and onto the rig goes the bulging thing!

Exciting? If you can’t believe it exciting, hop up on the load and let
us jog you home. Swish! bang! thump! tip! turn! joggle! jolt!--Hold on
to your ribs! Look out for the stump! Isn’t it fun to go leafing?
Isn’t it fun to do anything that your heart does with you--even though
you do it for a pig?

Just watch the pig as we shake out the bags of leaves. See him caper,
spin on his toes, shake himself, and curl his tail. That curl is his
laugh. We double up and weep when we laugh hard; but the pig can’t
weep, and he can’t double himself up, so he doubles up his tail. There
is where his laugh comes off, curling and kinking in little spasms of
pure pig joy!

_Boosh! Boosh!_ he snorts, and darts around the pen like a whirlwind,
scattering the leaves in forty ways, to stop short--the shortest
stop!--and fall to rooting for acorns.

He was once a long-tusked boar of the forest,--this snow-white,
sawed-off, pug-faced little porker of mine--ages and ages ago. But he
still remembers the smell of the forest leaves; he still knows the
taste of the acorn-mast; he is still wild pig in his soul.

And we were once long-haired, strong-limbed savages who roamed the
forest hunting him--ages and ages ago. And we, too, like him, remember
the smell of the fallen leaves, and the taste of the forest
fruits--and of pig, _roast_ pig! And if the pig in his heart is still
a wild boar, no less are we, at times, wild savages in our hearts.

Anyhow, for one day in the fall I want to go “leafing.” I want to give
my pig a taste of acorns, and a big pile of leaves to dive so deep
into that he cannot see his pen. I can feel the joy of it myself. No,
I do not live in a pen; but then, I might, if once in a while I did
not go leafing, did not escape now and then from my little daily round
into the wide, wild woods--my ancestral home.




CHAPTER XII

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO HEAR THIS FALL


I

You ought to hear the scream of the hen-hawks circling high in the
air. In August and September and late into October, if you listen in
the open country, you will hear their piercing whistle,--shrill,
exultant _scream_ comes nearer to describing it,--as they sail and
sail a mile away in the sky.


II

You ought to go out upon some mowing hill or field of stubble and hear
the crickets, then into the apple orchard and hear the katydids, then
into the high grass and bushes along the fence and hear the whole
stringed chorus of green grasshoppers, katydids, and crickets. You
have heard them all your life; but the trouble is that, because you
have heard them so constantly in the autumn, and because one player
after another has come gradually into the orchestra, you have taken
them as part of the natural course of things and have never really
heard them individually, to know what parts they play. Now anybody can
hear a lion roar, or a mule bray, or a loon laugh his wild crazy laugh
over a silent mountain lake, and know what sound it is; but who can
hear a cricket out of doors, or a grasshopper, and know which is
which?


III

Did you ever hear a loon laugh? You ought to. I would go a hundred
miles to hear that weird, meaningless, melancholy, maniacal laughter
of the loon, or great northern diver, as the dusk comes down over some
lonely lake in the wilderness of the far North. From Maine westward to
northern Illinois you may listen for him in early autumn; then, when
the migration begins, anywhere south to the Gulf of Mexico. You may
never hear the call of the bull moose in the northern woods, nor the
howl of a coyote on the western prairies, nor the wild _cac_, _cac_,
_cac_ of the soaring eagles, nor the husky _yap_, _yap_, _yap_ of the
fox. But, if you do, “make a note of it,” as Captain Cuttle would say;
for the tongues that utter this wild language are fast ceasing to
speak to us.


IV

One strangely sweet, strangely wild voice that you still may hear in
our old apple orchards, is the whimpering, whinnying voice of the
little screech owl. “When night comes,” says the bird book, “one may
hear the screech owl’s tremulous, wailing whistle. It is a weird,
melancholy call, welcomed only by those who love Nature’s voice,
whatever be the medium through which she speaks.” Now listen this
autumn for the screech owl; listen until the weird, melancholy call
_is_ welcomed by you, until the shiver that creeps up your back turns
off through your hair, as you hear the low plaintive voice speaking to
you out of the hollow darkness, out of the softness and the silence of
night.


V

You ought to hear the brown leaves rustling under your feet.

    “Heaped in the hollows of the grove, the autumn leaves lie dead;
    They rustle to the eddying gust, and to the rabbit’s tread.”

And they should rustle to your tread as well. Scuff along in them
where they lie in deep windrows by the side of the road; and hear them
also, as the wind gathers them into a whirling flurry and sends them
rattling over the fields.


VI

You ought to hear the cry of the blue jay and the caw of the crow in
the autumn woods.

    “The robin and the wren are flown, but from the shrub the jay,
    And from the wood-top calls the crow through all the gloomy day.”

Everybody knows those lines of Bryant, because everybody has heard
that loud scream of the jay in the lonesome woods, and the _caw_,
_caw_, _caw_ of the sentinel crow from the top of some tall tree. The
robins may not be all gone, for I heard and saw a flock of them this
year in January; but they are silent now, and so many of the birds
have gone, and the woods have become so empty, that the cries of the
jay and the crow seem, on a gloomy day, to be the only sounds in all
the hollow woods. There could hardly be an autumn for me if I did not
hear these two voices speaking--the one with a kind of warning in its
shrill, half-plaintive cry; the other with a message slow and solemn,
like the color of its sable coat.


VII

You ought to hear, you ought to _catch_, I should say, a good round
scolding from the red squirrel this fall. A red squirrel is always
ready to scold you (and doubtless you are always in need of his
scolding), but he is never so breathless and emphatic as in the fall.
“Whose nuts are these in the woods?” he asks, as you come up with your
stick and bag. “Who found this tree first? Come, get out of here! Get
right back to the city and eat peanuts! Come, do you hear? Get out of
this!”

No, don’t be afraid; he won’t “eat you alive”--though I think he might
if he were big enough. He won’t blow up, either, and burst! He is the
kind of fire-cracker that you call a “sizzler”--all sputter and no
explosion. But isn’t he a tempest! Isn’t he a whirlwind! Isn’t he a
red-coated cyclone! Let him blow! The little scamp, he steals birds’
eggs in the summer, they say; but there are none now for him to steal,
and the woods are very empty. We need a dash of him on these autumn
days, as we need a dash of spice in our food.

In the far western mountains he has a cousin called the Douglas
squirrel; and Mr. John Muir calls him “the brightest of all the
squirrels I have ever seen, a hot spark of life, making every tree
tingle with his prickly toes, a condensed nugget of fresh mountain
vigor and valor, as free from disease as a sunbeam. How he scolds, and
what faces he makes, all eyes, teeth, and whiskers!”

You must hear him this fall and take your scolding, whether you
deserve it or not.


VIII

You ought to hear in the cedars, pines, or spruces the small thin
_cheep_, _cheep_, _cheep_ of the chickadees or the kinglets. You must
take a quiet day on the very edge of winter and, in some sunny dip or
glade, hear them as they feed and flit about you. They speak in a
language different from that of the crow and the jay. This tiny talk
of the kinglet is all friendly and cheerful and personal and
confidential, as if you were one of the party and liked spiders’ eggs
and sunshine and didn’t care a snap for the coming winter! In all the
vast gray out of doors what bits of winged bravery, what crumbs of
feathered courage, they seem! One is hardly ready for the winter
until he has heard them in the cedars and has been assured that they
will stay, no matter how it snows and blows.


IX

You ought to hear, some quiet day or moonlit night in October or
November, the baying of the hounds as they course the swamps and
meadows on the heels of the fox. Strange advice, you say? No, not
strange. It is a wild, fierce cry that your fathers heard, and their
fathers, and theirs--away on back to the cave days, when life was
hardly anything but the hunt, and the dogs were the only tame animal,
and the most useful possession, man had. Their deep bass voices have
echoed through all the wild forests of our past, and stir within us
nowadays wild memories that are good for us again to feel. Stand
still, as the baying pack comes bringing the quarry through the forest
toward you. The blood will leap in your veins, as the ringing cries
lift and fall in the chorus that echoes back from every hollow and
hill around; and you will on with the panting pack--will on in the
fierce, wild exultation of the chase; for instinctively we are
hunters, just as all our ancestors were.

No, don’t be afraid. You won’t catch the fox.


X

You ought to hear by day--or better, by night--the call of the
migrating birds as they pass over, through the sky, on their way to
the South. East or west, on the Atlantic or on the Pacific shore, or
in the vast valley of the Mississippi, you may hear at night, so high
in air that you cannot see the birds, these voices of the passing
migrants. _Chink_, _chink_, _chink!_ will drop the calls of the
bobolinks--fine, metallic, starry notes; _honk_, _honk_, _honk!_ the
clarion cry of the wild geese will ring along the aërial way, as they
shout to one another and to you, listening far below them on the
steadfast earth.

Far away, yonder in the starry vault, far beyond the reach of human
eyes, a multitude of feathered folk, myriads of them, are streaming
over; armies of them winging down the long highway of the sky from the
frozen North, down to the rice fields of the Carolinas, down to the
deep tangled jungles of the Amazon, down beyond the cold, cruel reach
of winter.

Listen as they hail you from the sky.




CHAPTER XIII

HONK, HONK, HONK!


_Honk_, _honk_, _honk!_ Out of the silence of the November night, down
through the depths of the darkened sky, rang the thrilling call of the
passing geese.

_Honk_, _honk_, _honk!_ I was out of bed in an instant; but before I
had touched the floor, there was a patter of feet in the boys’ room,
the creak of windows going up, and--silence.

_Honk_, _honk_, _honk!_ A mighty flock was coming. The stars shone
clear in the far blue; the trees stood dark on the rim of the North;
and somewhere between the trees and the stars, somewhere along a
pathway running north and south, close up against the distant sky, the
wild geese were winging.

_Honk_, _honk_, _honk!_ They were overhead. Clear as bugles, round and
mellow as falling flute notes, ordered as the tramp of soldiers, fell
the _honk_, _honk_, _honk_, as the flock in single line, or double
like the letter V, swept over and was gone.

We had not seen them. Out of a sound sleep they had summoned us, out
of beds with four wooden legs and no wings; and we had heard the wild
sky-call, had heard and followed through our open windows, through the
dark of the night, up into the blue vault under the light of the
stars.

Round and dim swung the earth below us, hushed and asleep in the soft
arms of the night. Hill and valley lay close together, farm-land and
wood-land, all wrapped in the coverlet of the dark. City and town,
like watch fires along the edge of a sleeping camp, burned bright on
the rivers and brighter still on the ragged line of shore and sea, for
we were far away near the stars. The mountains rose up, but they could
not reach us; the white lakes beckoned, but they could not call us
down. For the stars were bright, the sky-coast was clear, the wind in
our wings was the keen, wild wind of the North, and the call that we
heard--ah! who knows the call? Yet, who does not know it--that distant
haunting call to fly, fly, fly?

I found myself in my bed the next morning. I found the small boys in
their beds. I found the big round sun in the sky that morning and not
a star in sight! There was nothing unusual to be seen up there,
nothing mysterious at all. But there was something unusual, something
mysterious to be seen in the four small faces at the breakfast-table
that morning--eyes all full of stars and deep with the far, dark
depths of the midnight sky into which they had gazed--into which those
four small boys had flown!

We had often heard the geese go over before, but never such a flock as
this, never such wild waking clangor, so clear, so far away, so
measured, swift, and--gone!

I love the sound of the ocean surf, the roar of a winter gale in the
leafless woods, the sough of the moss-hung cypress in the dark
southern swamps. But no other voice of Nature is so strangely, deeply
thrilling to me as the _honk_, _honk_, _honk_ of the passing geese.

For what other voice, heard nowadays, of beast or bird is so wild and
free and far-resounding? Heard in the solemn silence of the night, the
notes fall as from the stars, a faint and far-off salutation, like the
call of sentinels down the picket line--“All’s well! All’s well!”
Heard in the open day, when you can see the winged wedge splitting
through the dull gray sky, the notes seem to cleave the dun clouds,
driven down by the powerful wing-beats where the travelers are passing
high and far beyond the reach of our guns.

The sight of the geese going over in the day, and the sound of their
trumpetings, turn the whole world of cloud and sky into a wilderness,
as wild and primeval a wilderness as that distant forest of the far
Northwest where the howl of wolves is still heard by the trappers.
Even that wilderness, however, is passing; and perhaps no one of us
will ever hear the howl of wolves in the hollow snow-filled forests,
as many of our parents have heard. But the _honk_ of the wild geese
going over we should all hear, and our children should hear; for this
flock of wild creatures we have in our hands to preserve.

The wild geese breed in the low, wet marshes of the half-frozen North,
where, for a thousand years to come they will not interfere with the
needs of man. They pass over our northern and middle states and spend
the winter in the rivers, marshes, and lagoons of the South, where,
for another thousand years to come, they can do little, if any, harm
to man, but rather good.

But North and South, and all along their journey back and forth, they
are shot for sport and food. For the wild geese cannot make this
thousand-mile flight without coming down to rest and eat; and wherever
that descent is made, there is pretty sure to be a man with a gun on
the watch.

Here, close to my home, are four ponds; and around the sides of each
of them are “goose blinds”--screens made of cedar and pine boughs
fixed into the shore, behind which the gunners lie in wait. More than
that, out upon the surface of the pond are geese swimming, but tied so
that they cannot escape--geese that have been raised in captivity and
placed there to lure the flying wild flocks down. Others, known as
“flyers,” are kept within the blind to be let loose when a big flock
is seen approaching--to fly out and mingle with them and decoy them
to the pond. These “flyers” are usually young birds and, when thrown
out upon their wings, naturally come back, bringing the wild flock
with them, to their fellows fastened in the pond.

A weary flock comes winging over, hungry, and looking for a place to
rest. Instantly the captive geese out on the pond see them and set up
a loud honking. The flying flock hear them and begin to descend. Then
they see one (tossed from the blind) coming on to meet them, and they
circle lower to the pond, only to fall before a fury of shots that
pour from behind the blind.

Those of the flock that are not killed rise frightened and bewildered
to fly to the opposite shore, where other guns riddle them, the whole
flock sometimes perishing within the ring of fire!

Such shooting is a crime because it is unfair, giving the creature no
chance to exercise his native wit and caution. The fun of hunting, as
of any sport, is in playing the game--the danger, the exercise, the
pitting of limb against limb, wit against wit, patience against
patience; not in a heap of carcasses, the dead and bloody weight of
mere meat!

If the hunter would only play fair with the wild goose, shoot him (the
wild Canada goose) only along the North Carolina coast, where he
passes the winter, then there would be no danger of the noble bird’s
becoming extinct. And the hunter then would know what real sport is,
and what a long-headed, far-sighted goose the wild goose really
is--for there are few birds with his cunning and alertness.

Along the Carolina shore the geese congregate in vast numbers; and
when the day is calm, they ride out into the ocean after feeding, so
far off shore that no hunter could approach them. At night they come
in for shelter across the bars, sailing into the safety of the inlets
and bays for a place to sleep. If the wind rises, and a storm blows
up, then they must remain in the pools and water-holes, where the
hunter has a chance to take them. Only here, where the odds, never
even, are not all against the birds, should the wild geese be hunted.

With the coming of March there is a new note in the clamor of the
flocks, a new restlessness in their movements; and, before the month
is gone, many mated pairs of the birds have flocked together and are
off on their far northern journey to the icy lakes of Newfoundland and
the wild, bleak marshes of Labrador.

_Honk_, _honk_, _honk!_ Shall I hear them going over,--going
northward,--as I have heard them going southward this fall? Winter
comes down in their wake. There is the clang of the cold in their
trumpeting, the closing of iron gates, the bolting of iron doors for
the long boreal night. They pass and leave the forests empty, the
meadows brown and sodden, the rivers silent, the bays and lakes close
sealed. Spring will come up with them on their return; and their
_honk_, _honk_, _honk_ will waken the frogs from their oozy slumbers
and stir every winter sleeper to the very circle of the Pole.

_Honk_, _honk_, _honk!_ Oh, may I be awake to hear you, ye
strong-winged travelers on the sky, when ye go over northward, calling
the sleeping earth to waken, calling all the South to follow you
through the broken ice-gates of the North!

_Honk_, _honk_, _honk!_ The wild geese are passing--southward!



    AMY LOVEMAN

    The Minstrel Made His Tune of Hours and Seasons


    Dewfall, moonrise, high sweet clover,
      Chimney swifts at their twilight play;
    Quail call, owl hoot, moth a-hover,
      Midnight pale at the step of day.

    Star wane, cobweb, brown-plumed bracken;
      Morning laughs, with the frost in flower;
    Duck flight, hound cry; wild grapes blacken.
      Day leaps up at the amber hour.

    Sun dark, snowcloud, eaves ice cumbered,
      Gray sand piled on a carmine West;
    Faint wing, flake dance; winds unnumbered
      Swing the cradles where leaf-buds rest.

    Wide light, bough flush, gold-fringed meadows,
      Berries red in the rippled grass;
    Stream song, nest note, dream deep shadows
      Drawn back slowly for noon to pass.




CONTENTS

CHAP.                                       PAGE

I.    Faces of Janus                           1

II.   A Woodland Valentine                     7

III.  Ways of the March Hare                  13

IV.   The April Moment                        19

V.    The Crest of Spring                     25

VI.   Hay Harvest Time                        31

VII.  The Month of Yellow Flowers             37

VIII. The Mood of August                      43

IX.   Summer Pauses                           48

X.    When the Oaks Wear Damson               54

XI.   November Traits                         60

XII.  The Christmas Woods                     66

XIII. Landscapes Seen in Dreams               72

XIV.  Hiding Places                           78

XV.   The Play of Leaves                      84

XVI.  The Brown Frontier                      90

XVII. Far Altars                              96




ILLUSTRATIONS


The Milky Way Revealed to Lonely Herdsmen       _Frontispiece_

The Comforting Symbolism of Firelight
  at Play upon Clean Hearths                   _Facing p._   4

The Powers of Light                                 "       10

On the Topmost Boughs the Fairies Sleep             "       26

The Rejoicing Shout of Coming Summer                "       28

The Swooping Bat Darts Noiselessly                  "       34

Now the Mountaineer’s Girl Hurries Indoors
  at Nightfall from the Hallooing Specter
  of the Wild Huntsman in the Clouds                "       54

Baldwins Mellow by Twelfth-night                    "       58

December Acknowledges an Unpitying
  Fate—Anything May Happen                          "       68




MINSTREL WEATHER




CHAPTER I.

FACES OF JANUS


[Illustration]

Though January has days that dress in saffron for their going, and noons
of yellow light, foretelling crocuses, the month is yet not altogether
friendly. The year is moving now toward its most unpitying season.
Nights that came on kindly may turn the meadows to iron, tear off the
last faithful leaves from oaks, drive thick clouds across the moon, to
end in a violent dawn. January holds gentle weather in one hand and
blizzards in the other, and what a blizzard can be only dwellers on
prairies or among the mountains know. Snow gone mad, its legions
rushing across the land with daggers drawn, furious, bearing no malice,
but certainly no compassion, and overwhelming all creatures abroad:
bewildered flocks, birds half frozen on their twigs, cattle unwisely
left on shelterless ranges, and people who lose the way long before
animals give up. Snow hardly seems made of fairy stars and flowers when
its full terror sweeps Northern valleys or the interminable solitudes of
the plains. The gale so armed for attack owns something of the wicked
intention which Conrad says that sailors often perceive in a storm at
sea. The rider pursued by a blizzard may feel, like the tossed mariner,
that “these elemental forces are coming at him with a purpose, with an
unbridled cruelty which means to sweep the whole precious world away by
the simple and appalling act of taking his life.” We do not smile at the
pathetic fallacy when we are alone with cold. The overtaken mountaineer
understands—it means to get him. These things happen in places where
weather is not obedient to wraps and furnaces, but where it must be
fought hand to hand and where the pretty snow tangles its victim’s feet
and slowly puts him to sleep in a delicious dream of warmth. Tropical
lightning has not the calm omnipotence of cold when it walks lonely
ways.

January knows days on which the haze of spring and the dim tenderness of
the sunshine tempt the rabbit to try another nap _al fresco_, indiscreet
though he knows it to be. Even the woodchuck must turn over and sniff in
his sleep as the thaw creeps downward; and the muskrat takes his safe
way by water once more, while the steel trap waits on the bank, to be
sprung humanely by a falling cone. The lithe red fox glides across the
upper pastures and weaves among the hardhack unchallenged, for this is
not hunting weather. A fleeting respite comes to the tormented mink.
Toward the last of the month, innocent of the February and March to
come, pussy willows, ingenuously deceived by the brief mildness, come
out inquisitively and stand in expectation beside the brook, convinced
that this ice is only left over—what can have delayed the garnet-veined
skunk’s cabbage, always on hand the first of all? So many willows are
needed by the florists that perhaps they do not pay heavily for their
premature debut. But they are all gray now. In March they show a cloudy
crimson and yellow not alone of the final blossom, but of their fur.
There are plenty of scarlet rose hips in uplifted clusters, for the
birds somehow neglect them while they pursue other delicacies of the
same color and contour. Nature has probably told the winter chippies
that rose hips are no good—spring decorations must not be pilfered by
the snow sprites. Puffballs have broken off from old logs, and in
walking through low woods you may step on one here and there, awakening
the fancy that the world is burning, under its sad cloak of sepia
leaves, and sending up small puffs of smoke to warn those who have
trodden it in love and comprehension.

When the winsome skies turn stony, and melancholy winter rain ends in
chill mist, January has days to breathe whose air is like breathing
under water, down in spring-cold lake, where the incredible,
pleasureless fishes move through their gray element, finding pallid
amusement perhaps in nudging frogs and turtles, well tucked up under a
blanket of mud. They are cold-blooded, of course, and not supposed to
mind the oppressiveness of the liquid atmosphere. But after ourselves
moving in such an environment it is marvelous to ponder that any
creatures prefer it, and good to foreknow that our own world will swim
out into a splendid frosty weather.

[Illustration]

For its days of quiet sparkle we would remember January, not for lashing
tempests, April delusions, or brooding fog. Unbroken snow with blazing
spangles shifting as the sun moves, and above it twittering sparrows
clinging by one claw to stalks of yarrow or mustard while they shake the
seeds loose with the other; old stone walls suddenly demonstrating that
they have color, when the foreground is white, and showing bluish,
brown, earthen red, and gray alight with mica; streams covered with
pearly ice that floods into brilliant orange at sunset; spruce and
hemlock imperiously outlined on even far-off hills; skating-time without
and kindled logs within—that is the midwinter we remember when the
sterner messengers sped from the Pole have gone again. Were it not for
the blizzard we might fail to know so well the comforting symbolism of
firelight at play upon clean hearths. Many go all their lives, aware
only of the coziness or inconvenience of winter, never facing the
daggered gale alone, nor struck by the terror of a hostile Nature or the
awe of cold that may not soon relent. What one perceives in the volcano,
tidal wave, or blizzard, another is spared; the lesson, perhaps, being
postponed until he is ready for it. Spring comes sweetly to the
milliners’ this month. To the wilderness with rapid and menacing step
comes full winter.





CHAPTER II.

A WOODLAND VALENTINE


[Illustration]

Forces astir in the deepest roots grow restless beneath the lock of
frost. Bulbs try the door. February’s stillness is charged with a faint
anxiety, as if the powers of light, pressing up from the earth’s center
and streaming down from the stronger sun, had troubled the buried seeds,
who strive to answer their liberator, so that the guarding mother must
whisper over and over, “Not yet, not yet!” Better to stay behind the
frozen gate than to come too early up into realms where the wolves of
cold are still aprowl. Wisely the snow places a white hand over
eager—life unseen, but perceived in February’s woods as a swimmer feels
the changing moods of water in a lake fed by springs. Only the thick
stars, closer and more companionable than in months of foliage, burn
alert and serene. In February the Milky Way is revealed divinely lucent
to lonely peoples—herdsmen, mountaineers, fishermen, trappers—who are
abroad in the starlight hours of this grave and silent time of year. It
is in the long, frozen nights that the sky has most red flowers.

February knows the beat of twilight wings. Drifting north again come
birds who only pretended to forsake us—adventurers, not so fond of
safety but that they dare risk finding how snow bunting and pine finch
have plundered the cones of the evergreens, while chickadees, sparrows,
and crows are supervising from established stations all the more
domestic supplies available; a sparrow often making it possible to annoy
even a duck out of her share of cracked corn. Ranged along a
brown-draped oak branch in the waxing light, crows show a lordly
glistening of feathers. (Sun on a sweeping wing in flight has the
quality of sun on a ripple.) Where hemlocks gather, deep in somber
woods, the great horned owl has thus soon, perhaps working amid snows at
her task, built a nest wherein March will find sturdy balls of fluff.
The thunderous love song of her mate sounds through the timber. By the
time the wren has nested these winter babies will be solemn with the
wisdom of their famous race.

There is no season like the end of February for cleaning out brooks.
Hastening yellow waters toss a dreary wreckage of torn or ashen leaves,
twigs, acorn cups, stranded rafts of bark, and buttonballs from the
sycamore, never to come to seed. Standing on one bank or both, according
to the sundering flood’s ambition, the knight with staff and bold
forefinger sets the water princess free. She goes then curtsying and
dimpling over the shining gravel, sliding from beneath the ice that
roofs her on the uplands down to the softer valleys, where her quickened
step will be heard by the frogs in their mansions of mud, and the fish,
recluses in rayless pools, will rise to the light she brings.

Down from the frozen mountains, in summer, birds and winds must bear
the seed of alpine flowers—lilies that lean against unmelting snows,
poppies, bright-colored herbs, and the palely gleaming, fringed beauties
that change names with countries. How just and reasonable it would seem
to be that flowers which edge the ice in July should consent to bloom in
lowlands no colder in February! The pageant of blue, magenta, and
scarlet on the austere upper slopes of the Rockies, where nights are
bitter to the summer wanderer—why should it not flourish to leeward of a
valley barn in months when icicles hang from the eaves in this tamer
setting? But no. Mountain tempests are endurable to the silken-petaled.
The treacherous lowland winter, with its coaxing suns followed by
roaring desolation, is for blooms bred in a different tradition.

[Illustration]

The light is clear but hesitant, a delicate wine, by no means the mighty
vintage of April. February has no intoxication; the vague eagerness that
gives the air a pulse where fields lie voiceless comes from the secret
stirring of imprisoned life. Spring and sunrise are forever miracles,
but the early hour of the wonder hardly hints the exuberance of its
fulfillment. Even the forest dwellers move gravely, thankful for any
promise of kindness from the lord of day as he hangs above a sea-gray
landscape, but knowing well that their long duress is not yet to end.
Deer pathetically haunt the outskirts of farms, gazing upon cattle
feeding in winter pasture from the stack, and often, after dark,
clearing the fences and robbing the same disheveled storehouse. Not a
chipmunk winks from the top rail. The woodchuck, after his single
expeditionary effort on Candlemas, which he is obliged to make for
mankind’s enlightenment, has retired without being seen, in sunshine or
shadow, and has not the slightest intention of disturbing himself just
yet. Though snowdrops may feel uneasy, he knows too much about the Ides
of March! Quietest of all Northern woods creatures, the otter slides
from one ice-hung waterfall to the next. The solitary scamperer left is
the cottontail, appealing because he is the most pursued and politest of
the furry; faithfully trying to give no offense, except when starvation
points to winter cabbage, he is none the less fey. So is the mink,
though he moves like a phantom.

Mosses, whereon March in coming treads first, show one hue brighter in
the swamps. Pussy willows have made a gray dawn in viny caverns where
the day’s own dawn looks in but faintly, and the flushing of the red
willow betrays reveries of a not impossible cowslip upon the bank
beneath. The blue jay has mentioned it in the course of his voluble
recollections. He is unwilling to prophesy arbutus, but he will just
hint that when the leaves in the wood lot show through snow as early as
this ... Once he found a hepatica bud the last day of February ...
Speaking with his old friend, the muskrat, last week ... And when you
can see red pebbles in the creek at five o’clock in the afternoon ...
But it is no use to expect yellow orchids on the west knoll this spring,
for some people found them there last year, and after that you might as
well ... Of course cowslips beside red willows are remarkably pretty,
just as blue jays in a cedar with blue berries.... He is interminable,
but then he has seen a great deal of life. And February needs her blue
jays’ unwearied and conquering faith.




CHAPTER III.

WAYS OF THE MARCH HARE


[Illustration]

Follow him to the woods and you know his fascination, but never give the
March hare a reference for sobriety. His reputation cannot be
rehabilitated, yet his intimates love him in spite of it. He is such an
accomplished tease! He wakens, playful and ingratiating, with the sun;
he skips cajolingly among the crocuses; and before an hour passes he is
rushing about the fields in a fury, scattering the worn-out, brown
grasses, scaring the first robins, and bouncing over the garden fence to
break the necks of any tulips deceived by his morning mood. Impossible
animal, he is an eccentric born, glorying in his queerness; and none the
less, there are some who think he knows the zest of life better than
April’s infatuated starling or the woodchuck drowsing in May clover. He
loves to kick the chilly brooks into foam and fluster them until they
run over their unthawed banks and tear downhill and through the swamp to
alarm the rivers, so that they, too, come out on land and the whole
world looks as though it had gone back to the watery beginning. He
chases north the snowy owl, ornament of our winter woods, and
fraternizes with the sinful sparrow. Shrike and grosbeak leave, saying
that really it is growing quite warm, and, glancing behind them, they
behold the March hare turning somersaults in snowdrifts. He freezes the
mud that the shore lark was enjoying. No one depends upon him. Yet, to
see swift and enchanting changes of sky, lake, and woodland, go forth
with the March hare and find with him, better than quiet, the earth
astir.

Trees lose the archaic outline as leaf buds swell. Reddened maples and
black ash twigs, yellow flowers on the willow, begin the coloring of a
landscape that will not fade to gray and dun again until December
comes. The lilacs are growing impatient, for already the sophisticated
city lilac bush is wearing costly bloom, careless that a debut made so
early early ends. The crocuses, spring’s opening ballet, dressed in
pastel tints, take their places on the lawn, standing delicately erect,
waiting for bird music. Unknown to March’s gales, the still swamp pools
are fringed with shooting green, full of hints of cowslips; and
arbutus—few know on what hillsides—is lifting the warm leaf blanket,
trusting that vandal admirers are far away. The March violet is sung
more than seen, visiting Northern slopes and woods hollows only by
caprice, but all the legends lingering over it, and the magic beauty it
gives to maidens who gather it at dawn, make the violet still, for
lyrical needs, the flower of March. Cuddled close to sun-warmed stones,
cloaked by quaint leaves lined with sapphire and maroon, sometimes now
the hepatica has come; and bloodroot nested under bowlders, and in fence
corners where the sun is faithful, lifts praying, exquisite petals that
open swiftly from the slim bud and are scattered by a touch. The dark
blue grape hyacinth stands calm in winds and bitter weather; waist-deep
in snow, it proudly holds its ground. Sap is visibly climbing to the
highest limbs. It seems even to be mounting in the ancient wild-grape
vines that swing from the roof of the wood, bearing no buds and looking
dead a hundred years, though there is life beneath the somber and shaggy
bark. Sap called back through the ducts of the winter-warped thorn,
solitary in the clearing where the cruel nor’easter raced, will cover
the sad branches, once the soft days are here, with shining blossoms.
The year turns when the sap runs. Little boys who have their sugar
maples picked out and under guard, being more forehanded about some
things than others, are whittling intensely.

Loneliest of all sounds, the “peepers” take up their forsaken song in
flooded meadows, silenced in ghostly fashion by a footstep that comes
near. Heartbroken chant, it is more elegy than spring song, hard to hear
at dusk, yet it is certain that those peepers are delighted that March
is here—as content with their fate, while they utter the poignant notes,
as the emphatic old frogs by the deeper water. Wander-birds, almost
unresting, are posting north again through the twilights. Bold wild
geese are awing for Canada. Quiet returning hawks cross the valleys, and
the pine grosbeak hastens past. Spring dowers the devoted but undesired
starling with a pleasant voice which will change by summer into an
exasperating croak, and so many of our birds suffer this unfair loss
that a feathered critic would have good reason to declare that poets
ought to be slain in youth. The terrifying little screech owl wails from
shadowy woods, and from the venerable timber sounds the horned owl’s
obscure threat. The chickadee repeats with natural pride his charming
repertoire of two notes—“Spring soon!” Nothing is refused this fortunate
one, born with a sweet disposition and a winsome song, while sparrows,
angrily conducting their courtships, remain on earth solely by dint of
original cleverness.

Meadow mole and turtle, woodchuck and chipmunk, are recovering from a
three months’ nap, waiting patiently in the sunshine for the season to
begin. Snakes come out with the rest of the yawning company. Fish
glitter again in the hurrying streams, building their nests and houses
like the others—often obeying a spring impulse to rush from lake to
outlet or from quiet water to streamhead, ending their journey suddenly
and forever amid wire meshes. The brooks are icy on the mildest days
with melted snow from the mountains, where hemlocks green as arctic
waters, shutting out the sun, keep a white floor long after the valley
wears grasses.

Whoever has a touch of madness to lend him sympathy with the March hare
likes the bewildering days through which he scampers to vanish at the
edge of April. Rebellious, whitening ponds and wind-bent trees; defiant
buds and all the kindled life of marsh, hill, and woodland, set free
once more from cold, but not from dread—hear at the coming of the mighty
month their promise of release. But only to comrades who will run with
him through muddy lanes and tangled brush does he show his treasures:
forest creatures sped like the couriers, petals lifted like the banners,
of life resurgent.




CHAPTER IV.

THE APRIL MOMENT


[Illustration]

Survivor of so much that her fear is gone, triumphant April answers the
dark powers as if they could never speak again. Spring after spring she
stands among flying petals and smiles at the last bitter winds. She will
not grant that the green earth was ever vanquished, fiercely alive as
now it is. Scornfully the new silver bloom on the clover sheds the
relentless rain. Undaunted, reaffirming, she summons all beauty of
color, music, and fragrance beneath her banners, with a vitality so
profound and impregnable that more than other months she is careless of
man’s sympathy. April, preoccupied, hastens from crumbling furrow to
meadows that shout the coming of the green. Intense and too eager for
tenderness, she craves no admiration. Quite without excuse, the song
sparrow sits on a wine-colored willow twig and sings frantically. Anyone
has as good a reason for ecstasy as he—merely that the dumb struggle is
ended and the long suns have returned in splendor.

Contemplative between their dark exotic leaves, dogtooth violets fill
the light-flecked hollows. Spring beauties open warily at daybreak to
show stamens of deep rose. Where imperious amber waters go foaming
through the swamp, spendthrift gold of cowslips is swept down to the
rivers, and budded branches that leaned too close above the ripple are
shut out from the sun world for a while. Mauve and canary slippers are
waiting for the fairy queen where our wild orchid of the North dangles
them on remote knolls, but they are usually found and borne off by some
one for whom they are in no way suitable. Translucent young leaves
glitter beside the stream’s path. Dandelion rosettes appear with serene
impartiality on guarded lawn and mountain pasture, where steal also the
polite but persistent “pussy tiptoes,” asserting the right to display
white leaves in spring, if so a plant should choose. The snail has
deserted his shell and gone forth to take the air at the risk of being
plowed under. None of April’s children remember or foresee. The vivid
present is enough.

The apple boughs are inlaid with coral. The peach is a cloud of dawn,
and petals of the forward cherry and pear are floating reluctantly down.
Wild-fruit trees, mysteriously planted, are misty white above the
woodland thicket—scented crabapple and twisted branch of plum. This is
the month of blossoms, as May is the month of shimmering leaves and June
of the fruitless flower.

The blackbird swings at the foamy crest of the haw, disturbed by a
thousand delights, and notes too few to tell them. The crow hoarsely
mentions his rapture as he flaps above the moving harrow, and the new
lambs look on in a tremulous, wounded manner while the famished
woodchuck makes away with the cloverheads they were just about to
endeavor to bite off. Uncertainly the wondering calves proceed about the
pasture, not yet at the stage in life where they will skip with touching
curiosity after every object that stirs. At dusk and glistening morning
there are bird songs such as only April hears—the outburst of welcome to
the light, and the sleepy fluting of the robins when the sky turns to a
soft prism in the west. Fainter, more melancholy even than in March, is
the twilight lament of the peepers. They are alien to the aria of April.

New England’s forget-me-nots are fleet turquoise in the grasses; New
England’s arbutus flowers lie flushed pearls among the ancient leaves;
but everywhere are the violets of three colors—yellow for the pool’s
edge, white among the bog lands, and blue as pervasive as the sunlight
on hill slope, road bank, and forest floor. And there are violets of an
unfathomable blue, sprinkled with white like wisps of cloud against far
mountains. Some grow close to earth, taught by past dismay; others,
long-stemmed and sweet, will live and suffer and mend their ways next
year. The windflower meets the breeze, a slim princess, incredibly
fragile, yet broken less easily than the strong tulip, vaguely touched
with rose or white as bloodroot. Tulips dwell not only on the ground;
they have parted great, opaque petals at the tops of trees, startling to
see in the leafless wood. Watercress glitters in the cold streams where
trout, winter-weary, are on patrol for those flies now magnificent in
their jeweled dress of spring. The first oak leaves are delicately
crimson at the end of the bough. Disregard, amid this pageantry of _la
vita nuova_, the outrageous satire of brown skeleton “fingers” that
point stiffly up through the shining blades of grass. If they seem to be
a chilling cynicism of Nature, who has not found an April dandelion
telling a braver story through winter snow?

Cedar and balsam twig are golden-tipped. Nothing is unchanged. Immortal
wings that beat through February gales to reach this land of their
tradition are fluttering now about the building of the nest. The smooth
chimney swift flashes above the barn and is gone. With drooping wings he
hangs poised against the daffodil sky in his evening play. Peaceably
among the lilacs the contented bluebird sits, though through bulb, root,
and chrysalis has passed the irresistible current that will let no
sharer of the earth be still—not stone nor seed nor man. Into this
forced march April steps with gladness, hailing the order, predestined
to change. Joining her unresisting, take for your own the moment of
escape which the singer in the blossoms freely claims. Life’s fullness
is measured by these salvaged April moments when suddenly joy becomes a
simple and close-dwelling thing, when for a merciful, lighted instant
the impersonal and endless beauty of the world seems enough.




CHAPTER V.

THE CREST OF SPRING


[Illustration]

Flickering soft leaves spangled with sunlit rain give May a robe
diamond-sown, as lighted spray may weave for the sea. Skimming wings
catch sunrise colors. The grass blade is borne down by the exquisite
burden of one translucent pearl. This is the luminous youth of the year,
and its splendor lies deeper than the glitter of dew-and-rain jewels,
for it is visible in the forbidding strongholds of hemlock and pine,
where a sunless world still shines with May. In one month only Nature
lights her unquenchable lamp. Look down upon the orchard from a hill:
the young leaves are lanterns of sheer green silk, not the richly
draped and shadowy foliage of full summer. Lustrous is the new red of
poison ivy and woodbine, of swamp maple and slowly budding oak. Where in
July the hard light will play as upon metal, lake and stream are faintly
shimmering gray. Rain cannot dim the radiant freshness, for trees thus
queenly clothed in blossoms never bend submissive to the pelting skies.
Let that fragment of creation which bears umbrellas prostrate its spirit
before the “blossom storm,” seven times renewed—the answer of the
flowered thorn is always exultant. Amid departing petals which have
played their role and gone, voyaging on raindrops, “the May month flaps
its glad green leaves like wings.”

[Illustration]

Wild shrubs upon the mountain slopes are in thronging bloom. Delicately
pink and nectar-laden, the prodigal azalea calls to the honeybees,
always bitterly industrious and severely intent upon duty amid a general
festival. It is a great satisfaction sometimes to find a bee overtaken
by intoxication and night within a water lily or hollyhock, his
obtrusive good example smothered sweetly. For once he was not at the
hive in time to murmur of his heavy day of posting from garden to
meadow! Dowered with a white simplicity beyond the pensive moonflower’s,
the bracts of the dogwood seem afloat among gray branches—misty, seen
far off; clear cut to nearer view; eloquent of spring; without fragrance
as without pretense. The mountain laurel holds above gleaming leaves its
marvelously carven cups, faint pink or white, amber-flecked. All winter
it has kept the green, when ground pine lay snowbound and spruces sagged
with sleet. The victor may find his wreath at any time of year, for our
laurel has it ready. High toward the stars in regal manner the tulip
trees lift their broader chalices. It is probably in these, on the
topmost boughs, that the fairies sleep where mortals never climb up to
look in. Bilberry, shadbush, and brier stand in May marriage robes of
white, quiet and beautiful, scented at dusk when the sun warmth begins
to leave the blossoms. The red haw wears a little fine golden lace.
Farther south the rhododendron is gorgeously displayed—magenta verging
on damson.

The air is precious with the plentiful sweetness of lilac and magnolia,
of the memorial lavender lilac that summons homesickness to city parks
on evenings of May. The carmine glow of the flowering quince is here,
brought from its tropic wilderness. The long flushed curve of the almond
spray bends meekly toward the sod. Opulent is every bush, though its
blossoming may be secret. In colors beloved of kings, the velvet,
minutely perfect iris commands the garden path. Beside it in despair the
old-time bleeding-heart laments, and the bells of the valley lily hang,
chiming fragrance. Impatient climb the red-stalked peonies. The currant
is in green but pleadingly sweet blossom.

High, thick grass and clover in May fields are only the setting for the
dazzling buttercup, who shakes the dews from her closed petals before
daybreak and folds them prayerfully at about the time the birds turn
home. First white daisies, supremely fresh and lucid as all May’s
glories are, show a few misleading foam flecks of the flood with which
they intend to overwhelm the crop of hay. Feathery yellow of the wild
mustard nods beside the road as if it were not anchored to immovable
roots. Already the sapphire star grass is hiding in the meadows. Gone
are the blossoms of the wild strawberry. The canary-colored five-finger
vine would lace itself over the world, given but half an opportunity. So
would the bramble of the fair white blossom and maroon-bordered leaf.

[Illustration]

Still are restless wings now upon the guarded nest. Some flash along the
turned furrow, circle near the eaves, dip sharply to the ripple. Willow
fronds are startled by the glinting blue of the kingfisher, scarlet of
the tanager. Once more the chimneys of old houses know the flickering
swallow. The oriole has come to the orchard again, the wren to the grape
arbor. Tiny rabbits, beholding for the first time what white clover can
be, twitch their noses in content. Tired children, returning from rifled
woodlands with too many posies, drop them in the path, like flower girls
intrusted to strew the way of summer. It is more comfortable not to
grant flowers the capacity for pain, but we demand, nevertheless, that
they enjoy giving pleasure to us, so doubtless they are glad to be of
service even in this thwarted fashion. Yet May’s store is manifold; her
waiting buds can replace the scattered ones.

The face of Nature wears in the shining month a beauty something less
than mature, but more than the mischief and troubling intensity of
April. The wonder of the hour—the adieu of spring and the rejoicing
shout of coming summer—dwells there, a subdued, impassioned note. The
crest of the year’s youth merges like all crests into the wave beyond,
renewed forever like the waves. To man alone has been given the
difficult task of keeping on without a spring. That singular adversity
is ours in common with inanimate things: May rose and lilac come back
each year to the forsaken house, but to the house May brings no change.
About it a world of snow becomes a world of blossoms, as for us, and the
sun creates. But the house needs aid of human hands, man of earth’s
quickened beauty in luminous May.




CHAPTER VI.

HAY HARVEST TIME


[Illustration]

By the manifold hayfields only, were her wild-rose token banished, a
traveler returning from another land to our June, not knowing the time
of year, might name the month. In days just before hay harvest the
glistening dance of meadow grasses is most splendid, their soft
obedience to the winds is readiest. Deep rose plumes of sorrel, the
wine-colored red-top, smoky heads of timothy, are forever aripple, and,
though overstrewn with flowers, they reveal when bent beneath the step
of the southwest breeze a thousand lowlier flowers near the roots. Here
the “wild morning-glory,” the tiny fields convolvulus, hides perilously
in the mowing; white clover and yellow five-finger are spread; the
grassflower holds up its single jewel. The swaying stems are trellises
to many a wandering vine; there are fairy arbors where a tired elf might
sleep guarded from the sun as well as in a jungle. Here, too, the wild
strawberries are ripening, not breathing yet the bouquet of July; but
the white wild strawberry, lover of the shades, has already reached its
pallid ripeness. Far beneath the moving surface of the grass ocean lies
a dim and mysterious world, lined with track and countertrack of the
beetle, caverns of the mole, and the unremaining castle of the ant. Here
the sleek woodchuck passes imperceptibly, the ingenuous cottontail finds
his brief paradise; small moths fold their wings and sleep.

Above are light, motion, and the clearest, strongest colors of the year,
untarnished by hot suns, unmixed with the later browns. The dark-eyed
yellow daisy, sun worshiper, rises amid the fresh brilliance of that
other starry-petaled weed which only sheep will eat. Celestial-blue
chicory wanders in from the roadside and will not thereafter be denied.
Yarrow with its balsam fragrance and fernlike leaf, the first delicate
wild carrot asway, goldfinch yellow of the moth mullein, cloverheads of
the Tyrian dye, sunny spray of mustard, lie scattered on the crests of
hayfield waves.

In the lowgrounds, on bowldered hillsides, far in the woods, wherever
the mowing machine will grant it a summer, spreads the exquisite wild
rose, dowered like other flowers of June—the water lily, the wild-grape
blossom, the syringa—with a perfume as wistfully sweet as the form and
hue of its chalice. That fragrance, unearthly, never fails to bring a
catch of the breath, a start of memory, when in whatever place it is
encountered again. You seldom find a wild rose withered; they cast their
petals down without a struggle, and a throng of ardent pink buds are
waiting on the bush. So it is with the water lily—when the hour strikes
she draws her green cloak once more about her and retires from the sun.

The meadow rue has shaken out veil upon floating veil in the woodlands.
The shaded knolls are sprinkled lavender with wild geraniums, willing
to be background for the May windflower or the buttercups of June. Among
the rocks, twinkling red and yellow in the sandy, sunny places, the
columbine swings her cups of honey impartially for glittering humming
bird and blunt-nosed, serious bee. Columbines are delicious—could anyone
regard them sensibly, and not as something animate and almost winged.
The claret-colored milkweed (a natural paradox) holds flowing nectar,
too, but there is a paler milkweed, so softly tinted of pink, yellow,
and white as to be no color at all, whereto the little yellow
butterflies drift to sip at dusk. The blossomed elder rests like white
fog in the hollows, scenting all the country ways and promising
elder-blossom wine, the dryad’s draught. In moist and dark
retreats—under hemlocks and at the doors of caves—the ghost lamp is
lighted. In the brightest spot it can find the small blackberry lily
paints against the ledge its speckled orange star.

It is the time of perfect ferns, uncurled quickly from the brown balls,
and making our Northern woods tropical with the sumptuous brake and
temperate imitations of the tree fern. They fill the glades and scale
the cliffs. They mingle enchantingly along creeks and at the edge of the
pond with the regal hosts of the blue flag—the lavishly sown iris of the
meadows. They are matted close in the swamps, plumy on the hilltops.
From mosses on old logs spring ferns almost as faery as the fronds of
the moss itself.

[Illustration]

Into the whispering twilight of June come many creatures to play strange
games and sing such songs as even the many-stringed orchestra of the
sunlit hayfield does not know. The swooping bat darts from thick-hung
woodbine and noiselessly crosses the garden, brushes the hollyhocks, and
speeds toward the moon. Moths, white and pallid green, wander like
spirits among the peonies. Sometimes the humming bird shakes the trumpet
vine in the dark, queerly restless, though he is Apollo’s acolyte. The
fireflies are lambently awing. The cricket’s pleading, interrupted song
is half silenced by the steady, hot throb of the locust’s. The tree
toad’s eerie note comes faint and sweet, but from what cranny of the
bark he only knows. The mother bird, guardian even in sleep, speaks
drowsily to her children. From the brooding timber the owl sends his
call of despair across acres of friendly fields placid in the dew. June
nights are wakeful. Then enchantment deepens, for there comes no pause
in darkness for the joy of earth.




CHAPTER VII.

THE MONTH OF YELLOW FLOWERS


[Illustration]

From valley after valley dies away the drowsy croon of the mowing
machine, leaving to the grasshoppers the fragrant drying hay. Now comes
July in many hues of yellow, spreading her gold beside dark, hidden
beaver backwaters and along the sun-warmed stubble, whose various,
singing life is loudest through these shimmering afternoons. Tawny
beauties are abroad in woodways and sea marshes. Where the hot air
shines and quivers over shallow pools yellow water lilies float sleepily
beneath curved canopies, while the lucent pallors of the white water
lily one by one are dimmed. Moving serenely toward its climax, the
season drinks the sun and takes the color of its slanting light.

The flame lily lifts a burnt-orange cup straight toward the sky. The
yellow meadow lily bends down over the damp mold it seeks. But both love
deep woods, and, blazing suddenly above a fern bed, the rich flowers
startle, like a butterfly of the Andes adrift in Canadian forests. They
are princesses of the tropics, incongruously banished to Northern
swamps, but scornfully at ease. The false Solomon’s-seal in proud
assemblies wears with an oddly holiday air its freckled coral beads,
always a lure to the errant cow; and jack-in-the-pulpit, having been
invested with some churchly rank which demands the red robe, is ready to
cast off his cassock of lustrous striped green for one of scarlet. The
pendent-flowered jewelweed, plant with temperament and therefore called,
too, touch-me-not, droops its dew-lined leaves along the traveled lanes,
for it is making ready small surprise packages of seed that snap
ferociously open at a touch; and thus intriguing every passer-by into
sowing its crop, it earns the name unfairly borne by the innocent yellow
toadflax—snapdragon, which snaps only at bumblebees.

Gayly in possession of the fields, black-eyed Susan, known to the farmer
as “that confounded yellow bull’s-eye,” is holding her own, prepared to
resist to the utmost the onslaught of the goldenrod, which presumes to
unfurl in summer the banners of fall. The clear yellow evening primrose,
scion of one of our very best old English families, associates
democratically with a peasant mullein stalk, canary-flecked, since they
both fancy sun and sand. Magnificent sometimes upon the sand banks rises
a clump of that copper-in-the-sunshine flower, the butterfly weed, soon
to become as fugitive as our fair, lost trailing arbutus, the cardinal,
and the fringed gentian, if its lovers do not woo it less selfishly. All
beauty refuses captivity. In upland meadows the orange hawkweed is
afoot, waving its delirious-colored “paint brush” wantonly amid the
pasture grass in the light hours, but folding it at sunset, no sipper of
the dews. Brook sunflowers have come to the edge of the stream, but not
to look into the waters; their sunward-gazing petals are delicately
scented, surpassing their sisters of the fenced garden. The half-tamed
tiger lily, haunter of deserted dooryards and faithful even to abandoned
mountain farms long since given over to the wildcat and the owl,
wanderer by dusty roadsides, offers each morning new buds, and by
twilight they have bloomed and withered. Like the May rose, this is an
elegiac flower, clinging to lost gardens when all the rest have
vanished, though patches of tansy, herb of witchlore, will show pungent
golden buttons for long years untended, let the forgotten gardener but
plant it once. How many a little cabin, built in eagerness and hope, is
remembered at last only by the tiger lily, May rose, and chimney swift!
Yellow sweet clover, catching a roothold anywhere, declaring the gravel
bed a garden, makes it happiness to breathe the entranced air. The
yellow butterflies, like leaves of autumn, tremble and flurry where the
sun-steeped field meets the sweet dark wood. Among the rocks gleam ebony
seeds of the blackberry lily, whose star of orange and umber is about
to set.

Who knows, besides the birds, that embroidered on the moss new scarlet
partridge berries are ripe, hung from the vagrant vine of pale-veined
leaf that does not fear the snow? Only a month ago in this fairy
greenery lay the furry white partridge blossom, almost invisible, but
with a fragrance like that of just-opened water lilies, and now the
green fruit colors to the Christmas hue. There are no flowers like
these. The wood fairies wear them with their gowns of spangled cobweb
trimmed with moonlight.

Bough apples, with a sweetness like that of flowers distilled by the
intense sun, show the first brown seeds. From the high-piled loads of
hay journeying slowly to the mow fall the dried buttercups and daisies
that danced in the mowing grass. Ceaseless are locusts; heavy is the air
above the garden, where phlox and strawberry shrub tinge it
Persian-sweet. Clustered blueberries are drooped upon the mountains, and
in the swamps, sometimes over quicksands, shows the darkling sheen of
the high-bush huckleberry. The odor of the balsam fir is drawn out and
spread far by the heat. Now the pursued brambles become the blackberry
patch. The waste lands shine yellow with the blooms of the marching
hardhack. It is the triumph of the sun, and his priest, the white day
lily of the cloistral leaf, worships in fragrance.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE MOOD OF AUGUST


[Illustration]

The wild cherries are no longer garnet; they have darkened to their
harvest and hang in somber ripeness from the twig. Drowsy lie the grain
fields and slowly purpling vineyards. The robin in the apple orchard is
hardly to be seen among the red-fruited boughs from which the first
Astrakhans are dropping. Days of uncertain suns and exultant growing are
over. A languorous pause has come to the year. Even the crows, flapping
away across the windy blue, caw in a sleepy fashion, not yet hoarse with
anxiety because the huskers are hurrying the corn to cover with that
penurious vigilance which a crow finds so objectionable. The rabbits,
scampering and wary in the new clover time, sit out in the hot sun a
good deal now, like convalescent patients; they will keep this up until
the faint noons of November, storing the warmth that lets them sleep,
come winter, through many a hunting party overhead. The woodpecker
knocks with less ferocity. Stately on his favorite dead branch at the
lake’s edge the blue-armored kingfisher sits to watch the ripple. Only
the grasshopper persists with tragical intensity in his futile rehearsal
for the role of humming bird. A satirical Italian compares man to the
grasshopper, but no man is capable of such devotion to baffled
aspirations. Practice in grace makes him more and more imperfect. Young
wood duck, with portentous dignity, follow their mother down the topaz
creek in single file, an attentive field class, observing the demented
lucky bugs, the red-lined lily pads of the coves, the turtles sound
asleep on the warm stones. For the wood’s feathered children this is no
month of play and slumber; it will soon be autumn, and they must attempt
the long flight.

The aspect of the buckwheat fields is August’s signet. From their
goldenrod borders reaches a world of happy whiteness, against sky the
color of the pickerelweed flower, waving softly, shadowed only by the
plumy clouds. The corn is out in topgallant, and if you look from a
mountain path into the planted valley, the écru tassels have hidden the
lustrous ribbon leaves. Cornfields are never silent. Always there is a
low swish, like that of little summer waves on a lake shore.

Lavender and purple thistles, brimmed with nectar, are besought by
imperious bees and the great blue-black butterfly, but already their
pale-lit ships drift, unreturning, under sealed orders, to some far
harbor in the port of spring. More silvery still, the milkweed is
adrift. Fleets of white butterflies rise and fall with the sunset
breeze, and slow, twilight moths come from under the brakes at the hour
of dew. White-flowered, the clematis and wild cucumber, the creamy
honeysuckle of the amorous fragrance, cover fence rail and stone wall,
give petals to the barren underbrush, twine fearlessly around barbed
wire, and festoon deserted barns. Healing herbs of long ago that once
were hung every fall from attic rafters—the “wild isep,” or mountain
mint, and the gray-blooming boneset—stand profuse but unregarded in the
lowgrounds. We buy our magic potions now. Once they were brewed above
the back log, as occasion came. In ferny shadows glimmers the ivory
Indian pipe. The wild carrot, with delicate insistence, takes the field.

Ironweed of royal purple, maroon-shot, mingles in illogical harmony with
the blue vervain and magenta trumpet-weeds. The note makers name over
for us a score of flowers that Shakespeare meant by “long purples”; but
surely he foresaw our Northern swamps in August, on fire with those
exuberant, torchlike weeds that rise tall above the bogs and earn, by
their arresting splendor against a crimson sky, the need of immortality
in song. They bloom before the katydids begin and survive the first
frost. A few violets—a seed crop, not intended for men’s gaze, and
hidden cautiously beneath the leaves, are timidly aflower. They will not
go unwed, but would crave to die obscure.

The last of the new-tasting bough apples lie in the orchard grass. The
later apple trees, like the sunning rabbit and the thought-worn crow,
wait for the harvest moon. Already the unresting twigs are preparing
their winter mail of cork and gum, which will not be unfastened by the
fiercest assaults of the sleet. Short-stemmed flowers have arisen to
clothe the sharp wheat stubble. Along the mountain road grow vagabond
peach trees, to whose fruit cling eager blue wasps, whose aromatic gum
traps many a climbing robber. Other wanderers from the tended
orchard—cruelly sour plums and rouge-cheeked pears—growing among the
cornel bushes, drop down for the field mouse and woodchuck their harvest
of the wilderness. Some of them, companioned by the faithful phlox and
sunflower, once grew in dooryards now desolate. The surpassing rose
mallow like sunrise lights the marshes.

It is not a month of growth. Fruit and grain are only expanding—weeks
ago the marvel of formation was complete. It is the time of warm,
untroubled slumber that ends with the reveille of frost.




CHAPTER IX.

SUMMER PAUSES


[Illustration]

Where the slow creek is putting out to sea, freighted with seed and wan
leaf, cardinal-flowers watch the waters reddened by their image. Old
gold and ocher, the ferns beneath move listlessly up and down with the
ripple. As spring walks first along the stream, autumn, too, comes early
to the waterside, to kindle swamp maples and give the alder colors of
onyx. The lustrous indigo of the silky cornel hangs there in profusion.
Scented white balls of the river bush have lost their golden haloes, and
even the red-grounded purple of the ironweed is turning umber. The
fruited sweetbrier shows rust. Fall’s ancient tapestry, the browns of
decay worked over with carmine, olive, maroon, and buff, is being hung,
but where the blue lobelia is clustered in the lowground summer pauses.
A parting sun catches the clear yellow of curtsying, transfigured birch
leaves, and looks back, waiting, to give September’s landscape a
hesitant farewell. It seems early to go. Pickerelweed is azure still.
Among the green bogs the fragrant lady’s-tresses wear the white timidity
of April, and the three petals of the enameled arrowhead flower are
dusty with gold. But seeds wrapped up in brown are scattering.
Remembrance yields to prophecy.

The harvesters of grain and grass have gone, and the tinted stubble is
full of crickets and monotonous cicadas. Now the crumbling furrow is
folded back behind the plow and corn knives are swinging close to the
solemn pumpkins, for in cornfield, vineyard, and orchard and in the
squirrel’s domain the last harvests of all are hastening to ripeness as
the sunset chill gives warning of a disaster foretold since August by
the katydid. The honey-colored pippins, cracked and mellow in the
brooding heat, encounter the windfalls of October’s trees—deepening red,
soft yellow, and polished green. Great, sheltering leaves are dropping
from the burdened vine. Every breath tells of fruits, drying herbs, and
the late flowers that in deserted gardens are most pungent in
September—marigolds, tansy, and the cinnamon pink. Pennyroyal and mint
are betrayed. Thorn apples, not near ripened, are knocked from the twig
by south-bound birds.

Still, among wine-colored and vermilion foliage, the acorn is green,
though flushed wintergreen berry and red-gemmed partridge vine proclaim
autumn along the forest floor. The auburn splendors are upon the sumac
and the burning-bush of old-fashioned dooryards, where, too, the smoke
tree holds its haze of seeds. Sometimes a gentian stands erect among
dead grasses—a slim señora with a fringed mantilla swirled close about
her shoulders in the chilly dusk. The closed gentian keeps its darkly
impenetrable blue beside the pink-tipped companion stalks of the
snake’s-head. Fair are the sheathed berries of the prickly ash—but
daggers to the taste. Often they grow among wild cherries, which,
juiceless now, are sweet as dried fruits from Persia. And there are the
black nannyberries with their watermelon flavor, and the first spicy
wild grapes.

Immortelles are bleached paper white on sandy hills. The nightshade
holds berries of three colors, passing from brilliant green to clouded
amber and deep crimson lake, and still upon it hangs the mysterious blue
blossom, shunned. Dogwood boughs are gorgeous as a sunset, and the thick
scarlet clusters droop from the mountain ash. The last humming birds
haunt tanned honeysuckles. Languid, but clinging yet to the sun world,
the yellow lily dies on weedy streams. If the all-conquering goldenrod
hangs the way for summer’s passing with the color of regret, it has made
every meadow El Dorado with its plumes, sprays, clumps, and spears.
Spray upon delicate spray, the fairy lavender aster has taken possession
of the roadsides and fields, and before it, far into the shade, goes the
white wood aster, mingling with the flamboyant leaves of dwarf oaks and
the glistening red seeds of the wild turnip. To make September’s pageant
the scented, pale petals of spring, the drowsy contentedness of summer’s
fulfillment and the Tyrian dyes of fall are joined.

The pallid clematis, in flower along rail fences, still hides the
blacksnake, chipmunk, and red squirrel—sometimes even the unsylphlike
woodchuck—but the marshes and the branches of the lakeside pines have
felt for days past the brief touch of many a strange bird’s feet as the
vanguard migrants seek regions of longer days. Finely dressed visitors
have come to the blue-berried juniper and the monstrous pokeweed of the
terra-cotta stem. The heron breaks his profound meditation to engulf a
meadow frog, for he will not leave until the wild geese “with mingled
sound of horn and bells” press south above the watercourses. Starling
and blue jay stay awhile to oblige with their clatter to the dawn. The
fur has thickened on the woods creatures.

The blind might hear September in the uproarious arguments of the crow,
the despondent cries of katydid, tree toad, and hoot owl. In the air is
reluctance, pause. Flaming festoons of woodbine and poison ivy begarland
the stone wall. Summer cannot wait. Elegiac purples of the aster beckon,
and the butterfly sleeps long upon the thistle, but she would not go
now, in the month of the first bittersweet and the last sweet pea.




CHAPTER X.

WHEN THE OAKS WEAR DAMSON


[Illustration]

The wild ducks are streaming south upon their journey of uncounted days.
Resting a little after sunset upon the cedar-bordered pond, they are
startled into flight again by some hound hunting in the night, and with
beating wing and eerie cry go on. The later flying geese rise clamorous
from among the cat-tails, and in silent haste the blue heron and the
pair of sad old cranes that had roosted in a dead elm alongshore take
the chill, invisible trail. When day comes in spreading fire the crows
will humorously watch these wander-birds from the forest edges. They
feel no southward impulse. Circling the clearing, they comment in uproar
upon the most advisable oak for their afternoon symposium, expand their
polished feathers, and, seated in a derisive row, caw a farewell to the
wader’s long, departing legs. Now the mountaineer’s girl, remembering
Old World peasant tales that never have been told her, hurries indoors
at nightfall from the hallooing specter of the Wild Huntsman in the
clouds, who is but the anxious leader of the flying wedge.

[Illustration]

Buckwheat stubble in October is such a crimson as no Fiesolan rose
garden ever unfurled. Gray hill slopes of the North are festal with its
color, insistent even through rains, glowing from rose madder to maroon.
Lower stretches out the pale yellow of oats stubble, which breaks into
flashing splinters under the noon sun. The wheat fields show ocher, and
darker—burnt sienna at the roots—lie the reaped fields of barley. Small
rash flowers, fancying that the ground between the grain stalks has been
cultivated especially for them, now that they see the sun freely again,
put on the petals of spring amid this fair desolation. Strawberry
blossoms, visibly fey, appear; long-stemmed and scanty-flowered fall
dandelions; an ill-timed display of April’s buttercups. The blackberry
vines go richly dyed—superb red-velvet settings for the jewels of frost.

Down in the valley, through the wood-smoke haze, move the slow apple
wagons through the lanes. This is appleland. Northern Spy and Lemon
Pippin are ripe to cracking; Baldwins will be mellow by Twelfth-night,
the russet at Easter. Gorgeous and ephemeral hangs the Maiden’s Blush.
The strawberry apples are like embers on the little trees, rubies of the
orchard. Lady Sweets and Dominies are respectfully being urged into the
cellar, and for those who will pay to learn the falseness of this
world’s shows the freight cars are receiving Ben Davises. Sheep-noses,
left often on the boughs, will hold cold nectar after the black frosts
have killed the last marigold. They lie, dull red, by the orchard fence
in the early snow, their blunt expression revealing no secrets. You have
to know about them. Nothing is more inscrutable than a sheep-nose.

Fast above the indigo crests stir the light clouds, harried by the west
wind whereon the hawk floats across the valley. In the afternoon
October’s lover takes the hill path, mica-gemmed, that leads between
birches of the translucent yellow leaf and maples still green but
wearing scarlet woodbine like a gypsy’s sash. For here the sunset
lingers till the stars, though from the valley’s goblet evening has
sipped the waning sunlight like a clear amber wine. But take at morning
the path through brown lowgrounds, or close along the wood where frost
sleeps late, for here that flower of desire, the fringed gentian, grows.
Its blue is less mysterious and deep than the closed gentian’s, and yet
how many name it the cup of autumn delight!

In the woods where leafless boughs give them blue sky at last are
revealed in quaint perfection the ferneries of the moss: palm trees
towering higher than a snail’s house, gallant green plumes with
cornelians at the tip, vast tropical forests spreading for long inches,
gray trailing rivers and orange cliffs of lichen, leagues of delicate
jungle lost under a fallen leaf. A beetle clad in shining mail presses
through the wilderness. A cobalt dragonfly lights on a shaken palm.
Pursuing a rolling hickory nut, the chipmunk brings a hurricane—but
these are elastic trees.

That same mischief maker, incurably curious, chases every stranger,
shooting along the stone wall and pausing to peer out from the crevices
with unregenerate eyes. The handsome but vain woodpecker pounds at the
grub-dowered tree he has chosen to persecute. Enormously ingenuous, the
wayside cow lumbers reproachfully out of the path, knocking the grains
of excellent make-believe coffee from the withered dock. The drumming of
a partridge in his solitary transport sounds where reddened dogwood
glorifies a clump of firs. Sometimes the kittle pheasant, hardly at
home in our woods, ducks her head and vanishes in the briers.

[Illustration]

Now the harvest moon, yellower than the hunter’s moon of ending autumn
or the strawberry moon that looks upon June’s roses, rises for husking
time. It is the last harvest; when the corn is in, winter comes. Piled,
tumbling ears, their grain set in many a curious pattern, go by to the
sorting floor and crib, with pumpkins, the satraps of New England,
perched in rickety fashion on the gleaming load. The mountain ash hangs
flamboyant clusters along the road from the field. Obedient to the
frost, the acorns are dropping, and the first chestnuts lie, polished
mahogany, in the whitened grass at sunrise. The shagbark has scattered
its largess, the butternut its dainties in their staining coats. Against
the slopes the tinted fern patches show bronze, russet, and pansy brown.
Speaking October and our own purple East, the tall asters, darkening
from lavender to the ultimate shadowy violet, join the goldenrod. Sumacs
are thronging, with their proudly blazoned crests; the haw is hung with
Chinese scarlet lanterns; sweetbrier, stem and leaf, is scented of
menthol and spices of the Orient. The oaks stand regal in umber and
damson. Who that has known October could ever forget? How quiet the
nights are after frost!




CHAPTER XI.

NOVEMBER TRAITS


[Illustration]

By the time November comes the year is used to the caprices of the sun
and no longer frantically brings out flowers for his gaze or hides them
in hurt surprise from his indifference. Now the year is resigned,
untroubled of hope, far off from impatient April with her craving and
effort. Experienced month, November waits ready to face the snows. She
wraps up the buds too warmly for sleet to pierce their overcoats,
comforts the roots in the woods with mats of wrecked leaves, spreads a
little jewelry of frost as a warning before the black frosts come, and
for all else lives in the moment. November has been through this before.
But sometimes, in a reverie, she delights the blue jays and persistent
wild asters by a day of Indian summer.

There has been a great deal of ill feeling about Indian summer, and the
kinder way is not to persecute those who have since youth believed and
will maintain forever that it comes in October. Victims of this
perverted fancy, they will go through life calling the first hot spell
after Labor Day Indian summer. Every fall one explains to them that this
brief season of perfection may come as late as Thanksgiving, but the
very next year they will be heard to murmur, under frostless skies,
“Well, we are having our Indian summer.” Let them go their indoors way,
or follow the deserting robins down to Paraguay! Indian summer could
just as well come when the oaks have turned forlorn if it wanted to. In
truth, it comes and goes, by no means exhausted in a solitary burst of
flaring sumacs, fringed gentians lighted by frost along the rims,
damson-colored alder leaves and old yellow pumpkins, perilously exposed
among forgotten furrows, now that the corn is being drawn in. It goes,
and comes again, which is its charm—the one time of year that cannot be
calendared.

There is in all the world a small, choice coterie of people who like
November and March best of the months, and it must be admitted that
these are often a bit arrogant about their refined perceptions. They
manage to look down upon the many of us who prefer the daisy fields to
the time “when hills take on the noble lines of death.” But whims of the
worshiper steal no splendor from the god. June has nothing to place
beside a moonlit November night, whose shadow dance of multiform boughs
is never seen through leaves, while shadows on the snow are hard of
outline, unlike the illusive phantoms running over autumn’s brown grass.
June has no flowers so quaint, pathetic, and austere as the trembling
weeds of November. What does the goldenrod, white with age, care for
frost? All winter it will shake out seeds unthriftily upon the snow,
standing with a calm brotherhood who have gone beyond dependence on the
day. June’s forests do not take a thousand colors under a low sun.
June’s gray dews have no magnificence of frost. June’s incorrigible
sparrows are not the brave, flitting “snowbirds” whose sins we forgive,
once we hear them chirping in a blizzard. June is a lyric, November a
hymn.

The squirrels have put away enough nuts to last through the holidays,
and after that they come out and get something else—no one ever knows
what. They have gone off with most of the acorns, leaving the fairies
their usual autumn supply of cupless saucers. No birds worth fighting
with are left, for the crows will not notice them, so they go for the
chipmunks. Sometimes at the wood’s edge a bird that came only with the
blossoms and that should long since have gone sits lost, half grotesque,
on a stark twig—spent and beautiful singer, belated by perversity or by
untimely faintness of wing! The muskrat’s winter house is ready, but no
happy quiet such as his good citizenship deserves is in store for him,
because soon the trappers will begin their patrol of the forest, and his
skin, called wild Patagonian ox, the exquisite new fur, will bring a
good price. Emotional wild geese still pass overhead in the dawns and
sunsets—the crows can scarcely conceal their amusement: “What nonsense,
to be always coming or going!” The crow does not remain in the pale
North simply out of devotion to us. He is above mortal vicissitudes;
behind his demoniac eye dwells a critique of humanity which he would not
be bothered to utter if he could. The soul of the satirist once abode in
a crow.

Forsaken nests and rattling reeds along the stream, pools in the hollows
edged with thin ice, ragged leaves clutched at by the winds, desperate
buds of hepatica and cowslip where a sloping bank catches warmth at
noon, fences stripped of vines and ghostly with dead clematis, a few
frozen apples swinging on the top boughs, trampled fields and pelting
rain—and with it all a grandeur more serene than melancholy. November’s
lovers are not perverse, declaring this. They see half-indicated colors
and hear low sounds. They love the mellow light better than the blaze of
rich July, and they are loyal to November because she speaks in quiet
tones not heard through the eagerness or snow silence of other months.
It is the sentimentalist who sees only gloom and the weariness of
departure now. November is ruddier than many a day of spring and the
sharp air forbids languor. Indian summer, her gift and our most fleeting
season, is like the autumn ecstasy of the partridge, passionate and
irresistible, but not ending in despondency because he knows it will
return, and it is like joy in that it cannot be foreseen nor detained.
The bacchanal may have dreaded November, not the dryad.




CHAPTER XII.

THE CHRISTMAS WOODS


[Illustration]

The Southern woods hang their Christmas trimmings high. Laurel and
rhododendron, mistletoe and holly, reach up against the walls of tinted
bark. Our Northern forests trail greens along the floor, and roped
ground pine, pricking through the prone leaves or a gentle snow, appears
as a procession of tiny palm trees, come North for the holiday,
surprised and lost, but determined to keep together. Under the haw
bushes and over spruce roots, wherever shade was thick last summer,
partridge vines twine red-berried wreaths and the little plants of
wintergreen flavor and of that wandering name hold their rubies low on
the mountain side. After the enduring snows have come, these glimmering
fruits will be requisitioned—dug out by the furry owners of such
plantations on days when even covered roots seem barren of sap, and nuts
should really be saved awhile longer. Clumps of sword fern, beaten down
by November rains, are round green mats; other ferns long ago were
brown. But seldom save in its sunsets and woodlands has December color.
Ponds, fanged with ice, lie sullen or stir resentfully into whitecaps.
The sky is stony and often vanishes in brooding fog. Uncloaked, but
courageous in their gray armor, the trees wait tensely for the
intolerable onslaught of the cold: the blizzard with knives of sleet.

Over the marshes at the hour of dusk when the bronze and topaz are
quenched passes the breath of foreboding. December acknowledges an
unpitying fate—anything may happen. It is not the fireside month, softly
white outdoors and candlelit within. Time of miracles, it stands
expectant, and the thronging stars of the Christmas midnight wear a
restless look. Rutted paths answer harshly to the step. Delayed snow is
a menace in the air, but lands beyond the cities would be grateful
should it hasten, bringing safety to the soil and winter peace. Yet snow
is a betrayer, a sheet of paper upon which the feet of rabbit, mink, and
fox write a guide to their dwellings and to the whole plan of their
days.

Snow for Christmas there must be—on the lighted trees indoors, on our
far-scattered, similar cards. But save as a convenience to the reindeer
and a compliment to their driver, who cannot create his stocking stock
unless he is snowbound, and who must feel sadly languid as he tears
through Florida heavens, city people would quite willingly manage with
alum. Early in school life, however, comes the dangerous knowledge that
nothing is so easy to draw as Christmas Eve: a white hillside, a path of
one unchanging curve, a steeple or a chimney with smoke, a fir tree or a
star. Thus snow eases art for the credulous who think it white.
Glittering under starlight, shadowed with purple, lemon, or deep blue
as sunset turns to evening, taking on daffodil hues at noon, snow is
harder to paint. Fretted with windy tracery and drawn out into streaming
lines where the gale races along by a fence, snow is not, on Christmas
greetings, permitted to be seen.

[Illustration]

The first snowstorm of the year should be sent from Labrador on
Christmas Eve and sprinkled impartially and ornamentally over all the
land. Then, the Yule atmosphere once provided, the distribution should
be confined to the rural clientele until the next December, for on
streets the hoar frost is indeed like ashes. But why, in somber justice,
should the far South pretend to holiday snow at all? Why not Christmas
cards pranked with live oaks, alligators, lagoons, and other beauties of
an Everglade scene—an inspiring escape from tradition and sentiment? For
the antlered steeds must prance above hibiscus flowers as well as round
the Pole. Yet it must seem dull to hang stockings by a fireplace that
needs fire merely as a decoration and never to have loved a sleigh!

Abandoned, but still no downcast company, slanting corn shocks not
honored with winter shelter stand patient sentinels in the field.
Abandoned they may seem, yet could you suddenly tip one over there would
be a startled scurrying, for these are the choice snow-time residences
of field mice, cottontails, weasels, and meadow moles—not, of course,
together in harmony, but in their separate establishments. Let the
blizzard come; it only makes warmer a house of cornstalks properly
built, which bears, nevertheless, some of the dangers of a gingerbread
home—passing cows may feel tempted.

Vermilion heraldry of the wild rose is waved undimmed. Witch-hazel with
her yellow blossoms, last flowers of the year, gazes upon the vanquished
shrubs about her with a smile. Why, she will not even sow her seed until
February! There is plenty of time for hardy petals.

Massed against the stern horizon, the forest stands an unresponsive
gray; entered, the twigs are seen sleek brown, dark red, and a fawn soft
as the tan orchid. In towns December shows the iron mood. But in the
open places, where pools of light and shadow lie, it is a water-color
month, made fine with no gorgeous velvets of autumn, but hung with
blending veils of dawn mist and of new snow, so that the subdued day
rises in flushed, drifting vapors, like April’s awakening, and when the
sun comes, pale, we wonder that there is no summons in his light.




CHAPTER XIII.

LANDSCAPES SEEN IN DREAMS


[Illustration]

The painter of landscapes seen in dreams must be a memory that knows
fantastic woods and faery seas all strange to the waking memory. Or else
the artist is only a weariness with the day just past that gives us in
sleep sight of the country which, so Mr. Maugham and other story-tellers
say, is the real home that men may go their whole lives long without
finding, because we are not always born at home, nor even brought up
there, and we might for years be homesick for a land unseen. Once
beheld, the recognition is instant, and in the foreign place begins a
_vita nuova_—relief and an intensity of living never known before the
new and familiar harbor came down to meet us at the shore. So sometimes
it is in dreams. Recurrent and vivid, a scene of sheerest unreality will
take on an earthly air, or landscapes flamboyantly exotic will hold the
peace denied by every country it has been our daily fortune to know.

Dream landscapes come back again and again, as if they waited there
forever, substantial, and we were the transient comers. Some, in ether
dreams, shrink always from the same green waves, the same black, open
mine, and two have now and then been found who saw on sleep journeys
places that words repictured curiously alike. The fantasies may be
patchwork of poems, plays, and paintings long forgotten, but when they
rise in their compelling fusion they owe no debt to the lumber attic of
the subconscious. The world they fashion is their own, and they do offer
by their ethereal pathway a compensation for the insufficiencies of
life.

There is a long, uncurving sea strand whose gray immensity of sands lies
smooth for miles along the upper beach, but is feathered near the water
by the stroking of little afterwaves, and draped unendingly with umber
bands of kelp. Here as in no place seen the seaweed laces are edged with
colors ground in unlighted depths, as if the tide cast carvings of lapis
lazuli and feldspar up with the argent pebbles, and all the drifting
algæ are incrusted with yellow shells. Shoreward the palms climb up
until they make a green horizon, and their unnatural fronds sink down
again like green chiffon that veils the entrance to the pensive forest.
Vines with scented flowers as intangible as fog creep over root and
trunk, and among them now and then with soundless foot and molten eye a
leopard winds. Perpetual sunset wanes and glows behind the palms. There
is never any wind. The violence of the ocean, the beasts, the tempest,
is held in languorous leash while the treader of the sands goes on with
unfelt steps toward rocks where the waters break importunate and sink
moaning back. They hang black above a cave, and waves come in to prowl
and snakes with scales like gems twine back and forth, glittering in the
half light, with narcotic and effortless motion, until they with the
rocks and all the scene fade.

A tiny stream, a pixy’s river, slips from beneath a bowlder in a wood
long known, and leads through thicket, glade, and clearing to a
terrifying land, desolated by ancient fires and strewn with blackened
stones and charred boughs. The place itself is athirst, and the dreamer
kneels to drink. The tiny stream is dark, like a deep water, and bitter
cold as if it flowed through ice. A staff thrust down cannot sound its
depths. A finger’s span across and bottomless! Nothing could dam its
flow. Old embers at its borders are suddenly scattered when a gleaming
hand parts the current and waves back toward the way just traced, but
the flame-blasted firs have closed behind into a forbidding wall. Other
pallid fingers rise from the portal of the abyss in warning gesture, but
the narrow gulf opens underfoot.

There is a town where gay people in white dress promenade in a plaza
shaded by orange trees, and they are always humming tunes. Little white
streets lead to shuttered houses. A glory of buginvillæa overflows
trellis and bower in splendid war with the hibiscus hedges and the
dropping yellow fruit. Down the hill and over cobblestones, pursued by
music and laughter, ministered to by odors of the lemon blossom, he whom
sleep leads here may go toward a lake of fluent amethyst. The way is
past the market place where brown women crouch by baskets of brilliant
wares and venders of glistening lizards sit drowsily bent, and then at a
step the forest dense and brooding is above him and its low boughs sweep
the ripple of the lake. Immense leaves hang like curtains, and among
them men with unquiet eyes move and hold monotoned speech while they hew
sparkling rock into monstrous shapes. They are circling round a pit.
They cast in ornaments of opal and dark gold and garlands of venomous
forest growths, gray and blood-red, tied with withered vines. Cries come
from the pit, but the chant never stops.

Marching from a stronghold far up on a mountain of cedars, men in mail
come at dusk with standards flickering crimson, fringed with gold, down
to a valley full of blossomed iris where there is a wide pool with
torches at its rim. Their flare streams out toward the circling cliffs.
Each marcher dips his silken flag into the quiet waters, and lights rise
upon the battlements above as one by one all the black plumes are lost
in the meadow’s darkness and the torches burn low and fall into the
pool.

A garden planted only with dark-red nasturtiums that lift for the
dreamer’s touch a flower’s velvet cheek lies filmed with dew and
fragrant as a noon breath from Ceylon spice groves. The miracle of color
is spread along a hillside up to a high wall of great gray stones, and
inside the gate is a house grown all over with grapevines, some borne
down by blue clusters with shadowy bloom, some by clusters of topaz and
ripe green. There is a pond among the grasses, where broad, wan lilies
float, and purple pansies border all the walks. Very slowly the paneled
door opens and the sun floods the central hall. It is hung with silver
draperies, and an old woman stands there with a candle, mumbling and
peering in a cataract of light.




CHAPTER XIV.

HIDING PLACES


[Illustration]

Childhood remembers a secret place—refuge, confessional, and couch of
dreams—where through the years that bring the first bewildering hints of
creation’s loneliness he goes to hide and to rebuild the joyous world
that every now and then is laid in flowery ruins beneath the trampling
necessities of growing up. These little nooks where we confronted so
many puzzles, wondered over incomprehension, and looked into the hard
eyes of derision, abide caressingly for memory, who flies to them still
from cities of dreadful light. The need for those small havens is
lifelong. They are rarely at hand in later days, but no locked door and
no walled chamber of the mind can take their place.

The suns of midsummer, tempered by spruce boughs, flicker and play upon
a broad-backed rock where fairy pools made by the late rain in its
crannies are frequented by waxwing and woodpecker, even though an
intruder sleeps upon that dryad’s couch. Brakes and sweet fern crowd
around it. Tasseled alders are its curtains. Here one might be forever
at rest. It is to such a place that rebel wishes turn when the early
grass and clover thicken in the pastures or when the summer birds begin
their slow recessional. The longing to lie upon a sun-warmed rock in the
woods comes back desperately in April and October to them who once have
known that place of healing and stillness.

Yellow bells from the wands of circling forsythia bushes drop into a
deep hollow lined with velvet grass. Pale butterflies of new-come May
flutter among the dandelions that bejewel this emerald cup of Gæa, and
sometimes drowsy wings are folded sleepily upon a gold rosette. Light
beams pass and repass in jubilance over the grass blades. The sun is
enchanted in the clear yellow of the flowers. Glints, movement, gayety,
and withal peace and silence were in that place of exultant color and
radiant life. It was a rare spot, and unvisited save by birds in quest
of screening branches for their nests and perhaps by some one who hid
there and always had to laugh before he left.

A round space of soft sward is guarded by strawberry shrub and by the
bridal-wreath spiræa that droops white branches lowly to the ground.
Here you could lie on a moonlit summer night, with arms outstretched and
face pressed into the soft grass, and beneath your fingers you could
feel the world turn on and on, immensely, soothingly, and everlastingly,
the only sound the bats’ wings above, or a baby robin protesting
musically at the slowness of the night’s divine pace. Here the smell of
the sod is keen and sweet. Here dew would cool a throbbing brow. Here
the undertones of earth vibrate through the body, and all its nerves,
strung to intense perception, yet would be wrapped in persuasive peace.

An old balm-o’-Gilead tree, growing on a hillside, kindly lets down one
mighty limb as pathway to a leafy hiding place incomparably remote and
dimly lighted even at noon. The branches make an armchair far back
against the trunk, and that glossy foliage, always cool, swishes like
waves at low tide. The tree has much to tell, but never an intrusive
word. You may sit there with a book or in the distracting company of
secret happiness or tears, and it will ignore you courteously, going on
about its daylong task of gathering greenness from the sun, and only
from time to time touching your hand with an inquiring leaf. Sometimes a
red squirrel looks in and departs in shocked fashion through the air.
Sometimes the sheep pass far below on their way home. But the refuge is
secure, and the balm-o’-Gilead’s cradling arms wait peacefully to hold
an asking child.

A foamy brown brook that flashes and dallies, is captured and breaks
free again, down along the mountain has been coaxed by some wood nymph
to furnish sparkling water for her round rock bath. Dutifully it pours
in every moment its curveting freshness, bringing now and then the
tribute of a laurel leaf or a petal from some flower that bent too
close. This bath is gemmed with glittering quartz and floored with red
and white pebbles. Gray mosses broider it where the sun lies, and dark
green where the water drips. The nymph has been at some pains to train
the five-finger ivy and nightshade heavily all about, and the great
brakes carpet the path her gleaming feet must tread at sunrise. Now at
noon you may come there, troubling no living drapery, and dangle your
feet over the moss into the dimpling coolness of that mountain pool. A
trout might dart in, a red lizard appear upon a ledge, but nothing else.
The wild-cherry clusters hang within reach.

In the corner of a meadow where dispassionate cows graze and snort
scornfully at the collie who comes to get them in the late afternoon
stands a great red oak that has somehow inspired the grass underneath it
to grow to tropic heights. But between two of its wandering ancient
roots is short grass, woven with canary-flowered cinquefoil vines, and
into this nook you may creep, screened by wind-ruffled blades beyond,
and taste of the white wild strawberries that reach their eerie ripeness
in the shade. A woodchuck may sit up and gaze at you across the barrier,
or a bright-eyed chipmunk scuttle out on a limb for a better view. They
leave you alone soon, and at twilight even the cow bell is quiet.

A balsam fir that grows on a bowlder leaning out halfway down a ravine
hospitably spreads its aromatic boughs flat upon the rock, after the
inviting manner of this slumber-giving Northern tree. The very breath of
the hills is shed here. It is almost dark by day, and at night the stars
show yellow above the upper firs. The wind goes murmuring between gray
walls, and the sound of the stream, far down, comes vaguely save in the
freshet month. This is the farthest hiding place of all. Only the daring
would find the perilous way to its solitude.




CHAPTER XV.

THE PLAY OF LEAVES


[Illustration]

For fox and partridge, fawn and squirrel—all the wood dwellers that run
or fly—youth, like the rest of life, is a time of stress and effort.
They have a short babyhood and little childhood. Once they begin to move
they must take up for themselves the burden of those that prey and are
preyed upon. They step from nest or den into a world in arms against
them, and while they sensibly fail to worry over this, undoubtedly it
complicates their fun. Baby foxes playing are winsome innocents, but
they have become sly and wary while lambs, colts, and calves are still
making themselves admirably ridiculous in fenced meadows. And neither
hunter, hawk, nor wildcat makes allowances for the youth and
inexperience of debutante game.

It is different with little leaves. They are as playful as kittens, with
their dances, poses, flutters, their delicate bursts of glee. Unless
involved with flowers, or with timber or real estate, they are safe, not
alone in winter babyhood, but through spring and summer, that minister
to them with baths of dew and rain and with the somnolent wine of the
sun. Only when old age has brought weariness with winds and heat, and
even with the drawing of sap, are they confronted by their enemy, frost.
You will say, caterpillars, forest fires, but they are the fault of man
and an unanticipated flaw in nature’s plan for letting the leaves off
easily. We brought foreign trees that had their own mysterious
protection at home into lands where that immunity vanished, and so the
chestnut has left us, and apple and rose are threatened by foes whom
their mother had not foreseen. Were it not for man’s mistakes the leaves
would have had an outrageously gay time by comparison with the darkling
lives of the creatures that move among them and beneath them.

All winter long in its leaf bud the baby tulip leaf drowses, curled up
tight. It is completely ready to spring full formed into the light as
soon as the frost line has been driven back by the triumphant lances of
the sun, and there it dips and laughs and nods, and sometimes goes quite
wild when a running breeze comes by at the hour wherein morning makes
opals of July’s heavy dew. The poplars, the maidenhair trees, shake out
spangles then. The maples show their silver sides. Always the forest
lives and breathes, but when the new leaves come it draws long,
shuddering breaths of delight. Whoever has dwelt with trees knows how
differently the small leaves of May talk from the draped and weighted
boughs of August.

Stepping along the rustling wood road, you can hear the reveries of the
leaves around you. They whisper and sigh in youth; they reach out to
touch the friendly stranger’s cheek. In summer they hang their patterned
curtains tenderly about him, in a silence made vocal only by a teasing
gale. In autumn they are loud beneath his tread. Snow alone can hush
them. When they are voiceless they are dead at last, but already their
successors, snugly cradled and blanketed with cotton, are being rocked
to sleep upon the twigs.

The rippling, shimmering birch upon a wind-stroked hill talks with
falling cadence, like a chant. The naiad willow, arching lowland brooks,
speaks as water, very secretly. The oak could not be silent, with his
story of many days to tell, and keeping his leaves throughout the snow
time, his speech is perpetual. Only the pines and kindred evergreens are
now and then melancholy, as if the new needles and leaves looked down
upon the carpet below, forever thickened, of those whose hold grew
faint. Leaves of cherry and apple, born into a world of tinted blossoms,
are gay to the last. The sprays of locust leaves that keep their
yellow-green until the sober tree flowers into clustered fragrance of
white, arboreal sweet peas whisper by night and day of the bats and tree
toads that dwell in their channeled and vine-loved bark. The sycamore’s
voice is cool-toned and light, but the mountain ash murmurs low, and
low the beech.

Watching leaves adrift on November winds, there comes the memory of
Stevenson’s song of another ended life—of days they “lived the better
part. April came to bloom and never dim December breathed its killing
chill.” But the tree that wore them, standing in stripped starkness that
month—if stark means strong—shall enter dazzling splendors when the days
of ice storms come. That miracle of lucent grayness, an elm in the
morning sun, when every branch and every smallest twig is cased in ice
outdoes its green enchantments of June. It is more beautiful than a tree
of coral. It is the color of pussy willows made to shine. It is as gray
as sunrise cobwebs on the grass, as starlight on dew. Its branches,
tossed by January, clash sword on delicate sword, or, left quiet, the
elm stands like a pensive dancer and swings against one another long
strands of crystal beads. And in the city little ice-sheathed maples
along an avenue, glistening under white arc lights, surpass the changing
lusters of gray enamel. Trees robed in ice are the very home of light,
of fire frozen fast in water and turned pale.

Between the going and coming of the leaves the sky is background for the
cunning lacework of twigs. Were it always May, we should never see how
finely wrought is the loom upon which those leafy embroideries are
woven. In autumn the design is more austere, the colors show more
somber, but when the March branches flush with sap, and the buds,
waking, put forth hesitant green fingers, that infinitely complex
tracery of the twigs is a spring charm as moving as the perfume of the
thorn. Outlined against a sunset, it foretells in beauty the months when
the leaf chorus will sound with the birds’.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE BROWN FRONTIER


[Illustration]

One warm March noon a hushing wing is lifted from the piping nest of
earth. Voices of forest floor, tree trunk, and lowground break forth,
never to be silent again until Thanksgiving weather finds a muted world.
Croon and murmur from the swaying grasses, brief lyrics from the top of
the thorn, a sunrise chant from the bee tree, rise and fall through all
the hours of dew and light, intense in the sun-rusted fields, climbing
to an ecstatic swan song when frosts hover close. Whoever walks through
middle realms of the woods, never lying on the mosses nor winning to
skyward branches of the trees, has not shared the earth’s most ardent
life—the pensive songs a bird sings merely for himself; his impulsive,
goalless flights; and rarer still the industry and traffic at the roots
of growth: the epic of the ground.

Cricket follows pickering frog and cicada cricket. That earliest
invisible singer asks only a little warmth in the waters of the pond to
melt the springs of frozen song. He comes with lady’s-tresses, pussy
willows, and unfurling lily pads. The cricket, sleepy-voiced in the
August afternoon, grows gay at twilight, and does his best when the
firefly and bat are abroad, darting out from the creeper-veiled bark and
setting sail upon the placid air. Locusts play persistently a G string
out of tune until, when the first goldenrod peers above the yarrow, the
overwhelming night chorus of the katydids is heard, lifted bravely again
and again within the domains of autumn, not quenched before the
bittersweet berry and the chestnut fling open portals and surrender to
the cold.

Little they know of trees who have not seen spruce and larches against
the deep October sky, looking straight up from a yielding club-moss
pillow. The outlines and colors of the quiet branches are shown most
memorably upon the vault of that arching lapis-lazuli roof, draped with
floating chiffon of the clouds. Climb up among the boughs, and the
carven quality is gone. They are dim and soft. You must go close to
earth to behold tree-top forms. The supine view is magical.

Revealed in uncanny splendor by the death of verdure, brilliant and evil
fungi come from the dark mold in fall, orange and copper, vermilion and
cinnabar, dwelling as vampires upon trees brought low. Some wear the
terra-cotta of the alert little lizards that, inquisitive as squirrels,
will lift their heads from bark or stone and give back gaze for gaze. As
leaves that came from the sap of roots go back to the roots in ashes, so
ants take care that fallen oaks shall be transformed into the soil from
which young oaks will spring, and brown dust, when they have ended, is
all that abides of the tallest tree. Among them pass the bobbing,
glistening beetles. This immortal and thronging activity of the loam
can be heard, if you bend low enough and listen long.

When the air is frost-clear fairy landscapes, hidden since spring came
with mists and masking leaves, rise with an effect of unbeheld creation.
Small pools appear, and avenues among the bracken that still wave
banners of chestnut and old gold. The lonely homes of ground-nesting
birds grow visible. Trinkets are scattered as the forest makes ready for
night—tiny cones, abandoned snail shells, and feathers which the
woodpecker and oriole dropped when they took leave. The sun dapples with
yellow the partridge haunts where once drooped films of maidenhair fern.

The home that the squirrel built for his summer idyl is shattered by the
winds aloft and falls to earth with other finished things. The feathery
wrack of cat-tails sails the waters and is hung upon the grasses of the
marsh. Fallow fields spread a tangle of livid stems, but jewels lie in
the wood road, for berries, the last harvest, are shaken down by bird
gleaners from vine and shrub, where they hang in festal plenty, so that
all hardy creatures that do not fly from winter to the South or to an
underground Nirvana may here find reward. Dark blue beads drop from the
woodbine. The rose keeps her carmine caskets, full of other roses; but
the bayberry is generous with dove-gray pebble seeds. Witch-hazel,
reversing seasons like the eccentric trout—who, after all, probably
enjoys the solitude at the stream-heads after the other fish have
gone—sends wide her mysterious fusillade, and that, too, finds its aim
in the floor of the forest.

Life more remote than that of snowfield or jungle, beneath our tread,
guarded from our glances and our hearing unless we seek it out, the
subtle cycles of the soil go on everlastingly, alien even to those who
know in intimacy the meadows and the woods. Vigorously though it toils,
there is a peace in the vision of continuity delicately given. Most of
the singers in the mowing grass live for a day, yet next morning the
song ascends unbroken. Here on the frontier between the world of the air
and that within the earth passports are granted back and forth—the red
lily is summoned from the depths; the topmost acorn, lifting its cup
toward the sky, obediently falls and passes through the dark barrier, to
return when the life-call bids. Steadily go on arrival and departure.
The gorgeous lichen is hung upon the rotting log. White rue rises and
white snows sink. Fire demons split the rocks, and after them in a
thousand years comes bloodroot. Floods rush down, and windflowers and
cities follow; and leisurely, another spring, the gates that received
them part, and a legion of new cowslips marches out.




CHAPTER XVII.

FAR ALTARS


[Illustration]

Guarded by treacherous green marshes whose murmuring rushes will close
without a change of cadence over the despair of the unwarned, in August
there lives a scene of tender and appealing beauty. The languid creek,
turned the color of iron rust with its plunder—spoil of the wild and
impractical fertility of the roots of bog and bracken—pauses in a pool
that shows now brown, now sorrel, now satiny green as the clouds wait or
hasten above and the supple rushes lean back and forth. This is the
tourney field of gorgeous dragonflies. Emerald, gold, and amethyst, they
hold resplendent play, sparkling above the water like magnets of light,
causing the placid depths to shimmer, and drawing the minnows from their
sunlit rest. Even the bird-dog does not know this pool. No messenger
more personal than a prowling shot comes there from man.

It is a sturdy conceit that wonders why Nature should spend her freshest
art on treasure scenes she decrees invisible, as if the mother of
mountains, tempests, deserts, toiled anxiously for the approval of a
particular generation, keeping one eye on Mr. Gray and the other on Mr.
Emerson in the hope that they will justify her flower blushing unseen
and her excusable rhodora. Nature is far too unmoral to bother about
rendering economists an account for her spendthrift loveliness. She
willfully deserts the imitation Sicilian garden, though she would be
well paid to stay, and rollicks in the jungle, clothing magnificently
the useless snake and leopard, dressing their breakfast in paradise
plumes, puzzling Victorian poets, and badly scaring the urban
manicurist, who returns after her first country vacation with decided
views concerning the cheerful humanity of streets compared with lodges
in the wilderness.

Were Nature careworn and personal, where should we turn for consolation
or rest? Hers is the tonic gift of a strength that, underlying all life,
does not pity or praise. As in the Cave of the Winds the most restless
spirit surely might find peace, so in the eternal changefulness of the
forest under the touch of forces fierce or serene we find the soul of
quiet because the powers at work are beyond our control, control us
utterly, hold us in an immense and soothing grasp where thought and
energy are fused and contend no more. So those who live upon the ocean
come to possess that which they will not barter for ease, and so the
timber cruiser shortens his visit to town. They would not tell what they
gain who relinquish readily the things for which others pour out their
years upon the ground that commerce may grow. It is because words are
not fashioned to speak what shapes the wind takes, the motion whereby
mists climb after the sun out of ravines, or how the tropic orchids lift
at daybreak among their fragrant shadows wings of ivory and fawn that
drooped against ferny trunks.

Many days must bloom and fade between you and the sound of human voices
before, in the wilderness, there can be surrender to the giant arms that
forever hold the body, and to the spirit, supreme and unemotional, that
has sped beyond the utmost outposts the mind ever reached. But after the
homecoming—when the confused echoes of a swarming, blind humanity are
lost in the exalted quiet of wide spaces—the vast impersonality of woods
and plains, swamps, hills, and sea, takes on a tenderness more deep than
lies in human gift and a glorious hostility that calls to combat without
grudge or motive, ennobling because it gives no mercy; challenges alike
the craft of man and the strength of the hills.

The exuberant fancy of a less earnest day made air and fire the
dwellings of creatures formed like ourselves, and, though immortal, shod
with lightning, guarded from common sight, they were afflicted with our
own vexations, our loves and hates. Nymph and naiad, faun and satyr,
were always plotting and gossiping, and little better were the
subsequent gnomes and fairies—more personal and cantankerous than
persons; resorting upon occasion to divorce; tangling skeins, and
teasing kind old horses. These were not the earth deities.

Earth deities wear no human shape. No one has looked upon the sky fire’s
face, the pinions of the gale. Enormously they have wrought, without
regard for man and sharing no passion, yet yielding sometimes their
limitless force to the mind that soared with them. In the age of winged
serpents, in the days when Assyria was mistress, they were the same,
holding an equal welcome for the boy and sage, unchanging and unresting,
free from mortal attributes of good and evil, mighty and healing as no
half-human god could be. Therefore that lavish scattering of beauty
without regard to man. Therefore the wonder given to all who dare call
to them when far from other men.

The disrepute of the pathetic fallacy has come from making the forest
sentimental. Sentient beyond all doubt its lovers know it is. Even as
water visibly rebels, warring with headlands and leaping after the wind,
and as it slumbers dimpling and caresses the swimmer, so the woodlands
are solemn and aloof, or breathe to give the open-hearted their vast
serenity. The nymph or fairy rises at the bidding of imagination, but
the everlasting deities of the elements, past our reckoning elder than
they, need no fiction. They are presences, and accord communion. They
can be gentle as the twilight call of quail. They can be indifferent and
gigantic as the prairie fire and typhoon. But they brood to-day as
yesterday over cities that they will not enter, but which sometimes they
destroy. They march above mountain ridges and loiter among flowered
laurel, impartial as nothing else is, and in their dispassionate
companionship supremely consoling, offering for playthings the ripple
and the gleam.


THE END
INTRODUCTION                                      ix
       I. SPRING! SPRING! SPRING!                      1
      II. THE SPRING RUNNING                           7
     III. AN OLD APPLE TREE                           13
      IV. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO SEE THIS SPRING      26
       V. IF YOU HAD WINGS                            33
      VI. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO DO THIS SPRING       41
     VII. THE PALACE IN THE PIG-PEN                   48
    VIII. IS IT A LIFE OF FEAR?                       60
      IX. THE BUZZARD OF THE BEAR SWAMP               76
       X. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO HEAR THIS SPRING     86
      XI. TURTLE EGGS FOR AGASSIZ                     94
     XII. AN ACCOUNT WITH NATURE                     115
    XIII. WOODS MEDICINE                             127
          NOTES AND SUGGESTIONS                      137




    ILLUSTRATIONS


    SPRING OF THE YEAR--SHADBUSH                  _Frontispiece_
    HYLAS PEEPING “SPRING!”                                    1
    “THE EARLIEST BLOODROOT”                                   4
    THE TURKEY-HEN--“HALF A MILE FROM HOME”                    8
    CATFISH FAMILY                                            12
    SCREECH OWL--“OUT OVER THE MEADOW HE SAILS”               17
    TREE-TOAD--“COMES FORTH TO THE EDGE OF HIS HOLE”          23
    SKUNK-CABBAGE AND BUMBLEBEE                               27
    A SUNFISH OVER ITS NEST                                   29
    CRESTED FLYCATCHER WITH SNAKE-SKIN                        31
    “ONE OF MY LITTLE BAND OF CROWS”                          33
    YOUNG PAINTED TURTLE, FROGS’ EGGS, SNAILS, AND
        WHIRLIGIG BEETLES                                     45
    “ONE LIVE TOAD UNDER YOUR DOORSTEP”                       46
    PHŒBE AND HER YOUNG                                       55
    PIKE AND MINNOWS                                          62
    FOX BARKING--“UPON THE BARE KNOLL NEAR THE HOUSE”         66
    PINE MARTEN AND CHIPMUNK                                  71
    “UPON ONE OF THESE THE BUZZARD SAT HUMPED”                79
    YOUNG TURKEY BUZZARD                                      83
    BROWN THRASHER--“OUR FINEST, MOST GIFTED SONGSTER”        87
    PAINTED TURTLE--“BEGAN TO BURY HERSELF”                  103
    CHIPMUNK EATING JUNE-BUGS                                117
    “TWO TUMBLE-BUGS TRYING TO ROLL THEIR BALL UP HILL”      127
    “THE BOX TURTLES SCUFF CARELESSLY ALONG”                 130




INTRODUCTION


It has been my aim in the thirty-nine chapters of the three books in
this series to carry my readers through the weeks of all the school
year, not however as with a calendar, for that would be more or less
wooden and artificial; but by readings, rather, that catch in a large
way the spirit of the particular season, that give something definite
and specific in the way of suggestions for tramps afield with things
to look for and hear and do. Naturally many of the birds and animals
and flowers mentioned, as well as woods and aspects of sky and field,
are those of my own local environment--of my New England
surrounding--and so must differ in some details from those surrounding
you in your far Southern home or you on your distant Pacific coast, or
you in your rich and varied valley of the Mississippi, or you on your
wide and generous prairie. But the similarities and correspondences,
the things and conditions we have in common, are more than our
differences. Our sun, moon, sky, earth--our land--are the same, our
love for this beautiful world is the same, as is that touch of nature
which we all feel and which makes us all kin. Wherever, then, in these
books of the seasons, the things treated differ from the things
around you, read about those things for information, and in your
journeys afield fill in the gaps with whatever it is that completes
your landscape, or rounds out your cycle of the seasons, or links up
your endless chain of life.

While I have tried to be accurate throughout these books, still it has
not been my object chiefly to write a natural history--volumes of
outdoor facts; but to quicken the imaginations behind the sharp eyes,
behind the keen ears and the eager souls of the multitude of children
who go to school, as I used to go to school, through an open,
stirring, beckoning world of living things that I longed to range and
understand.

The best thing that I can do as writer, that you can do as teacher, if
I may quote from the last paragraph--the keynote of these volumes--is
to “go into the fields and woods, go deep and far and frequently, with
eyes and ears and all your souls alert.”

    MULLEIN HILL, May, 1912




THE SPRING OF THE YEAR




CHAPTER I

“SPRING! SPRING! SPRING!”


Who is your spring messenger? Is it bird or flower or beast that
brings your spring? What sight or sound or smell spells S-P-R-I-N-G to
you, in big, joyous letters?

Perhaps it is the frogs. Certainly I could not have a real spring
without the frogs. They have peeped “Spring!” to me every time I have
had a spring. Perhaps it is the arbutus, or the hepatica, or the
pussy-willow, or the bluebird, or the yellow spice-bush, or, if you
chance to live in New England, perhaps it is the wood pussy that
brings your spring!

Beast, bird, or flower, whatever it is, there comes a day and a
messenger and--spring! You know that spring is here. It may snow again
before night: no matter; your messenger has brought you the news,
brought you the very spring itself, and after all your waiting
through the winter months are you going to be discouraged by a flurry
of snow?

    “All white and still lie stream and hill--
      The winter dread and drear!
    When from the skies a bluebird flies,
      And--spring is here!”

To be sure, it is here, if the bluebird is your herald.

But how much faith in the weather you must have, and how you must long
for the spring before the first bluebird brings it to you! Some sunny
March day he drops down out of the blue sky, saying softly, sweetly,
“Florida, florida!” as if calling the flowers; and then he is
gone!--gone for days at a time, while it snows and blows and rains,
freezes and thaws, thaws, thaws, until the March mud looks fitter for
clams than for flowers.

So it is with the other first signs. If you want springtime ahead of
time, then you must have it in your heart, out of reach of the
weather, just as you must grow cucumbers in a hothouse if you want
them ahead of time. But there comes a day when cucumbers will grow out
of doors; and there comes a day when the bluebird and the song sparrow
and all the other heralds stay, when spring has come whether you have
a heart or not.

What day is that in your out-of-doors, and what sign have you to mark
it? Mr. John Burroughs says his sign is the wake-robin, or trillium.
When I was a school-boy it used to be for me the arbutus; but
nowadays it is the shadbush: I have no sure settled spring until I see
the shadbush beginning to open misty white in the edge of the woods.
Then I can trust the weather; I can open my beehives; I can plough and
plant my garden; I can start into the woods for a day with the birds
and flowers; for when the shadbush opens, the great gate to the woods
and fields swings open--wide open to let everybody in.

But perhaps you do not know what the shadbush is? That does not
matter. You can easily enough find that out. Some call it June-berry;
others call it service-berry; and the botany calls it _A-me-lan’chi-er
ca-na-den’sis_! But that does not matter either. For this is not a
botany lesson. It is an account of how springtime comes to _me_, and
when and what are its signs. And I would have you read it to think how
springtime comes to _you_, and when and what are its signs. So, if the
dandelion, and not the shadbush, is your sign, then you must read
“dandelion” here every time I write “shadbush.”

There is an old saying, “He that would bring home the wealth of the
Indies must carry the wealth of the Indies out”; which is to say,
those who bring home the wealth of the Indies, must carry out some
kind of wealth in exchange. So you who would enjoy or understand what
my shadbush means to me must have a shadbush of your own, or a
dandelion, or something that is a sign to you that spring is here.
Then, you see, my chapter in the book will become your own.

There are so many persons who do not know one bird from another, one
tree from another, one flower from another; who would not know one
season from another did they not see the spring hats in the milliner’s
window or feel the need of a change of coat. I hope you are not one of
them. I hope you are on the watch, instead, for the first phœbe or
the earliest bloodroot, or are listening to catch the shrill, brave
peeping of the little tree-frogs, the hylas.

As for me, I am on the watch for the shadbush. Oh, yes, spring comes
before the shadbush opens, but it is likely not to stay. The wild
geese trumpet spring in the gray March skies as they pass; a February
rain, after a long cold season of snow, spatters your face with
spring; the swelling buds on the maples, the fuzzy kittens on the
pussy-willows, the opening marsh-marigolds in the meadows, the frogs,
the bluebirds--all of these, while they stay, are the spring. But they
are not sure to stay over night, here in New England. You may wake up
and find it snowing--until the shadbush opens. After that, hang up
your sled and skates, put away your overcoat and mittens; for spring
is here, and the honey-bees will buzz every bright day until the
October asters are in bloom.

I said if you want springtime ahead of time you must have it in your
heart. Of course you must. If your heart is warm and your eye is keen,
you can go forth in the dead of winter and gather buds, seeds,
cocoons, and living things enough to make a little spring. For the
fires of summer are never wholly out. They are only banked in the
winter, smouldering always under the snow, and quick to brighten and
burst into blaze. There comes a warm day in January, and across your
thawing path crawls a woolly-bear caterpillar; a mourning-cloak
butterfly flits through the woods, and the juncos sing. That night a
howling snowstorm sweeps out of the north; the coals are covered
again. So they kindle and darken, until they leap from the ashes of
winter a pure, thin blaze in the shadbush, to burn higher and hotter
across the summer, to flicker and die away--a line of yellow
embers--in the weird witch-hazel of the autumn.

At the sign of the shadbush the doors of my springtime swing wide
open. My birds are back, my turtles are out, my long sleeping
woodchucks are wide awake. There is not a stretch of woodland or
meadow now that shows a trace of winter. Over the pasture the bluets
are beginning to drift, as if the haze on the distant hills, floating
down in the night, had been caught in the dew-wet grass. They wash
the field to its borders in their delicate azure hue. At the sign of
the shadbush the doors of my memory, too, swing wide open, and I am a
boy again in the meadows of my old home. The shadbush is in blossom,
and the fish are running--the sturgeon up the Delaware; the shad up
Cohansey Creek; and through the Lower Sluice, these soft, stirring
nights, the catfish are slipping. Is there any real boy now in
Lupton’s Meadows to watch them come? Oh yes, doubtless; and doubtless
there ever shall be. But I would go down for this one night, down in
the May moonlight, and listen, as I used to listen years ago, for the
quiet _splash splash splash_, as the swarming catfish pass through the
shallows of the main ditch, up toward the dam at the pond.

At the sign of the shadbush how swiftly the tides of life begin to
rise! How mysteriously their currents run!--the fish swimming in from
the sea, the birds flying up from the South, the flowers opening fresh
from the soil, the insects coming out from their sleep: life moving
everywhere--across the heavens, over the earth, along the deep, dim
aisles of the sea!




CHAPTER II

THE SPRING RUNNING


This title is Kipling’s; the observations that follow are mine; but
the real spring running is yours and mine and Kipling’s and Mowgli the
wolf-child’s, whose running Kipling has told us about. Indeed, every
child of the earth has felt it, has had the running--every living
thing of the land and the sea.

Everything feels it; everything is restless, everything is moving. The
renter changes houses; the city dweller goes “down to the shore” or up
to the mountains to open his summer cottage; the farmer starts to
break up the land for planting; the schoolchildren begin to squirm in
their seats and long to fly out of the windows; and “Where are you
_going_ this summer?” is on every one’s lips.

They have all caught the spring running, the only infection I know
that you can catch from April skies. The very sun has caught it, too,
and is lengthening out his course, as if he hated to stop and go to
bed at night. And the birds, that are supposed to go to bed most
promptly, they sleep, says the good old poet Chaucer, with open eye,
these April nights, so bad is their case of spring running,--

    “So priketh hem Nature in hir corages.”[1]

[Footnote 1: So nature pricks (stirs) them in their hearts.]

Their long journey northward over sea and land has not cured them yet
of their unrest. Only one thing will do it (and I suppose we all
should be glad), one sovereign remedy, and that is _family cares_. But
they are yet a long way off.

Meantime watch your turkey-hen, how she saunters down the field alone,
how pensive she looks, how lost for something to do and somewhere to
go. She is sick with this disease of spring. Follow her, keeping out
of sight yourself, and lo, a nest, hidden under a pile of brush in a
corner of the pasture fence, half a mile from home!

The turkey-hen has wandered off half a mile to build her nest; but
many wild birds have come on their small wings all the way from the
forests of the Amazon and have gone on to Hudson Bay and the Fur
Countries, just to build their nests and rear their young. A wonderful
case of the spring running, you would say; and still more wonderful is
the annual journey of the golden plover from Patagonia to Alaska and
back, eight thousand miles each way. Yet there is another case that
seems to me more mysterious, and quite as wonderful, as the sea seems
more mysterious than the land.

It is the spring running of the fish. For when the great tidal waves
of bird-life begin to roll northward with the sun, a corresponding
movement begins among the denizens of the sea. The cold-blooded fish
feel the stirring; the spring running seizes them, and in they come
through the pathless wastes of the ocean, waves of them, shoals of
them,--sturgeon, shad, herring,--like the waves and flocks of wild
geese, warblers, and swallows overhead,--into the brackish water of
the bays and rivers and on (the herring) into the fresh water of the
ponds.

To watch the herring come up Weymouth Back River into Herring Run here
near my home, as I do every April, is to watch one of the most
interesting, most mysterious movements of all nature. It was about a
century ago that men of Weymouth brought herring in barrels of water
by ox-teams from Taunton River and liberated them in the pond at the
head of Weymouth Back River. These fish laid their eggs in the grassy
margins of the pond that spring and went out down the river to the
sea. Later on, the young fry, when large enough to care for
themselves, found their way down the river and out to sea.

And where did they go then? and what did they do? Who can tell? for
who can read the dark book of the sea? Yet this one thing we know they
did, for still they are doing it after all these hundred years,--they
came back up the river, when they were full-grown,--up the river, up
the run, up into the pond, to lay their eggs in the waters where they
were hatched, in the waters that to them were _home_.

Something very much like this all the other fish are doing, as are the
birds also. The spell of _home_ is over land and sea, and has been
laid upon them all. The bird companies of the fall went south at the
inexorable command of Hunger; but a greater than Hunger is in command
of the forces of spring. Now our vast bird army of North America, five
billion strong, is moving northward at the call of Home. And the hosts
of the sea, whose shining billions we cannot number,--they, too, are
coming up, some of them far up through the shallow streams to the
wood-walled ponds for a drink of the sweet waters of Home.

As a boy I used to go down to the meadows at night to hear the catfish
coming, as now I go down to the village by day to see the herring
coming. The catfish would swim in from the Cohansey, through the
sluices in the bank, then up by way of the meadow ditches to the dam
over which fall the waters of Lupton’s Pond.

It was a seven-or eight-foot dam, and of course the fish could not
climb it. Down under the splashing water they would crowd by hundreds,
their moving bodies close-packed, pushing forward, all trying to break
through the wooden wall that blocked their way. Slow, stupid things
they looked; but was not each big cat head pointed forward? each
slow, cold brain trying to follow and keep up with each swift, warm
heart? For the homeward-bound heart knows no barrier; it never stops
for a dam.

The herring, too, on their way up the run are stopped by a dam; but
the town, in granting to certain men the sole rights to catch the
fish, stipulated that a number of the live herring, as many as several
barrels full, should be helped over the dam each spring that they
might go on up to the pond to deposit their eggs. If this were not
done annually, the fish would soon cease to come, and the Weymouth
herring would be no more.

There was no such lift for the catfish under Lupton’s dam. I often
tossed them over into the pond, and so helped to continue the line;
but perhaps there was no need, for spring after spring they returned.
They were the young fish, I suppose, new each year, from parent fish
that remain inside the pond the year round.

I cannot say now--I never asked myself before--whether it is Mother or
Father Catfish who stays with the swarm (it is literally a swarm) of
kitten catfish. It may be father, as in the case of Father Stickleback
and Father Toadfish, who cares for the children. If it is--I take off
my hat to him. I have four of my own; and I think if I had eighteen or
twenty more I should have both hands full. But Father Catfish! Did you
ever see his brood?

I should say that there might easily be five hundred young ones in
the family, though I never have counted them. But you might. If you
want to try it, take your small scoop-net of coarse cheesecloth, or
mosquito-netting, and go down to the pond this spring. Close along the
margin you will see holes in the shallow water running up under the
overhanging grass and roots. The holes were made probably by the
muskrats. It is in here that the old catfish is guarding the brood.

As soon as you learn to know the holes, you can cover the entrance
with your net, and then by jumping or stamping hard on the ground
above the hole, you will drive out the old fish with a flop, the
family following in a fine, black cloud. The old fish will swim away,
then come slowly back to the scattered swarm, to the little black
things that look like small tadpoles, who soon cluster about the
parent once more and wiggle away into the deep, dark water of the
pond--the strangest family group that I know in all the spring world.




CHAPTER III

AN OLD APPLE TREE


Beyond the meadow, perhaps half a mile from my window, stands an old
apple tree, the last of an ancient line that once marked the boundary
between the “upper” and the “lower” pastures. It is a bent, broken,
hoary old tree, grizzled with suckers from feet to crown. No one has
pruned it for half a century; no one ever gathers its gnarly
apples--no one but the cattle who love to lie in its shadow and munch
its fruit.

The cows know the tree. One of their winding paths runs under its
low-hung branches; and as I frequently travel the cow-paths, I also
find my way thither. Yet I do not go for apples, nor just because the
cow-path takes me. That old apple tree is hollow, hollow all over,
trunk and branches, as hollow as a lodging-house; and I have never
known it when it was not “putting up” some wayfaring visitor or some
permanent lodger. So I go over, whenever I have a chance, to call upon
my friends or pay my respects to the distinguished guests.

This old tree is on the neighboring farm. It does not belong to me,
and I am glad; for if it did, then I should have to trim it, and
scrape it, and plaster up its holes, and put a burlap petticoat on
it, all because of the gruesome gypsy moths that infest my trees. Oh,
yes, that would make it bear better apples, but what then would become
of its birds and beasts? Everybody ought to have _one_ apple tree that
bears birds and beasts--and Baldwin apples, too, of course, if the
three sorts of fruit can be made to grow on the same tree. But only
the birds and beasts grow well on the untrimmed, unscraped,
unplastered, unpetticoated old tree yonder between the pastures. His
heart is wide open to every small traveler passing by.

Whenever I look over toward the old tree, I think of the old
vine-covered, weather-beaten house in which my grandfather lived,
where many a traveler put up over night--to get a plate of
grandmother’s buckwheat cakes, I think, and a taste of her keen wit.
The old house sat in under a grove of pin oak and pine,--“Underwood”
we called it,--a sheltered, sheltering spot; with a peddler’s stall in
the barn, a peddler’s place at the table, a peddler’s bed in the herby
garret, a boundless, fathomless featherbed, of a piece with the house
and the hospitality. There were larger houses and newer, in the
neighborhood; but no other house in all the region, not even the
tavern, two miles farther down the pike, was half so central, or so
homelike, or so full of sweet and juicy gossip. The old apple tree
yonder between the woods and the meadow is as central, as hospitable,
and, if animals talk with one another, just as full of neighborhood
news as was grandfather’s roof-tree.

Of course you would never suspect it, passing by. But then, no lover
of wild things passes by--never without first stopping, and especially
before an old tree all full of holes. Whenever you see a hole in a
tree, in a sand-bank, in a hillside, under a rail-pile--anywhere out
of doors, stop!

Stop here beside this decrepit apple tree. No, you will find no sign
swinging from the front, no door-plate, no letter-box bearing the name
of the family residing here. The birds and beasts do not advertise
their houses so. They would hide their houses, they would have you
pass by; for most persons are rude in the woods and fields, breaking
into the homes of the wood-folk as they never would dream of doing in
the case of their human neighbors.

There is no need of being rude anywhere, no need of being an unwelcome
visitor even to the shyest and most timid of the little people of the
fields. Come over with me--they know me in the old apple tree. It is
nearly sundown. The evening is near, with night at its heels, for it
is an early March day.

We shall not wait long. The doors will open that we may enter--enter
into a home of the fields, and, a little way at least, into a life of
the fields, for, as I have said, this old tree has a small dweller of
some sort the year round.

On this March day we shall be admitted by my owls. They take
possession late in winter and occupy the tree, with some curious
fellow tenants, until early summer. I can count upon these small
screech owls by February,--the forlorn month, the seasonless,
hopeless, lifeless month of the year, but for its owls, its thaws, its
lengthening days, its cackling pullets, its possible bluebirds, and
its being the year’s end! At least the ancients called February, not
December, the year’s end, maintaining, with some sense, that the
making of the world was begun in March, that is, with the spring. The
owls do not, like the swallows, bring the spring, but they
nevertheless help winter with most seemly haste into an early grave.

If, as the dusk comes down, I cannot go over to the tree, I will go to
my window and watch. I cannot see him, the grim-beaked baron with his
hooked talons, his ghostly wings, his night-seeing eyes, but I know
that he has come to his window in the apple-tree turret yonder against
the darkening sky, and that he watches with me. I cannot see him swoop
downward over the ditches, nor see him quarter the meadow, beating,
dangling, dropping between the flattened tussocks; nor can I hear him,
as, back on the silent shadows, he slants upward again to his tower.
Mine are human eyes, human ears. Even the quick-eared meadow mouse did
not hear until the long talons closed and it was too late.

[Illustration: SCREECH OWL--“OUT OVER THE MEADOW HE SAILS”]

But there have been times when, like some belated traveler, I have
been forced to cross this wild night-land of his; and I have _felt_
him pass--so near at times that he has stirred my hair, by the
wind--dare I say?--of his mysterious wings. At other times I have
heard him. Often on the edge of night I have listened to his
quavering, querulous cry from the elm-tops below me by the meadow. But
oftener I have watched at the casement here in my castle wall.

Away yonder on the borders of night, dim and gloomy, looms his ancient
keep. I wait. Soon on the deepened dusk spread his soft wings, out
over the meadow he sails, up over my wooded height, over my moat, to
my turret tall, as silent and unseen as the soul of a shadow, except
he drift across the face of the full round moon, or with his weird cry
cause the dreaming quiet to stir in its sleep and moan.

Now let us go over again to the old tree, this time in May. It will be
curious enough, as the soft dusk comes on, to see the round face of
the owl in one hole and, out of another hole in the broken limb above,
the flat, weazened face of a little tree-toad.

Both creatures love the dusk; both have come forth to their open doors
to watch the darkening; both will make off under the cover of the
night--one for mice and frogs over the meadow, the other for slugs and
insects over the crooked, tangled limbs of the apple tree.

It is strange enough to see them together, but it is stranger still
to think of them together; for it is just such prey as this little
toad that the owl has gone over the meadow to catch.

Why does he not take the supper ready here on the shelf? There may be
reasons that we, who do not eat tree-toad, know nothing of; but I am
inclined to believe that the owl has never seen his fellow lodger in
the doorway above, though he must often have heard him trilling gently
and lonesomely in the gloaming, when his skin cries for rain!

Small wonder if they have never met! for this gray, squat, disk-toed
little monster in the hole, or flattened on the bark of the tree like
a patch of lichen, may well be one of the things that are hidden from
even the sharp-eyed owl. It is always a source of fresh amazement, the
way that this largest of the hylas, on the moss-marked rind of an old
tree, can utterly blot himself out before your staring eyes.

The common toads and all the frogs have enemies enough, and it would
seem from the comparative scarcity of the tree-toads that they must
have enemies, too; but I do not know who they are. This scarcity of
the tree-toads is something of a puzzle, and all the more to me, that,
to my certain knowledge, this toad has lived in the old Baldwin tree,
now, for five years. Perhaps he has been several toads, you say, not
one; for who can tell one tree-toad from another? Nobody; and for that
reason I made, some time ago, a simple experiment, in order to see
how long a tree-toad might live, unprotected, in his own natural
environment.

Upon moving into this house, about nine years ago, we found a
tree-toad living in the big hickory by the porch. For the next three
springs he reappeared, and all summer long we would find him, now on
the tree, now on the porch, often on the railing and backed tight up
against a post. Was he one or many? we asked. Then we marked him; and
for the next four years we knew that he was himself alone. How many
more years he might have lived in the hickory for us all to pet, I
should like to know; but last summer, to our great sorrow, the gypsy
moth killers, poking in the hole, hit our little friend and left him
dead.

It was very wonderful to me, the instinct for home--the love for home,
I should like to call it--that this humble little creature showed.
Now, a toad is an amphibian to the zoölogist; an ugly gnome with a
jeweled eye, to the poet; but to the naturalist, the lover of life for
its own sake, who lives next door to his toad, who feeds him a fly or
a fat grub now and then, who tickles him to sleep with a rose leaf,
who waits as thirstily as the hilltop for him to call the summer rain,
who knows his going to sleep for the winter, his waking up for the
spring--to such a one, I say, a tree-toad means more than the jeweled
eye and the strange amphibious habits.

This small tree-toad had a home, had it in a tree, too,--in a hickory
tree,--this toad that dwelt by my house.

    “East, west,
    Hame’s best,”

croaked our tree-toad in a tremulous, plaintive song that wakened
memories in the vague twilight of more old, unhappy, far-off things
than any other voice I ever knew.

These two tree-toads could not have been induced to trade houses, the
hickory for the apple, because a house to a toad means home, and a
home is never in the market. There are many more houses in the land
than homes. Most of us are only real-estate dealers. Many of us have
never had a home; and none of us has ever had, perhaps, more than one,
or could have--that home of our childhood.

This toad seemed to feel it all. Here in the hickory for four years
(more nearly seven, I am sure) he lived, single and alone. He would go
down to the meadow when the toads gathered there to lay their eggs;
but back he would come, without mate or companion, to his tree.
Stronger than love of kind, than love of mate, constant and dominant
in his slow cold heart was his instinct for home.

If I go down to the orchard and bring up from an apple tree some other
toad to dwell in the hole of the hickory, I shall fail. He might
remain for the day, but not throughout the night, for with the
gathering twilight there steals upon him an irresistible longing; and
guided by it, as bee and pigeon and dog and man are guided, he makes
his sure way back to his orchard home.

Would my toad of the Baldwin tree go back beyond the orchard, over the
road, over the wide meadow, over to the old tree, half a mile away, if
I brought him from there? We shall see. During the coming summer I
shall mark him in some manner, and bringing him here to the hickory, I
shall then watch the old apple tree yonder to see if he returns. It
will be a hard, perilous journey. But his longing will not let him
rest; and, guided by his mysterious sense of direction,--for that
_one_ place,--he will arrive, I am sure, or he will die on the way.

Suppose he never gets back? Only one toad less? A great deal more than
that. There in the old Baldwin he has made his home for I don’t know
how long, hunting over its world of branches in the summer, sleeping
down in its deep holes during the winter--down under the chips and
punk and castings, beneath the nest of the owls, it may be; for my
toad in the hickory always buried himself so, down in the débris at
the bottom of the hole, where, in a kind of cold storage, he preserved
himself until thawed out by the spring.

I never pass the old apple in the summer but that I stop to pay my
respects to the toad; nor in the winter that I do not pause and think
of him asleep in there. He is no longer mere toad. He has passed into
the Guardian Spirit of the tree, warring in the green leaf against
worm and grub and slug, and in the dry leaf hiding himself, a heart of
life, within the thin ribs, as if to save the old shell of a tree to
another summer.

Often in the dusk, especially the summer dusk, I have gone over to sit
at his feet and learn some of the things that my school-teachers and
college professors did not teach me.

Seating myself comfortably at the foot of the tree, I wait. The toad
comes forth to the edge of his hole above me, settles himself
comfortably, and waits. And the lesson begins. The quiet of the summer
evening steals out with the wood-shadows and softly covers the fields.
We do not stir. An hour passes. We do not stir. Not to stir is the
lesson--one of the primary lessons in this course with the toad.

The dusk thickens. The grasshoppers begin to strum; the owl slips out
and drifts away; a whip-poor-will drops on the bare knoll near me,
clucks and shouts and shouts again, his rapid repetition a thousand
times repeated by the voices that call to one another down the long
empty aisles of the swamp; a big moth whirs about my head and is
gone; a bat flits squeaking past; a firefly blazes, is blotted out by
the darkness, blazes again, and so passes, his tiny lantern flashing
into a night that seems the darker for his quick, unsteady glow.

We do not stir. It is a hard lesson. By all my other teachers I had
been taught every manner of stirring, and this strange exercise of
being still takes me where my body is weakest, and puts me almost out
of breath.

What! out of breath by keeping still? Yes, because I had been hurrying
hither and thither, doing this and that--doing them so fast for so
many years that I no longer understood how to sit down and keep still
and do nothing inside of me as well as outside. Of course _you_ know
how to keep still, for you are children. And so perhaps you do not
need to take lessons of teacher Toad. But I do, for I am grown up, and
a man, with a world of things to do, a great many of which I do not
need to do at all--if only I would let the toad teach me all he knows.

So, when I am tired, I will go over to the toad. I will sit at his
feet, where time is nothing, and the worry of work even less. He has
all time and no task. He sits out the hour silent, thinking--I know
not what, nor need to know. So we will sit in silence, the toad and I,
watching Altair burn along the shore of the horizon, and overhead
Arcturus, and the rival fireflies flickering through the leaves of
the apple tree. And as we watch, I shall have time to rest and to
think. Perhaps I shall have a thought, a thought all my own, a rare
thing for any one to have, and worth many an hour of waiting.




CHAPTER IV

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO SEE THIS SPRING


Out of the multitude of sights, which twelve sights this spring shall
I urge you to see? Why the twelve, of course, that I always look for
most eagerly. And the first of these, I think, is the bluebird.


I

“Have you seen a bluebird yet?” some friend will ask me, as March
comes on. Or it will be, “I have seen my first bluebird!” as if seeing
a first bluebird were something very wonderful and important. And so
it is; for the sight of the first March bluebird is the last sight of
winter and the first sight of spring. The brown of the fertile earth
is on its breast, the blue of the summer sky is on its back, and in
its voice is the clearest, sweetest of all invitations to come out of
doors.

Where has he spent the winter? Look it up. What has brought him back
so early? Guess at it. What does he say as he calls to you? Listen.
What has John Burroughs written about him? Look it up and read.


II

You must see the skunk-cabbage abloom in the swamp. You need not pick
it and carry it home for the table--just see it. But be sure you see
it. Get down and open the big purple-streaked spathe, as it spears the
cold mud, and look at the “spadix” covered with its tiny but perfect
flowers. Now wait a minute. The woods are still bare; ice may still be
found on the northern slopes, while here before you, like a wedge
splitting the frozen soil, like a spear cleaving through the earth
from the other, the summer, side of the world, is this broad blade of
life letting up almost the first cluster of the new spring’s flowers.
Wait a moment longer and you may hear your first bumblebee, as he
comes humming at the door of the cabbage for a taste of new honey and
pollen.


III

Among the other early signs of spring, you should see a flock of
red-winged blackbirds! And what a sight they are upon a snow-covered
field! For often after their return it will snow again, when the
brilliant, shining birds in black with their red epaulets make one of
the most striking sights of the season.


IV

Another bird event that you should witness is the arrival of the
migrating warblers. You will be out one of these early May days when
there will be a stirring of small birds in the bushes at your side, in
the tall trees over your head--everywhere! It is the warblers. You are
in the tide of the tiny migrants--yellow warblers, pine warblers,
myrtle warblers, black-throated green warblers--some of them on their
way from South America to Labrador. You must be in the woods and see
them as they come.


V

You should see the “spice-bush” (wild allspice or fever-bush or
Benjamin-bush) in bloom in the damp March woods. And, besides that,
you should see with your own eyes under some deep, dark forest trees
the blue hepatica and on some bushy hillside the pink arbutus. (For
fear I forget to tell you in the chapter of things to do, let me now
say that you should take a day this spring and go “may-flowering.”)


VI

There are four nests that you should see this spring: a hummingbird’s
nest, saddled upon the horizontal limb of some fruit or forest tree,
and looking more like a wart on the limb than a nest; secondly, the
nest, eggs rather, of a turtle buried in the soft sand along the
margin of a pond or out in some cultivated field; thirdly, the nest of
a sun-fish (pumpkin-seed) in the shallow water close up along the
sandy shore of the pond; and fourthly, the nest of the red squirrel,
made of fine stripped cedar bark, away up in the top of some tall pine
tree! I mean by this that there are many other interesting
nest-builders besides the birds. Of all the difficult nests to find,
the hummingbird’s is the most difficult. When you find one, please
write to me about it.


VII

You should see a “spring peeper,” the tiny Pickering’s frog--_if you
can_. The marsh and the meadows will be vocal with them, but one of
the hardest things that you will try to do this spring will be to see
the shrill little piper, as he plays his bagpipe in the rushes at your
very feet. But hunt until you do see him. It will sharpen your eyes
and steady your patience for finding other things.


VIII

You should see the sun come up on a May morning. The dawn is always a
wonderful sight, but never at other times attended with quite the
glory, with quite the music, with quite the sweet fragrance, with
quite the wonder of a morning in May. Don’t fail to see it. Don’t fail
to rise with it. You will feel as if you had wings--something better
even than wings.


IX

You should see a farmer ploughing in a large field--the long straight
furrows of brown earth; the blackbirds following behind after worms;
the rip of the ploughshare; the roll of the soil from the smooth
mould-board--the wealth of it all. For in just such fields is the
wealth of the world, and the health of it, too. Don’t miss the sight
of the ploughing.


X

Go again to the field, three weeks later, and see it all green with
sprouting corn, or oats, or one of a score of crops. Then--but in “The
Fall of the Year” I ask you to go once more and see that field all
covered with shocks of ripened corn, shocks that are pitched up and
down its long rows of corn-butts like a vast village of Indian tepees,
each tepee full of golden corn.


XI

You should see, hanging from a hole in some old apple tree, a long
thin snake-skin! It is the latch-string of the great crested
flycatcher. Now why does this bird always use a snake-skin in his
nest? and why does he usually leave it hanging loose outside the hole?
Questions, these, for you to think about. And if you will look sharp,
you will see in even the commonest things questions enough to keep you
thinking as long as you live.


XII

You should see a dandelion. A dandelion? Yes, a dandelion, “fringing
the dusty road with harmless gold.” But that almost requires four
eyes--two to see the dandelion and two more to see the gold--the two
eyes in your head, and the two in your imagination. Do you really know
how to see anything? Most persons have eyes, but only a few really
see. This is because they cannot look hard and steadily at anything.
The first great help to real seeing is to go into the woods knowing
what you hope to see--seeing it in your eye, as we say, before you see
it in the out-of-doors. No one would ever see a tree-toad on a mossy
tree or a whip-poor-will among the fallen leaves who did not have
tree-toads and whip-poor-wills in mind. Then, secondly, look at the
thing _hard_ until you see in it something peculiar, something
different from anything like it that you ever saw before. Don’t dream
in the woods; don’t expect the flowers to tell you their names or the
wild things to come up and ask you to wait while they perform for
you.




CHAPTER V

IF YOU HAD WINGS


If you had wings, why of course you would wear feathers instead of
clothes, and you might be a crow! And then of course you would steal
corn, and run the risk of getting three of your big wing feathers shot
away.

All winter long, and occasionally during this spring, I have seen one
of my little band of crows flying about with a big hole in his
wing,--at least three of his large wing feathers gone, shot away
probably last summer,--which causes him to fly with a list or limp,
like an automobile with a flattened tire, or a ship with a shifted
ballast.

Now for nearly a year that crow has been hobbling about on one whole
and one half wing, trusting to luck to escape his enemies, until he
can get three new feathers to take the places of those that are
missing. “Well, why doesn’t he get them?” you ask. If you were that
crow, how would you get them? Can a crow, by taking thought, add three
new feathers to his wing?

Certainly not. That crow must wait until wing-feather season comes
again, just as an apple tree must wait until apple-growing season
comes to hang its boughs with luscious fruit. The crow has nothing to
do with it. His wing feathers are supplied by Nature once a year
(after the nesting-time), and if a crow loses any of them, even if
right after the new feathers had been supplied, that crow will have to
wait until the season for wing feathers comes around once more--if
indeed he can wait and does not fall a prey to hawk or owl or the
heavy odds of winter.

But Nature is not going to be hurried on that account, nor caused to
change one jot or tittle from her wise and methodical course. The
Bible says that the hairs of our heads are numbered. So are the
feathers on a crow’s body. Nature knows just how many there are
altogether; how many there are of each sort--primaries, secondaries,
tertials, greater coverts, middle coverts, lesser coverts, and
scapulars--in the wing; just how each sort is arranged; just when each
sort is to be moulted and renewed. If Master Crow does not take care
of his clothes, then he will have to go without until the time for a
new suit comes; for Mother Nature won’t patch them up as your mother
patches up yours.

But now this is what I want you to notice and think about: that just
as an apple falls according to a great law of Nature, so a bird’s
feathers fall according to a law of Nature. The moon is appointed for
seasons; the sun knoweth his going down; and so light and
insignificant a thing as a bird’s feather not only is appointed to
grow in a certain place at a certain time, but also knoweth its
falling off.

Nothing could look more haphazard, certainly, than the way a hen’s
feathers seem to drop off at moulting time. The most forlorn, undone,
abject creature about the farm is the half-moulted hen. There is one
in the chicken-yard now, so nearly naked that she really is ashamed of
herself, and so miserably helpless that she squats in a corner all
night, unable to reach the low poles of the roost. It is a critical
experience with the hen, this moulting of her feathers; and were it
not for the protection of the yard it would be a fatal experience, so
easily could she be captured. Nature seems to have no hand in the
business at all; if she has, then what a mess she is making of it!

But pick up the hen, study the falling of the feathers carefully, and
lo! here is law and order, every feather as important to Nature as a
star, every quill as a planet, and the old white hen as mightily
looked after by Nature as the round sphere of the universe!

Once a year, usually after the nesting-season, it seems a physical
necessity for most birds to renew their plumage.

We get a new suit (some of us) because our old one wears out. That is
the most apparent cause for the new annual suit of the birds. Yet with
them, as with some of us, the feathers go out of fashion, and then the
change of feathers is a mere matter of style, it seems.

For severe and methodical as Mother Nature must be (and what mother or
teacher or ruler, who has great things to do and a multitude of little
things to attend to, must not be severe and methodical?)--severe, I
say, as Mother Nature must be in looking after her children’s clothes,
she has for all that a real motherly heart, it seems.

For see how she looks after their wedding garments--giving to most of
the birds a new suit, gay and gorgeous, especially to the bridegrooms,
as if fine feathers _did_ make a fine bird! Or does she do all of this
to meet the fancy of the bride, as the scientists tell us? Whether so
or not, it is a fact that among the birds it is the bridegroom who is
adorned for his wife, and sometimes the fine feathers come by a
special moult--an extra suit for him!

Take Bobolink, for instance. He has two complete moults a year, two
new suits, one of them his wedding suit. Now, as I write, I hear him
singing over the meadow--a jet-black, white, and cream-buff lover,
most strikingly adorned. His wife, down in the grass, looks as little
like him as a sparrow looks like a blackbird. But after the
breeding-season he will moult again, changing color so completely that
he and his wife and children will all look alike, all like sparrows,
and will even lose their names, flying south now under the name of
“reed-birds.”

Bobolink passes the winter in Brazil; and in the spring, just before
the long northward journey begins, he lays aside his fall traveling
clothes and puts on his gay wedding garments and starts north for his
bride. But you would hardly know he was so dressed, to look at him;
for, strangely enough, he is not black and white, but still colored
like a sparrow, as he was in the fall. _Apparently_ he is. Look at him
more closely, however, and you will find that the brownish-yellow
color is all caused by a veil of fine fringes hanging from the edges
of the feathers. The bridegroom wearing the wedding veil? Yes!
Underneath is the black and white and cream-buff suit. He starts
northward; and, by the time he reaches Massachusetts, the fringe veil
is worn off and the black and white bobolink appears. Specimens taken
after their arrival here still show traces of the brownish-yellow
veil.

Many birds do not have this early spring moult at all; and with most
of those that do, the great wing feathers are not then renewed as are
bobolink’s, but only at the annual moult after the nesting is done.
The great feathers of the wings are, as you know, the most important
feathers a bird has; and the shedding of them is so serious a matter
that Nature has come to make the change according to the habits and
needs of the birds. With most birds the body feathers begin to go
first, then the wing feathers, and last those of the tail. But the
shedding of the wing feathers is a very slow and carefully regulated
process.

In the wild geese and other water birds the wing feathers drop out
with the feathers of the body, and go so nearly together that the
birds really cannot fly. On land you could catch the birds with your
hands. But they keep near or on the water and thus escape, though
times have been when it was necessary to protect them at this season
by special laws; for bands of men would go into their nesting-marshes
and kill them with clubs by hundreds!

The shedding of the feathers brings many risks to the birds; but
Nature leaves none of her children utterly helpless. The geese at this
time cannot fly because their feathers are gone; but they can swim,
and so get away from most of their natural enemies. On the other hand,
the hawks that hunt by wing, and must have wings always in good
feather, or else perish, lose their feathers so slowly that they never
feel their loss. It takes a hawk nearly a year to get a complete
change of wing feathers, one or two dropping out from each wing at a
time, at long intervals apart.

Then here is the gosling, that goes six weeks in down, before it gets
its first feathers, which it sheds within a few weeks, in the fall.
Whereas the young quail is born with quills so far grown that it is
able to fly almost as soon as it is hatched. These are real mature
feathers; but the bird is young and soon outgrows these first flight
feathers, so they are quickly lost and new ones come. This goes on
till fall, _several_ moults occurring the first summer to meet the
increasing weight of the little quail’s growing body.

I said that Nature was severe and methodical, and so she is, where she
needs to be, so severe that you are glad, perhaps, that you are not a
crow. But Nature, like every wise mother, is severe only where she
needs to be. A crow’s wing feathers are vastly important to him. Let
him then take care of them, for they are the best feathers made and
are put in to stay a year. But a crow’s tail feathers are not so
vastly important to him; he could get on, if, like the rabbit in the
old song, he had no tail at all.

In most birds the tail is a kind of balance or steering-gear, and not
of equal importance with the wings. Nature, consequently, seems to
have attached less importance to the feathers of the tail. They are
not so firmly set, nor are they of the same quality or kind; for,
unlike the wing feathers, if a tail feather is lost through accident,
it is made good, no matter when. How do you explain that? Do you think
I believe that old story of the birds roosting with their tails out,
so that, because of generations of lost tails, those feathers now grow
expecting to be plucked by some enemy, and therefore have only a
temporary hold?

The normal, natural way, of course, is to replace a lost feather with
a new one as soon as possible. But, in order to give extra strength to
the wing feathers, Nature has found it necessary to check their
frequent change; and so complete is the check that the annual moult is
required to replace a single one. The Japanese have discovered the
secret of this check, and are able by it to keep certain feathers in
the tails of their cocks growing until they reach the enormous length
of ten to twelve feet.

My crow, it seems, lost his three feathers last summer just after his
annual moult; the three broken shafts he carries still in his wing,
and must continue to carry, as the stars must continue their courses,
until those three feathers have rounded out their cycle to the annual
moult. The universe of stars and feathers is a universe of law, of
order, and of reason.




CHAPTER VI

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO DO THIS SPRING


I do not know where to begin--there are so many interesting things to
do this spring! But, while we ought to be interested in all of the
out-of-doors, it is very necessary to select some _one_ field, say,
the birds or flowers, for _special_ study. That would help us to
decide what to do this spring.


I

If there is still room under your window, or on the clothes-pole in
your yard, or in a neighboring tree, nail up another bird-house. (Get
“Methods of Attracting Birds” by Gilbert H. Trafton.) If the
bird-house is on a pole or post, invert a large tin pan over the end
of the post and nail the house fast upon it. This will keep cats and
squirrels from disturbing the birds. If the bird-house is in a tree,
saw off a limb, if you can without hurting the tree, and do the same
there. Cats are our birds’ worst enemies.


II

Cats! Begin in your own home and neighborhood a campaign against the
cats, to reduce their number and to educate their owners to the need
of keeping them well fed and shut up in the house from early evening
until after the early morning; for these are the cats’ natural hunting
hours, when they do the greatest harm to the birds.

This does not mean any cruelty to the cat--no stoning, no persecution.
The cat is not at fault. It is the keepers of the cats who need to be
educated. Out of every hundred nests in my neighborhood the cats of
two farmhouses destroy ninety-five! The state must come to the rescue
of the birds by some new rigid law reducing the number of cats.


III

Speaking of birds, let me urge you to begin your watching and study
early--with the first robins and bluebirds--and to select some near-by
park or wood-lot or meadow to which you can go frequently. There is a
good deal in getting intimately acquainted with a locality, so that
you know its trees individually, its rocks, walls, fences, the very
qualities of its soil. Therefore you want a small area, close at hand.
Most observers make the mistake of roaming first here, then there,
spending their time and observation in finding their way around,
instead of upon the birds to be seen. You must get used to your paths
and trees before you can see the birds that flit about them.


IV

In this haunt that you select for your observation, you must study not
only the birds but the trees, and the other forms of life, and the
shape of the ground (the “lay” of the land) as well, so as to know
_all_ that you see. In a letter just received from a teacher, who is
also a college graduate, occurs this strange description: “My window
faces a hill on which straggle brown houses among the deep green of
elms or oaks or maples, I don’t know which.” Perhaps the hill is far
away; but I suspect that the writer, knowing my love for the
out-of-doors, wanted to give me a vivid picture, but, not knowing one
tree from another, put them all in so I could make my own choice!

Learn your common trees, common flowers, common bushes, common
animals, along with the birds.


V

Plant a garden, if only a pot of portulacas, and _care_ for it, and
watch it grow! Learn to dig in the soil and to love it. It is amazing
how much and how many things you can grow in a box on the window-sill,
or in a corner of the dooryard. There are plants for the sun and
plants for the shade, plants for the wall, plants for the very cellar
of your house. Get you a bit of earth and plant it, no matter how busy
you are with other things this spring.


VI

There are four excursions that you should make this spring: one to a
small pond in the woods; one to a deep, wild swamp; one to a wide
salt marsh or fresh-water meadow; and one to the seashore--to a wild
rocky or sandy shore uninhabited by man.

There are particular birds and animals as well as plants and flowers
that dwell only in these haunts; besides, you will get a sight of four
distinct kinds of landscape, four deep impressions of the face of
nature that are altogether as good to have as the sight of four
flowers or birds.


VII

Make a calendar of _your_ spring (read “Nature’s Diary” by Francis H.
Allen)--when and where you find your first bluebird, robin, oriole,
etc.; when and where you find your first hepatica, arbutus, saxifrage,
etc.; and, as the season goes on, when and where the doings of the
various wild things take place.


VIII

Boy or girl, you should go fishing--down to the pond or the river
where you go to watch the birds. Suppose you do not catch any fish.
That doesn’t matter; for you have gone out to the pond with a pole in
your hands (a pole is a _real_ thing); you have gone with the _hope_
(hope is a _real_ thing) of catching _fish_ (fish are _real_ things);
and even if you catch no fish, you will be sure, as you wait for the
fish to bite, to hear a belted kingfisher, or see a painted turtle, or
catch the breath of the sweet leaf-buds and clustered catkins opening
around the wooded pond. It is a very good thing for the young
naturalist to learn to sit still. A fish-pole is a great help in
learning that necessary lesson.


IX

One of the most interesting things you can do for special study is to
collect some frogs’ eggs from the pond and watch them grow into
tadpoles and on into frogs. There are glass vessels made particularly
for such study (an ordinary glass jar will do). If you can afford a
small glass aquarium, get one and with a few green water plants put in
a few minnows, a snail or two, a young turtle, water-beetles, and
frogs’ eggs, and watch them grow.


X

You should get up by half past three o’clock (at the earliest streak
of dawn) and go out into the new morning with the birds! You will
hardly recognize the world as that in which your humdrum days (there
are no such days, really) are spent! All is fresh, all is new, and the
bird-chorus! “Is it possible,” you will exclaim, “that this can be the
earth?”

Early morning and toward sunset are the best times of the day for
bird-study. But if there was not a bird, there would be the sunrise
and the sunset--the wonder of the waking, the peace of the closing,
day.


XI

I am not going to tell you that you should make a collection of
beetles or butterflies (you should _not_ make a collection of birds or
birds’ eggs) or of pressed flowers or of minerals or of arrow-heads or
of--anything. Because, while such a collection is of great interest
and of real value in teaching you names and things, still there are
better ways of studying living nature. For instance, I had rather
have you tame a hop-toad, feed him, watch him evening after evening
all summer, than make any sort of dead or dried or pressed collection
of anything. Live things are better than those things dead. Better
know one live toad under your doorstep than bottle up in alcohol all
the reptiles of your state.


XII

Finally you should remember that kindliness and patience and close
watching are the keys to the out-of-doors; that only sympathy and
gentleness and quiet are welcome in the fields and woods. What, then,
ought I to say that you should do finally?




CHAPTER VII

THE PALACE IN THE PIG-PEN


“You have taken a handful of my wooded acres,” says Nature to me, “and
if you have not improved them, you at least have changed them greatly.
But they are mine still. Be friendly now, go softly, and you shall
have them all--and I shall have them all, too. We will share them
together.”

And we do. Every part of the fourteen acres is mine, yielding some
kind of food or fuel or shelter. And every foot, yes, every foot, is
Nature’s; as entirely hers as when the thick primeval forest stood
here. The apple trees are hers as much as mine, and she has ten
different bird families that I know of, living in them this spring. A
pair of crows and a pair of red-tailed hawks are nesting in the
wood-lot; there are at least three families of chipmunks in as many of
my stone-piles; a fine old tree-toad sleeps on the porch under the
climbing rose; a hornet’s nest hangs in a corner of the eaves; a small
colony of swifts thunder in the chimney; swallows twitter in the
hay-loft; a chipmunk and a half-tame gray squirrel feed in the barn;
and--to bring an end to this bare beginning--under the roof of the
pig-pen dwell a pair of phœbes.

To make a bird-house of a pig-pen, to divide it between the pig and
the bird--this is as far as Nature can go, and this is certainly
enough to redeem the whole farm. For she has not sent an outcast or a
scavenger to dwell in the pen, but a bird of character, however much
he may lack in song or color. Phœbe does not make up well in a
picture; neither does he perform well as a singer; there is little to
him, in fact, but personality--personality of a kind and (may I say?)
quantity, sufficient to make the pig-pen a decent and respectable
neighborhood.

Phœbe is altogether more than his surroundings. Every time I go to
feed the pig, he lights upon a post near by and says to me, “It’s what
you are! Not what you do, but how you do it!”--with a launch into the
air, a whirl, an unerring snap at a cabbage butterfly, and an easy
drop to the post again, by way of illustration. “Not where you live,
but how you live there; not the feathers you wear, but how you wear
them--it is what you are that counts!”

There is a difference between being a “character” and having one. My
phœbe “lives over the pig,” but I cannot feel familiar with a bird
of his air and carriage, who faces the world so squarely, who settles
upon a stake as if he owned it, who lives a prince in my pig-pen.

Look at him! How alert, able, free! Notice the limber drop of his
tail, the ready energy it suggests. By that one sign you would know
the bird had force. He is afraid of nothing, not even the cold; and he
migrates only because he is a flycatcher, and is thus compelled to.
The earliest spring day, however, that you find the flies buzzing in
the sun, look for phœbe. He is back, coming alone and long before
it is safe. He was one of the first of my birds to return this spring.

And it was a fearful spring, this of which I am telling you. How
Phœbe managed to exist those miserable March days is a mystery. He
came directly to the pen as he had come the year before, and his
presence in that bleakest of Marches gave the weather its only touch
of spring.

The same force and promptness are manifest in the domestic affairs of
the bird. One of the first to arrive this spring, he was the first to
build and bring off a brood--or, perhaps, _she_ was. And the size of
the brood--of the broods, for there was a second, and a third!

Phœbe appeared without his mate, and for nearly three weeks he
hunted in the vicinity of the pen, calling the day long, and, toward
the end of the second week, occasionally soaring into the air,
fluttering, and pouring forth a small, ecstatic song that seemed
fairly forced from him.

These aerial bursts meant just one thing: _she_ was coming, was coming
soon! Was she coming or was he getting ready to go for her? Here he
had been for nearly three weeks, his house-lot chosen, his mind at
rest, his heart beating faster with every sunrise. It was as plain as
day that he knew--was certain--just how and just when something lovely
was going to happen. I wished I knew. I was half in love with her
myself; and I, too, watched for her.

On the evening of April 14th, he was alone as usual. The next morning
a pair of phœbes flitted in and out of the windows of the pen. Here
she was. Will some one tell me all about it? Had she just come along
and fallen instantly in love with him and his fine pig-pen? It is
pretty evident that he nested here last year. Was she, then, his old
mate? Did they keep together all through the autumn and winter? If so,
then why not together all the way back from Florida to Massachusetts?

Here is a pretty story. But who will tell it to me?

For several days after she came, the weather continued raw and wet, so
that nest-building was greatly delayed. The scar of an old, last
year’s nest still showed on a stringer, and I wondered if they had
decided on this or some other site for the new nest. They had not made
up their minds, for when they did start it was to make three
beginnings in as many places.

Then I offered a suggestion. Out of a bit of stick, branching at right
angles, I made a little bracket and tacked it up on one of the
stringers. It appealed to them at once, and from that moment the
building went steadily on.

Saddled upon this bracket, and well mortared to the stringer, the
nest, when finished, was as safe as a castle. And how perfect a thing
it was! Few nests, indeed, combine the solidity, the softness, and the
exquisite inside curve of Phœbe’s.

In placing the bracket, I had carelessly nailed it under one of the
cracks in the loose board roof. The nest was receiving its first
linings when there came a long, hard rain that beat through the crack
and soaked the little cradle. This was serious, for a great deal of
mud had been worked into the thick foundation, and here, in the
constant shade, the dampness would be long in drying out.

The builders saw the mistake, too, and with their great good sense
immediately began to remedy it. They built the bottom up thicker,
carried the walls over on a slant that brought the outermost point
within the line of the crack, then raised them until the cup was as
round-rimmed and hollow as the mould of Mrs. Phœbe’s breast could
make it.

The outside of the nest, its base, is broad and rough and shapeless
enough; but nothing could be softer and lovelier than the inside, the
cradle, and nothing drier, for the slanting walls of the nest shed
every drop from the leafy crack above.

Wet weather followed the heavy rain until long after the nest was
finished. The whole structure was as damp and cold as a newly
plastered house. It felt wet to my touch. Yet I noticed that the birds
were already brooding. Every night and often during the day I would
see one of them in the nest--so deep in, that only a head or a tail
showed over the round rim.

After several days I looked to see the eggs, but to my surprise found
the nest empty. It had been robbed, I thought, yet by what creature I
could not imagine. Then down cuddled one of the birds again--and I
understood. Instead of wet and cold, the nest to-day was warm to my
hand, and dry almost to the bottom. It had changed color, too, all the
upper part having turned a soft silver-gray. She (I am sure it was
she) had not been brooding her eggs at all; she had been brooding her
mother’s thought of them; and for them had been nestling here these
days and nights, _drying and warming_ their damp cradle with the fire
of her life and love.

In due time the eggs came,--five of them, white, spotless, and
shapely. While the little phœbe hen was hatching them, I gave my
attention further to the cock.

Our intimate friendship revealed a most pleasing nature in phœbe.
Perhaps such close and continued association would show like qualities
in every bird, even in the kingbird; but I fear only a woman, like
Mrs. Olive Thorne Miller, could find them in him. Not much can be said
of this flycatcher family, except that it is useful--a kind of virtue
that gets its chief reward in heaven. I am acquainted with only four
of the other nine Eastern members,--crested flycatcher, kingbird, wood
pewee, and chebec,--and each of these has some redeeming attribute
besides the habit of catching flies.

They are all good nest-builders, good parents, and brave, independent
birds; but aside from phœbe and pewee--the latter in his small way
the sweetest voice of the oak woods--the whole family is an odd lot,
cross-grained, cross-looking, and about as musical as a family of
ducks. A duck seems to know that he cannot sing. A flycatcher knows
nothing of his shortcomings. He believes he can sing, and in time he
will prove it. If desire and effort count for anything, he certainly
must prove it in time. How long the family has already been training,
no one knows. Everybody knows, however, the success each flycatcher of
them has thus far attained. It would make a good minstrel show,
doubtless, if the family would appear together. In chorus, surely,
they would be far from a tuneful choir. Yet individually, in the wide
universal chorus of the out-of-doors, how much we should miss the
kingbird’s metallic twitter and the chebec’s insistent call!

There was little excitement for phœbe during this period of
incubation. He hunted in the neighborhood and occasionally called to
his mate, contented enough perhaps, but certainly sometimes appearing
tired.

[Illustration: PHŒBE AND HER YOUNG]

One rainy day he sat in the pig-pen window looking out at the gray,
wet world. He was humped and silent and meditative, his whole attitude
speaking the extreme length of his day, the monotony of the drip,
drip, drip from the eaves, and the sitting, the ceaseless sitting, of
his brooding wife. He might have hastened the time by catching a few
flies for her or by taking her place on the nest; but I never saw him
do it.

Things were livelier when the eggs hatched, for it required a good
many flies a day to keep the five young ones growing. And how they
grew! Like bread sponge in a pan, they began to rise, pushing the
mother up so that she was forced to stand over them; then pushing her
out until she could cling only to the side of the nest at night; then
pushing her off altogether. By this time they were hanging to the
outside themselves, covering the nest from sight almost, until finally
they spilled off upon their wings.

Out of the nest upon the air! Out of the pen and into a sweet, wide
world of green and blue and of golden light! I saw one of the broods
take this first flight, and it was thrilling.

The nest was placed back from the window and below it, so that in
leaving the nest the young would have to drop, then turn and fly up to
get out. Below was the pig.

As they grew, I began to fear that they might try their wings before
this feat could be accomplished, and so fall to the pig below. But
Nature, in this case, was careful of her pearls. Day after day they
clung to the nest, even after they might have flown; and when they did
go, it was with a sure and long flight that carried them out and away
to the tops of the neighboring trees.

They left the nest one at a time and were met in the air by their
mother, who, darting to them, calling loudly, and, whirling about
them, helped them as high and as far away as they could go.

I wish the simple record of these family affairs could be closed
without one tragic entry. But that can rarely be of any family. Seven
days after the first brood were awing, I found the new eggs in the
nest. Soon after that the male bird disappeared. The second brood had
now been out a week, and in all that time no sight or sound was had of
the father.

What happened? Was he killed? Caught by a cat or a hawk? It is
possible; and this is an easy and kindly way to think of him. It is
not impossible that he may have remained as leader and protector to
the first brood; or (perish the thought!) might he have grown weary at
sight of the second lot of five eggs, of the long days and the neglect
that they meant for him, and out of jealousy and fickleness wickedly
deserted?

I hope it was death, a stainless, even ignominious death by one of my
neighbor’s many cats.

Death or desertion, it involved a second tragedy. Five such young ones
at this time were too many for the mother. She fought nobly; no mother
could have done more. All five were brought within a few days of
flight; then, one day, I saw a little wing hanging listlessly over the
side of the nest. I went closer. One had died. It had starved to
death. There were none of the parasites in the nest that often kill
whole broods. It was a plain case of sacrifice,--by the mother,
perhaps; by the other young, maybe--one for the other four.

But she did well. Nine such young birds to her credit since April. Who
shall measure her actual use to the world? How does she compare in
value with the pig? Weeks later I saw several of her brood along the
meadow fence hawking for flies. They were not far from my
cabbage-patch.

I hope a pair of them will return to me next spring and that they will
come early. Any bird that deigns to dwell under roof of mine commands
my friendship. But no other bird takes Phœbe’s place in my
affections; there is so much in him to like, and he speaks for so much
of the friendship of nature.

“Humble and inoffensive bird” he has been called by one of our leading
ornithologies--because he comes to my pig-pen! Inoffensive! this bird
with the cabbage butterfly in his beak! The faint and damning praise!
And humble? There is not a humble feather on his body. Humble to
those who see the pen and not the bird. But to me--why, the bird has
made a palace of my pig-pen!

The very pig seems less a pig because of this exquisite association;
and the lowly work of feeding the creature has been turned for me by
Phœbe into a poetic course in bird study.




CHAPTER VIII

IS IT A LIFE OF FEAR?


There was a swish of wings, a flash of gray, a cry of pain; a
squawking, cowering, scattering flock of hens; a weakly fluttering
pullet; and yonder, swinging upward into the sky, a marsh hawk,
buoyant and gleaming silvery in the sun. Over the trees he beat,
circled once, and disappeared.

The hens were still flapping for safety in a dozen directions, but the
gray harrier had gone. A bolt of lightning could hardly have dropped
so unannounced, could hardly have vanished so completely, could
scarcely have killed so quickly. I ran to the pullet, but found her
dead. The harrier’s stroke, delivered with fearful velocity, had laid
head and neck open as with a keen knife. Yet a little slower and he
would have missed, for the pullet warded off the other claw with her
wing. The gripping talons slipped off the long quills, and the hawk
swept on without his quarry. He dared not come back for it at my feet;
so, with a single turn above the woods he was gone.

The scurrying hens stopped to look about them. There was nothing in
the sky to see. They stood still and silent a moment. The rooster
_chucked_. Then one by one they turned back into the open pasture. A
huddled group under the hen-yard fence broke up and came out with the
others. Death had flashed among them, but had missed _them_. Fear had
come, but it had gone. Within two minutes from the fall of the stroke,
every hen in the flock was intent at her scratching, or as intently
chasing the gray grasshoppers over the pasture.

Yet, as the flock scratched, the high-stepping cock would frequently
cast up his eye toward the tree-tops; would sound his alarum at the
flight of a robin; and if a crow came over, he would shout and dodge
and start to run. But instantly the shadow would pass, and instantly
Chanticleer--

    “He looketh as it were a grym leoun,
    And on hise toos he rometh up and doun;
           *       *       *       *       *
    Thus roial as a prince is in an halle.”

He wasn’t afraid. Cautious, alert, watchful he was, but not afraid. No
shadow of dread lay dark and ominous across the sunshine of his
pasture. Shadows came--like a flash; and like a flash they vanished
away.

We cannot go far into the fields without sighting the hawk and the
snake, whose other names are Death. In one form or another Death moves
everywhere, down every wood-path and pasture-lane, through the black
waters of the mill-pond, out under the open of the April sky, night
and day, and every day, the four seasons through.

I have seen the still surface of a pond break suddenly with a swirl,
and flash a hundred flecks of silver into the light, as the minnows
leap from the jaws of the terrible pike. Then a loud rattle, a streak
of blue, a splash at the centre of the swirl, and I see the pike
twisting and bending in the beak of the terrible kingfisher. The
killer is killed. But at the mouth of the nest-hole in the steep
sand-bank, swaying from a root in the edge of the turf above, hangs
the terrible black snake, the third killer; and the belted kingfisher,
dropping the pike, darts off with a startled cry.

I have been afield at times when one tragedy has followed another in
such rapid and continuous succession as to put a whole shining,
singing, blossoming springtime under a pall. Everything has seemed to
cower, skulk, and hide, to run as if pursued. There was no peace, no
stirring of small life, not even in the quiet of the deep pines; for
here a hawk would be nesting, or a snake would be sleeping, or I
would hear the passing of a fox, see perhaps his keen, hungry face an
instant as he halted, winding me.

There is struggle, and pain, and death in the woods, and there is fear
also, but the fear does not last long; it does not haunt and follow
and terrify; it has no being, no shape, no lair. The shadow of the
swiftest scudding cloud is not so fleeting as this Fear-shadow in the
woods. The lowest of the animals seem capable of feeling fear; yet the
very highest of them seem incapable of dreading it. For them Fear is
not of the imagination, but of the sight, and of the passing moment.

    “The present only toucheth thee!”

It does more, it throngs him--our little fellow mortal of the
stubble-field. Into the present is lived the whole of his life--he
remembers none of it; he anticipates none of it. And the whole of this
life is action; and the whole of this action is joy. The moments of
fear in an animal’s life are few and vanishing. Action and joy are
constant, the joint laws of all animal life, of all nature--of the
shining stars that sing together, of the little mice that squeak
together, of the bitter northeast storms that roar across the wintry
fields.

I have had more than one hunter grip me excitedly, and with almost a
command bid me hear the music of the baying pack. There are hollow
halls in the swamps that lie to the east and north and west of me,
that catch up the cry of the foxhounds, that blend it, mellow it,
round it, and roll it, rising and falling over the meadows in great
globes of sound, as pure and sweet as the pearly notes of the veery
rolling round their silver basin in the summer dusk.

What music it is when the pack breaks into the open on the warm trail!
A chorus then of tongues singing the ecstasy of pursuit! My blood
leaps; the natural primitive wild thing of muscle and nerve and
instinct within me slips its leash, and on past with the pack I drive,
the scent of the trail single and sweet in my nostrils, a very fire in
my blood, motion, motion, motion in my bounding muscles, and in my
being a mighty music, spheric and immortal!

                  “The fair music that all creatures made
    To their great Lord, whose love their motions swayed....”

But what about the fox, loping wearily on ahead? What part has he in
the chorus? No part, perhaps, unless we grimly call him its conductor.
But the point is the chorus--that it never ceases, the hounds at this
moment, not the fox, in the leading rôle.

“But the chorus ceases for me,” you say. “My heart is with the poor
fox.” So is mine, and mine is with the dogs too. No, don’t say “Poor
little fox!” For many a night I have bayed with the pack, and as
often--oftener, I think--I have loped and dodged and doubled with the
fox, pitting limb against limb, lung against lung, wit against wit,
and always escaping. More than once, in the warm moonlight, I, the
fox, have led them on and on, spurring their lagging muscles with a
sight of my brush, on and on, through the moonlit night, through the
day, on into the moon again, and on until--only the stir of my own
footsteps has followed me. Then, doubling once more, creeping back a
little upon my track, I have looked at my pursuers, silent and stiff
upon the trail, and, ere the echo of their cry has died away, I have
caught up the chorus and carried it single-throated through the
wheeling, singing spheres.

There is more of fact than of fancy to this. That a fox ever purposely
led a dog to run to death would be hard to prove; but that the dogs
run themselves to death in a single extended chase after a single fox
is a common occurrence here in the woods about the farm. Occasionally
the fox may be overtaken by the hounds; seldom, however, except in the
case of a very young one or of one unacquainted with the lay of the
land, a stranger that may have been driven into the rough country
here.

I have been both fox and hound; I have run the race too often not to
know that both enjoy it at times, fox as much as hound. Some weeks ago
the dogs carried a young fox around and around the farm, hunting him
here, there, everywhere, as if in a game of hide-and-seek. An old fox
would have led the dogs on a long coursing run across the range. But
the young fox, after the dogs were caught and taken off the trail,
soon sauntered up through the mowing-field behind the barn, came out
upon the bare knoll near the house, and sat there in the moonlight
yapping down at Rex and Dewey, the house-dogs in the two farms below.
Rex is a Scotch collie, Dewey a dreadful mix of dog-dregs. He had been
tail-ender in the pack for a while during the afternoon. Both dogs
answered back at the young fox. But he could not egg them on. Rex was
too fat, Dewey had had enough; not so the young fox. It had been fun.
He wanted more. “Come on, Dewey!” he cried. “Come on, Rex, play tag
again! You’re still ‘it.’”

I was at work with my chickens one spring day when the fox broke from
cover in the tall woods, struck the old wagon-road along the ridge,
and came at a gallop down behind the hen-coops, with five hounds not a
minute behind. They passed with a crash and were gone--up over the
ridge and down into the east swamp. Soon I noticed that the pack had
broken, deploying in every direction, beating the ground over and
over. Reynard had given them the slip--on the ridge-side, evidently,
for there were no cries from below in the swamp.

Leaving my work at noon, I went down to restake my cow in the meadow.
I had just drawn her chain-pin when down the road through the orchard
behind me came the fox, hopping high up and down, his neck stretched,
his eye peeled for poultry. Spying a white hen of my neighbor’s, he
made for her, clear to the barnyard wall. Then, hopping higher for a
better view, he sighted another hen in the front yard, skipped in
gayly through the fence, seized her, and loped across the road and
away up the birch-grown hills beyond.

The dogs had been at his very heels ten minutes before. He had fooled
them. And no doubt he had done it again and again. They were even now
yelping at the end of the baffling trail behind the ridge. Let them
yelp. It is a kind and convenient habit of dogs, this yelping, one can
tell so exactly where they are. Meantime one can take a turn for one’s
self at the chase, get a bite of chicken, a drink of water, a wink or
two of rest, and when the yelping gets warm again, one is quite ready
to pick up one’s heels and lead the pack another merry dance. The fox
is quite a jolly fellow.

This is the way the races out of doors are all run off. Now and then
they may end tragically. A fox cannot reckon on the hunter with a gun.
He is racing against the pack of hounds. But, mortal finish or no, the
spirit of the chase is neither rage nor terror, but the excitement of
a matched game, the ecstasy of pursuit for the hound, the passion of
escape for the fox, without fury or fear--except for the instant at
the start and at the finish--when it is a finish.

This is the spirit of the chase--of the race, more truly; for it is
always a race, where the stake is not life and death, but rather the
joy of winning. The hound cares as little for his own life as for the
life of the fox he is hunting. It is the race, instead, that he loves;
it is the moments of crowded, complete, supreme existence for
him--“glory” we call it when men run it off together. Death, and the
fear of death, the animals can neither understand nor feel. Only
enemies exist in the world out of doors, only hounds, foxes,
hawks--they, and their scents, their sounds and shadows; and not fear,
but readiness only. The level of wild life, of the soul of all nature,
is a great serenity. It is seldom lowered, but often raised to a
higher level, intenser, faster, more exultant.

The serrate pines on my horizon are not the pickets of a great pen. My
fields and swamps and ponds are not one wide battle-field, as if the
only work of my wild neighbors were bloody war, and the whole of their
existence a reign of terror. This is a universe of law and order and
marvelous balance; conditions these of life, of normal, peaceful,
joyous life. Life and not death is the law; joy and not fear is the
spirit, is the frame of all that breathes, of very matter itself.

    “And ever at the loom of Birth
      The Mighty Mother weaves and sings;
    She weaves--fresh robes for mangled earth;
      She sings--fresh hopes for desperate things.”

But suppose the fox were a defenseless rabbit, what of fear and terror
then?

Ask any one who has shot in the rabbity fields of southern New Jersey.
The rabbit seldom runs in blind terror. He is soft-eyed, and timid,
and as gentle as a pigeon, but he is not defenseless. A nobler set of
legs was never bestowed by nature than the little cottontail’s. They
are as wings compared with the bent, bow legs that bear up the
ordinary rabbit-hound. With winged legs, protecting color, a clear map
of the country in his head,--its stumps, railpiles, cat-brier tangles,
and narrow rabbit-roads,--with all this as a handicap, Bunny may well
run his usual cool and winning race. The balance is just as even, the
chances quite as good, and the contest every bit as interesting to him
as to Reynard.

I have seen a rabbit squat close in his form and let a hound pass
yelping within a few feet of him, but waiting on his toes as ready as
a hair-trigger should he be discovered.

I have seen him leap for his life as the dog sighted him, and,
bounding like a ball across the stubble, disappear in the woods, the
hound within two jumps of his flashing tail. I have waited at the end
of the wood-road for the runners to come back, down the home-stretch,
for the finish. On they go through the woods, for a quarter, or
perhaps a half a mile, the baying of the hound faint and intermittent
in the distance, then quite lost. No, there it is again, louder now.
They have turned the course.

I wait.

The quiet life of the woods is undisturbed; for the voice of the hound
is only an echo, not unlike the far-off tolling of a slow-swinging
bell. The leaves stir as a wood mouse scurries from his stump; an
acorn rattles down; then in the winding wood-road I hear the _pit-pat,
pit-pat_, of soft furry feet, and there at the bend is the rabbit. He
stops, rises high up on his haunches, and listens. He drops again upon
all fours, scratches himself behind the ear, reaches over the cart-rut
for a nip of sassafras, hops a little nearer, and throws his big ears
forward in quick alarm, for he sees me, and, as if something had
exploded under him, he kicks into the air and is off,--leaving a
pretty tangle for the dog to unravel, later on, by this mighty jump to
the side.

My children and a woodchopper were witnesses recently of an exciting,
and, for this section of Massachusetts, a novel race, which, but for
them, must certainly have ended fatally. The boys were coming through
the wood-lot where the man was chopping, when down the hillside toward
them rushed a little chipmunk, his teeth a-chatter with terror; for
close behind him, with the easy, wavy motion of a shadow, glided a
dark-brown animal, which the man took on the instant for a mink, but
which must have been a large weasel or a pine marten. When almost at
the feet of the boys, and about to be seized by the marten, the
squeaking chipmunk ran up a tree. Up glided the marten, up for twenty
feet, when the chipmunk jumped. It was a fearfully close call.

The marten did not dare to jump, but turned and started down, when the
man intercepted him with a stick. Around and around the tree he
dodged, growling and snarling and avoiding the stick, not a bit
abashed, stubbornly holding his own, until forced to seek refuge among
the branches. Meanwhile, the terrified chipmunk had recovered his
nerve and sat quietly watching the sudden turn of affairs from a
near-by stump.

I frequently climb into the cupola of the barn during the winter, and
bring down a dazed junco that would beat his life out up there against
the window-panes. He will lie on his back in my open hand, either
feigning death or really powerless with fear. His eyes will close, his
whole tiny body throb convulsively with his throbbing heart. Taking
him to the door, I will turn him over and give him a gentle toss.
Instantly his wings flash; they take him zigzag for a yard or two,
then bear him swiftly round the corner of the house and drop him in
the midst of his fellows, where they are feeding upon the lawn. He
will shape himself up a little and fall to picking with the others.

From a state of collapse the laws of his being bring the bird into
normal behavior as quickly and completely as the collapsed rubber ball
is rounded by the laws of its being. The memory of the fright seems to
be an impression exactly like the dent in the rubber ball--as if it
had never been.

Memories, of course, the animals surely have; but little or no power
to use them. The dog will sometimes seem to cherish a grudge; so will
the elephant. Some one injures or wrongs him, and the huge beast
harbors the memory, broods it, and awaits his opportunity for revenge.
Yet the records of these cases usually show that the creature had been
living with the object of his hatred--his keeper, perhaps--and that
the memory goes no farther back than the present moment, than the
sight of the hated one.

At my railroad station I frequently see a yoke of great sleepy,
bald-faced oxen, that look as much alike as two blackbirds. Their
driver knows them apart; but as they stand there, bound to one another
by the heavy bar across their foreheads, it would puzzle anybody else
to tell Buck from Berry. But not if he approach them wearing an
overcoat. At sight of me in an overcoat the off ox will snort and back
and thrash about in terror, twisting the head of his yoke-fellow,
nearly breaking his neck, and trampling him miserably. But the nigh ox
is used to it. He chews and blinks away placidly, keeps his feet the
best he can, and doesn’t try to understand at all why greatcoats
should so frighten his cud-chewing brother. I will drop off my coat
and go up immediately to smooth the muzzles of both oxen, now blinking
sleepily while the lumber is being loaded on.

Years ago, the driver told me, the off ox was badly frightened by a
big woolly coat, the sight or smell of which probably suggested to the
creature some natural enemy, a panther, perhaps, or a bear. The memory
remained, but beyond recall except in the presence of its first cause,
the greatcoat.

To us there are such things as terror and death, but not to the lower
animals except momentarily. We are clutched by terror even as the
junco was clutched in my goblin hand. When the mighty fingers open, we
zigzag, dazed, from the danger; but fall to planning before the
tremors of the fright have ceased. Upon the crumbled, smoking heap of
San Francisco a second splendid city has arisen and shall ever rise.
Terror can kill the living, but it cannot hinder them from forgetting,
or prevent them from hoping, or, for more than an instant, stop them
from doing. Such is the law of life--the law of heaven, of my
pastures, of the little junco, of myself. Life, Law, and Matter are
all of one piece. The horse in my stable, the robin, the toad, the
beetle, the vine in my garden, the garden itself, and I together with
them all, come out of the same divine dust; we all breathe the same
divine breath; we have our beings under the same divine laws; only
they do not know that the law, the breath, and the dust are divine.
If, with all that I know of fear, I can so readily forget it, and can
so constantly feel the hope and the joy of life within me, how soon
for them, my lowly fellow mortals, must vanish all sight of fear, all
memory of pain! And how abiding with them, how compelling, the
necessity to live! And in their unquestioning obedience, what joy!

The face of the fields is as changeful as the face of a child. Every
passing wind, every shifting cloud, every calling bird, every baying
hound, every shape, shadow, fragrance, sound, and tremor, are
reflected there. But if time and experience and pain come, they pass
utterly away; for the face of the fields does not grow old or wise or
seamed with pain. It is always the face of a child,--asleep in
winter, awake in spring and summer,--a face of life and health always,
as much in the falling leaf as in the opening bud, as much under the
covers of the snow as in the greensward of the spring, as much in the
wild, fierce joy of fox and hound as they course the turning, tangling
paths of the woodlands in their fateful race as in the song of brook
and bird on a joyous April morning.




CHAPTER IX

THE BUZZARD OF THE BEAR SWAMP


No, I do not believe that any one of you ever went into a swamp to
find a turkey buzzard’s nest. Still, if you had been born on the edge
of a great swamp, as I was, and if the great-winged buzzards had been
soaring, soaring up in your sky, as all through my boyhood they were
soaring up in mine, then why should you not have gone some time into
the swamp to see where they make their nests--these strange
cloud-winged creatures?

Boys are boys, and girls are girls, the world over; and I am pretty
sure that little Jack Horner and myself were not the only two boys in
all the world to do great and wonderful deeds. Any boy with a love for
birds and a longing for the deep woods, living close to the edge of
the Bear Swamp, would have searched out that buzzard’s nest.

Although I was born within the shadows of the Bear Swamp, close enough
to smell the magnolias along its margin, and lived my first ten years
only a little farther off, yet it was not until after twice ten years
of absence that I stood again within sight of it, ready for the first
time to cross its dark borders and find the buzzard’s nest.

Now here at last I found myself, looking down over the largest, least
trod, deepest-tangled swamp in southern New Jersey--wide, gloomy,
silent, and to me,--for I still thought of it as I used to when a
child,--to me, a mysterious realm of black streams, hollow trees,
animal trails, and haunting shapes, presided over by this great bird,
the turkey buzzard.

For he was never mere bird to me, but some kind of spirit. He stood to
me for what was far off, mysterious, secret, and unapproachable in the
deep, dark swamp; and, in the sky, so wide were his wings, so majestic
the sweep of his flight, he had always stirred me, caused me to hold
my breath and wish myself to fly.

No other bird did I so much miss from my New England skies when I came
here to live. Only the other day, standing in the heart of Boston, I
glanced up and saw, sailing at a far height against the billowy
clouds, an aeroplane; and what should I think of but the flight of the
vulture, so like the steady wings of the great bird seemed the steady
wings of this great monoplane far off against the sky.

And so you begin to understand why I had come back after so many years
to the swamp, and why I wanted to see the nest of this strange bird
that had been flying, flying forever in my imagination and in my sky.
But my good uncle, whom I was visiting, when I mentioned my quest,
merely exclaimed, “What in thunderation!”

You will find a good many uncles and other folk who won’t understand a
good many things that you want to do. Never mind. If you want to see a
buzzard’s nest, let all your relations exclaim while you go quietly
off alone and see it.

I wanted to find a buzzard’s nest--the nest of the Bear Swamp buzzard;
and here at last I stood; and yonder on the clouds, a mere mote in the
distance, floated the bird. It was coming toward me over the wide
reach of the swamp.

Silent, inscrutable, and alien lay the swamp, and untouched by human
hands. Over it spread a quiet and reserve as real as twilight. Like a
mask it was worn, and was slipped on, I know, at my approach. I could
feel the silent spirit of the place drawing back away from me. But I
should have at least a guide to lead me through the shadow land, for
out of the lower living green towered a line of limbless stubs, like a
line of telegraph-poles, their bleached bones gleaming white, or
showing dark and gaunt against the horizon, and marking for me a path
far out across the swamp. Besides, here came the buzzard winding
slowly down the clouds. Soon its spiral changed to a long
pendulum-swing, till just above the skeleton trees the great bird
wheeled and, bracing itself with its flapping wings, dropped heavily
upon one of the headless tree-trunks.

It had come leisurely, yet I could see that it had come with a
directness and purpose that was unmistakable and also meaningful. It
had discovered me in the distance, and, while still invisible to my
eyes, had started down to perch upon that giant stub in order to watch
me. It was suspicious, and had come to watch me, because somewhere
beneath its perch, I felt sure, lay a hollow log, the creature’s den,
holding its two eggs or its young. A buzzard has something like a
soul.

Marking the direction of the stub, and its probable distance, I waded
into the deep underbrush, the buzzard perched against the sky for my
guide, and, for my quest, the stump or hollow log that held the
creature’s nest.

The rank ferns and ropy vines swallowed me up, and shut out at times
even the sight of the sky and the buzzard. It was not until half an
hour’s struggle that, climbing a pine-crested swell in the low bottom,
I sighted the bird again. It had not moved.

I was now in the real swamp, the old uncut forest. It was a land of
tree giants: huge tulip poplar and swamp white oak, so old that they
had become solitary, their comrades having fallen one by one; while
some of them, unable to loose their grip upon the soil, which had
widened and tightened through centuries, were still standing, though
long since dead. It was upon one of these that the buzzard sat humped.

Directly in my path stood an ancient swamp white oak, the greatest
tree, I think, that I have ever seen. It was not the highest, nor the
largest round, perhaps, but in years and looks the greatest. Hoary,
hollow, and broken-limbed, his huge bole seemed encircled with the
centuries.

    “For it had bene an auncient tree,
    Sacred with many a mysteree.”

Above him to twice his height loomed a tulip poplar, clean-boled for
thirty feet and in the top all green and gold with blossoms. It was a
resplendent thing beside the oak, yet how unmistakably the gnarled old
monarch wore the crown! His girth more than balanced the poplar’s
greater height; and, as for blossoms, he had his tiny-flowered
catkins; but nature knows the beauty of strength and inward majesty,
and has pinned no boutonnière upon the oak.

My buzzard now was hardly more than half a mile away, and plainly seen
through the rifts in the lofty timbered roof above me. As I was
nearing the top of a large fallen pine that lay in my course, I was
startled by the _burrh! burrh! burrh!_ of three partridges taking wing
just beyond, near the foot of the tree. Their exploding flight seemed
all the more like a real explosion when three little clouds of
dust-smoke rose out of the low, _wet_ bottom of the swamp and drifted
up against the green.

Then I saw an interesting sight. The pine, in its fall, had snatched
with its wide-reaching, multitudinous roots at the shallow bottom and
torn out a giant fistful of earth, leaving a hole about two feet deep
and more than a dozen feet wide. The sand thus lifted into the air had
gradually washed down into a mound on each side of the butt, where it
lay high and dry above the level of the wet swamp. This the swamp
birds had turned into a great dust-bath. It was in constant use,
evidently. Not a spear of grass had sprouted in it, and all over it
were pits and craters of various sizes, showing that not only the
partridges but also the quail and such small things as the warblers
bathed here,--though I can’t recall ever having seen a warbler bathe
in the dust. A dry bath in the swamp was something of a luxury,
evidently. I wonder if the buzzards used it?

I went forward cautiously now, and expectantly, for I was close enough
to see the white beak and red wattled neck of my buzzard guide. The
buzzard saw me, too, and began to twist its head and to twitch its
wing-tips nervously. Then the long, black wings began to open, as you
would open a two-foot rule, and, with a heavy lurch that left the dead
stub rocking, the bird dropped and was soon soaring high up in the
blue.

This was the locality of the nest; now where should I find it?
Evidently I was to have no further help from the old bird. The
underbrush was so thick that I could hardly see farther than my nose.
A half-rotten tree-trunk lay near, the top end resting across the
backs of several saplings that it had borne down in its fall. I crept
up on this for a look around, and almost tumbled off at finding myself
staring directly into the dark, cavernous hollow of an immense log
lying on a slight rise of ground a few feet ahead of me.

It was a yawning hole, which at a glance I knew belonged to the
buzzard. The log, a mere shell of a mighty white oak, had been girdled
and felled with an axe, by coon-hunters probably, and still lay with
one side resting upon the rim of the stump. As I stood looking,
something white stirred vaguely in the hole and disappeared.

Leaping from my perch, I scrambled forward to the mouth of the hollow
log and was greeted with hisses from far back in the dark. Then came a
thumping of bare feet, more hisses, and a sound of snapping beaks. I
had found my buzzard’s nest!

[Illustration: YOUNG TURKEY BUZZARD]

Hardly that, either, for there was not a feather, stick, or chip as
evidence of a nest. The eggs had been laid upon the sloping cavern
floor, and in the course of their incubation must have rolled clear
down to the opposite end, where the opening was so narrow that the
buzzard could not have brooded them until she had rolled them back.
The wonder is that they had ever hatched.

But they had, and what they hatched was another wonder. Nature never
intended a young buzzard for any eye but his mother’s, and _she_ hates
the sight of him. Elsewhere I have told of a buzzard that devoured her
eggs at the approach of an enemy, so delicately balanced are her
unnamable appetites and her maternal affections!

The two strange nestlings in the log must have been three weeks old, I
should say, the larger weighing about four pounds. They were covered,
as young owls are, with deep snow-white down, out of which protruded
their black scaly, snaky legs. They stood braced on these long black
legs, their receding heads drawn back, shoulders thrust forward, and
bodies humped between the featherless wings like challenging tom-cats.

In order to examine them, I crawled into the den--not a difficult act,
for the opening measured four feet and a half across at the mouth. The
air was musty inside, yet surprisingly free from odor. The floor was
absolutely clean, but on the top and sides of the cavity was a thick
coating of live mosquitoes, most of them gorged, hanging like a
red-beaded tapestry over the walls.

I had taken pains that the flying buzzard should not see me enter, for
I hoped she would descend to look after her young. But she would take
no chances with herself. I sat near the mouth of the hollow, where I
could catch the fresh breeze that pulled across the end, and where I
had a view of a far-away bit of sky. Suddenly, across this field of
blue, there swept a meteor of black--the buzzard! and evidently in
that instant of passage, at a distance certainly of half a mile, she
spied me in the log.

I waited more than an hour longer, and when I tumbled out with a dozen
kinds of cramps, the unworried mother was soaring serenely far up in
the clear, cool sky.




CHAPTER X

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO HEAR THIS SPRING


I

The frogs! You can have no spring until you hear the frogs. The first
shrill notes, heard before the ice is fairly out of the marshes, will
be the waking call of the hylas, the tiny tree-frogs that later on in
the summer you will find in the woods. Then, as the spring advances
and this silvery sleigh-bell jingle tinkles faster, other voices will
join in--the soft croak of the spotted leopard frogs, the still softer
melancholy quaver of the common toad, and away down at the end of the
scale the deep, solemn bass of the great bullfrog saying, “Go round!
Better go round!”


II

You must hear, besides the first spring notes of the bluebird and the
robin, four bird songs this spring. First (1) the song of the wood
thrush or the hermit thrush, whichever one lives in your neighborhood.
No words can describe the purity, the peacefulness, the spiritual
quality of the wood thrush’s simple “Come to me.” It is the voice of
the tender twilight, the voice of the tranquil forest, speaking to
you. After the thrush (2) the brown thrasher, our finest, most gifted
songster, as great a singer, I think (and I have often heard them
both), as the Southern mockingbird. Then (3) the operatic catbird. She
sits lower down among the bushes than the brown thrasher, as if she
knew that, compared with him, she must take a back seat; but for
variety of notes and length of song, she has few rivals. I say _she_,
when really I ought to say _he_, for it is the males of most birds
that sing, but the catbird seems so long and slender, so dainty and
feminine, that I think of this singer as of some exquisite operatic
singer in a woman’s rôle. Then (4) the bobolink; for his song is just
like Bryant’s bubbling poem, only better! Go to the meadows in June
and listen as he comes lilting and singing over your head.


III

There are some birds that cannot sing: the belted kingfisher, for
instance; he can only rattle. You must hear him rattle. You can do as
well yourself if you will shake a “pair of bones” or heave an anchor
and let the chain run fast through the hawse-hole. You then must hear
the downy woodpecker doing his rattling _rat-ta-tat-tat-tat-tat_
(across the page and back again), as fast as _rat-ta-tat_ can _tat_.
How he makes the old dead limb or fence-post rattle as he drums upon
it with his chisel bill. He can be heard half a mile around.

Then high-hole, the flicker (or golden-winged woodpecker), you must
hear him yell, _Up-up-up-up-up up-up-up-up-up-up_,--a ringing,
rolling, rapid kind of yodel that echoes over the spring fields.


IV

You must hear the nighthawk and the whip-poor-will. Both birds are to
be heard at twilight, and the whip-poor-will far into the night. At
the very break of dawn is also a good time to listen to them.

At dusk you will see (I have seen him from the city roofs in Boston) a
bird about the size of a pigeon mounting up into the sky by short
flights, crying _peent_, until far over your head the creature will
suddenly turn and on half-closed wings dive headlong toward the
earth, when, just before hitting the ground, upward he swoops, at the
same instant making a weird booming sound, a kind of hollow groan with
his wings, as the wind rushes through their large feathers. This diver
through the dim ocean of air is the nighthawk. Let one of the birds
dive close to your head on a lonely dusky road, and your hair will try
to jump out from under your hat.

The whip-poor-will’s cry you all know. When you hear one this spring,
go out into the twilight and watch for him. See him spring into the
air, like a strange shadow, for flies; count his _whip-poor-wills_ (he
may call it more than a hundred times in as many seconds!). But hear a
circle of the birds, if possible, calling through the darkness of a
wood all around you!


V

There is one strange bird song that is half song and half dance that
perhaps most of you may never be able to hear and see; but as it is
worth going miles to hear, and nights of watching to witness, I am
going to set it here as one of your outdoor tasks or feats: you must
hear the mating song of the woodcock. I have described the song and
the dance in “Roof and Meadow,” in the chapter called “One Flew East
and One Flew West.” Mr. Bradford Torrey has an account of it in his
“Clerk of the Woods,” in the chapter named “Woodcock Vespers.” To hear
the song is a rare experience for the habitual watcher in the woods,
but one that you might have the first April evening that you are
abroad.

Go down to your nearest meadow--a meadow near a swampy piece of woods
is best--and here, along the bank of the meadow stream, wait in the
chilly twilight for the _speank_, _speank_, or the _peent_, _peent_,
from the grass--the signal that the song is about to begin.


VI

One of the dreadful--positively dreadful--sounds of the late spring
that I hear day in and day out is the gobbling, strangling, ghastly
cries of young crows feeding. You will surely think something is being
murdered. The crying of a hungry baby is musical in comparison. But it
is a good sound to hear, for it reminds one of the babes in the
woods--that a new generation of birds is being brought through from
babyhood to gladden the world. It is a tender sound! The year is still
young.


VII

You should hear the hum of the honey-bees on a fresh May day in an
apple tree that is just coming into perfect bloom. The enchanting
loveless of the pink and white world of blossoms is enough to make one
forget to listen to the _hum-hum-hum-humming-ing-ing-ing-ing_ of the
excited bees. But hear their myriad wings, fanning the perfume into
the air and filling the sunshine with the music of work. The whir, the
hum of labor--of a busy factory, of a great steamship dock--is always
music to those who know the blessedness of work; but it takes that
knowledge, and a good deal of imagination besides, to hear the music
in it. Not so with the bees. The season, the day, the colors, and
perfumes--they are the song; the wings are only the million-stringed
æolian upon which the song is played.


VIII

You should hear the grass grow. What! I repeat, you should hear the
grass grow. I have a friend, a sound and sensible man, but a lover of
the out-of-doors, who says he can hear it grow. But perhaps it is the
soft stir of the working earthworms that he hears. Try it. Go out
alone one of these April nights; select a green pasture with a slope
to the south, at least a mile from any house, or railroad; lay your
ear flat upon the grass, listen without a move for ten minutes. You
hear something--or do you feel it? Is it the reaching up of the grass?
is it the stir of the earthworms? is it the pulse of the throbbing
universe? or is it your own throbbing pulse? It is all of these, I
think; call it the heart of the grass beating in every tiny living
blade, if you wish to. You should listen to hear the grass grow.


IX

The fires have gone out on the open hearth. Listen early in the
morning and toward evening for the rumbling, the small, muffled
thunder, of the chimney swallows, as they come down from the open sky
on their wonderful wings. Don’t be frightened. It isn’t Santa Claus
this time of year; nor is it the Old Nick! The smothered thunder is
caused by the rapid beating of the swallows’ wings on the air in the
narrow chimney-flue, as the birds settle down from the top of the
chimney and hover over their nests. Stick your head into the fireplace
and look up! Don’t smoke the precious lodgers out, no matter how much
racket they make.


X

Hurry out while the last drops of your first May thunder-shower are
still falling and listen to the robins singing from the tops of the
trees. Their liquid songs are as fresh as the shower, as if the
raindrops in falling were running down from the trees in song--as
indeed they are in the overflowing trout-brook. Go out and listen, and
write a better poem than this one that I wrote the other afternoon
when listening to the birds in our first spring shower:--

        The warm rain drops aslant the sun
          And in the rain the robins sing;
        Across the creek in twos and troops,
          The hawking swifts and swallows wing.

        The air is sweet with apple bloom,
          And sweet the laid dust down the lane,
        The meadow’s marge of calamus,
          And sweet the robins in the rain.

        O greening time of bloom and song!
          O fragrant days of tender pain!
        The wet, the warm, the sweet young days
          With robins singing in the rain.




CHAPTER XI

TURTLE EGGS FOR AGASSIZ


I took down, recently, from the shelves of a great public library, the
four volumes of Agassiz’s “Contributions to the Natural History of the
United States.” I doubt if anybody but the charwoman, with her duster,
had touched those volumes for twenty-five years. They are a monumental
work, the fruit of vast and heroic labors, with colored plates on
stone, showing the turtles of the United States, and their
life-history. The work was published more than half a century ago, but
it looked old beyond its years--massive, heavy, weathered, as if dug
from the rocks; and I soon turned with a sigh from the weary learning
of its plates and diagrams to look at the preface.

Then, reading down through the catalogue of human names and of thanks
for help received, I came to a sentence beginning:--

“In New England I have myself collected largely; but I have also
received valuable contributions from the late Rev. Zadoc Thompson of
Burlington; ... from Mr. D. Henry Thoreau of Concord; ... and from Mr.
J. W. P. Jenks of Middleboro.” And then it hastens on with the thanks
in order to get to the turtles, as if turtles were the one and only
thing of real importance in all the world.

Turtles are important--interesting; so is the late Rev. Zadoc Thompson
of Burlington. Indeed any reverend gentleman who would catch turtles
for Agassiz must have been interesting. If Agassiz had only put a
chapter into his turtle book about him! and as for the Mr. Jenks of
Middleboro (at the end of the quotation) I know that he was
interesting; for years later, he was an old college professor of mine.
He told me some of the particulars of his turtle contributions,
particulars which Agassiz should have found a place for in his big
book. The preface says merely that this gentleman sent turtles to
Cambridge by the thousands--brief and scanty recognition. For that is
not the only thing this gentleman did. On one occasion he sent, not
turtles, but turtle _eggs_ to Cambridge--_brought_ them, I should say;
and all there is to show for it, so far as I could discover, is a
small drawing of a bit of one of the eggs!

Of course, Agassiz wanted to make that drawing, and had to have a
_fresh_ turtle egg to draw it from. He had to have it, and he got it.
A great man, when he wants a certain turtle egg, at a certain time,
always gets it, for he gets some one else to get it for him. I am glad
he got it. But what makes me sad and impatient is that he did not
think it worth while to tell us about the getting of it.

It would seem, naturally, that there could be nothing unusual or
interesting about the getting of turtle eggs when you want them.
Nothing at all, if you should chance to want the eggs as you chance to
find them. So with anything else. But if you want turtle eggs _when_
you want them, and are bound to have them, then you must--get Mr.
Jenks, or somebody else to get them for you.

Agassiz wanted those turtle eggs when he wanted them--not a minute
over three hours from the minute they were laid. Yet even that does
not seem exacting, hardly more difficult than the getting of hens’
eggs only three hours old. Just so, provided the professor could have
had his private turtle-coop in Harvard College Yard; and provided he
could have made his turtles lay. But turtles will not respond, like
hens, to meat-scraps and the warm mash. The professor’s problem was
not to get from a mud turtle’s nest in the back yard to his work-table
in the laboratory; but to get from the laboratory in Cambridge to some
pond when the turtles were laying, and back to the laboratory within
the limited time. And this might have called for nice and
discriminating work--as it did.

Agassiz had been engaged for a long time upon his “Contributions.” He
had brought the great work nearly to a finish. It was, indeed,
finished but for one small yet very important bit of observation: he
had carried the turtle egg through every stage of its development with
the single exception of one--the very earliest. That beginning stage
had brought the “Contributions” to a halt. To get eggs that were fresh
enough to show the incubation at this period had been impossible.

There were several ways that Agassiz might have proceeded: he might
have got a leave of absence for the spring term, taken his laboratory
to some pond inhabited by turtles, and there camped until he should
catch the reptile digging out her nest. But there were difficulties in
all of that--as those who are college professors and naturalists know.
As this was quite out of the question, he did the easiest thing--asked
Mr. Jenks of Middleboro to get him the eggs. Mr. Jenks got them.
Agassiz knew all about his getting of them; and I say the strange and
irritating thing is, that Agassiz did not think it worth while to tell
us about it, at least in the preface to his monumental work.

It was many years later that Mr. Jenks, then a gray-haired college
professor, told me how he got those eggs to Agassiz.

“I was principal of an academy, during my younger years,” he began,
“and was busy one day with my classes, when a large man suddenly
filled the doorway of the room, smiled to the four corners of the
room, and called out with a big, quick voice that he was Professor
Agassiz.

“Of course he was. I knew it, even before he had had time to shout it
to me across the room.

“Would I get him some turtle eggs? he called. Yes, I would. And would
I get them to Cambridge within three hours from the time they were
laid? Yes, I would. And I did. And it was worth the doing. But I did
it only once.

“When I promised Agassiz those eggs, I knew where I was going to get
them. I had got turtle eggs there before--at a particular patch of
sandy shore along a pond, a few miles distant from the academy.

“Three hours was the limit. From the railroad station to Boston was
thirty-five miles; from the pond to the station was perhaps three or
four miles; from Boston to Cambridge we called about three miles.
Forty miles in round numbers! We figured it all out before he
returned, and got the trip down to two hours,--record time:--driving
from the pond to the station; from the station by express train to
Boston; from Boston by cab to Cambridge. This left an easy hour for
accidents and delays.

“Cab and car and carriage we reckoned into our time-table; but what we
didn’t figure on was the turtle.” And he paused abruptly.

“Young man,” he went on, his shaggy brows and spectacles hardly hiding
the twinkle in the eyes that were bent severely upon me, “young man,
when _you_ go after turtle eggs, take into account the turtle. No! No!
that’s bad advice. Youth never reckons on the turtle--and youth seldom
ought to. Only old age does that; and old age would never have got
those turtle eggs to Agassiz.

“It was in the early spring that Agassiz came to the academy, long
before there was any likelihood of the turtles’ laying. But I was
eager for the quest, and so fearful of failure that I started out to
watch at the pond, fully two weeks ahead of the time that the turtles
might be expected to lay. I remember the date clearly: it was May
14th.

“A little before dawn--along near three o’clock--I would drive over to
the pond, hitch my horse near by, settle myself quietly among some
thick cedars close to the sandy shore, and there I would wait, my
kettle of sand ready, my eye covering the whole sleeping pond. Here
among the cedars I would eat my breakfast, and then get back in good
season to open the academy for the morning session.

“And so the watch began.

“I soon came to know individually the dozen or more turtles that kept
to my side of the pond. Shortly after the cold mist would lift and
melt away, they would stick up their heads through the quiet water;
and as the sun slanted down over the ragged rim of tree-tops, the slow
things would float into the warm lighted spots, or crawl out and doze
comfortably on the hummocks and snags.

“What fragrant mornings those were! How fresh and new and unbreathed!
The pond odors, the woods odors, the odors of the ploughed fields--of
water-lily, and wild grape, and the dew-laid soil! I can taste them
yet, and hear them yet--the still, large sounds of the waking day--the
pickerel breaking the quiet with his swirl; the kingfisher dropping
anchor; the stir of feet and wings among the trees. And then the
thought of the great book being held up for me! Those were rare
mornings!

“But there began to be a good many of them, for the turtles showed no
desire to lay. They sprawled in the sun, and never one came out upon
the sand as if she intended to help on the great professor’s book. The
story of her eggs was of small concern to her; her contribution to the
Natural History of the United States could wait.

“And it did wait. I began my watch on the 14th of May; June 1st found
me still among the cedars, still waiting, as I had waited every
morning, Sundays and rainy days alike. June 1st was a perfect morning,
but every turtle slid out upon her log, as if egg-laying might be a
matter strictly of next year.

“I began to grow uneasy,--not impatient yet, for a naturalist learns
his lesson of patience early, and for all his years; but I began to
fear lest, by some subtile sense, my presence might somehow be known
to the creatures; that they might have gone to some other place to
lay, while I was away at the schoolroom.

“I watched on to the end of the first week, on to the end of the
second week in June, seeing the mists rise and vanish every morning,
and along with them vanish, more and more, the poetry of my early
morning vigil. Poetry and rheumatism cannot long dwell together in the
same clump of cedars, and I had begun to feel the rheumatism. A month
of morning mists wrapping me around had at last soaked through to my
bones. But Agassiz was waiting, and the world was waiting, for those
turtle eggs and I would wait. It was all I could do, for there is no
use bringing a china nest-egg to a turtle; she is not open to any such
delicate suggestion.

“Then came a mid-June Sunday morning, with dawn breaking a little
after three: a warm, wide-awake dawn, with the level mist lifted from
the level surface of the pond a full hour higher than I had seen it
any morning before.

“This was the day. I knew it. I have heard persons say that they can
hear the grass grow; that they know by some extra sense when danger is
nigh. For a month I had been watching, had been brooding over this
pond, and now I knew. I felt a stirring of the pulse of things that
the cold-hearted turtles could no more escape than could the clods and
I.

“Leaving my horse unhitched, as if he, too, understood, I slipped
eagerly into my covert for a look at the pond. As I did so, a large
pickerel ploughed a furrow out through the spatter-docks, and in his
wake rose the head of a large painted turtle. Swinging slowly round,
the creature headed straight for the shore, and, without a pause,
scrambled out on the sand.

“She was nothing unusual for a turtle, but her manner was unusual and
the gait at which she moved; for there was method in it and fixed
purpose. On she came, shuffling over the sand toward the higher open
fields, with a hurried, determined see-saw that was taking her
somewhere in particular, and that was bound to get her there on time.

“I held my breath. Had she been a dinosaurian making Mesozoic
footprints, I could not have been more fearful. For footprints in the
Mesozoic mud, or in the sands of time, were as nothing to me when
compared with fresh turtle eggs in the sands of this pond.

“But over the strip of sand, without a stop, she paddled, and up a
narrow cow-path into the high grass along a fence. Then up the narrow
cow-path, on all fours, just like another turtle, I paddled, and into
the high wet grass along the fence.

“I kept well within sound of her, for she moved recklessly, leaving a
wide trail of flattened grass behind. I wanted to stand up,--and I
don’t believe I could have turned her back with a rail,--but I was
afraid if she saw me that she might return indefinitely to the pond;
so on I went, flat to the ground, squeezing through the lower rails of
the fence, as if the field beyond were a melon-patch. It was nothing
of the kind, only a wild, uncomfortable pasture, full of dewberry
vines, and very discouraging. They were excessively wet vines and
briery. I pulled my coat-sleeves as far over my fists as I could get
them, and with the tin pail of sand swinging from between my teeth to
avoid noise, I stumped fiercely, but silently, on after the turtle.

[Illustration: “TAIL FIRST, BEGAN TO BURY HERSELF”]

“She was laying her course, I thought, straight down the length of
this dreadful pasture, when, not far from the fence, she suddenly hove
to, warped herself short about, and came back, barely clearing me. I
warped about, too, and in her wake bore down across the corner of the
pasture, across the powdery public road, and on to a fence along a
field of young corn.

“I was somewhat wet by this time, but not so wet as I had been before
wallowing through the deep, dry dust of the road. Hurrying up behind a
large tree by the fence, I peered down the corn-rows and saw the
turtle stop, and begin to paw about in the loose, soft soil. She was
going to lay!

“I held on to the tree and watched, as she tried this place, and that
place, and the other place. But _the_ place, evidently, was hard to
find. What could a female turtle do with a whole field of possible
nests to choose from? Then at last she found it, and, whirling about,
she backed quickly at it and, tail first, began to bury herself before
my staring eyes.

“Those were not the supreme moments of my life; perhaps those moments
came later that day; but those certainly were among the slowest, most
dreadfully mixed of moments that I ever experienced. They were hours
long. There she was, her shell just showing, like some old hulk in the
sand alongshore. And how long would she stay there? and how should I
know if she had laid an egg?

“I could still wait. And so I waited, when, over the freshly awakened
fields, floated four mellow strokes from the distant town clock.

“Four o’clock! Why there was no train until seven! No train for three
hours! The eggs would spoil! Then with a rush it came over me that
this was Sunday morning, and there was no regular seven o’clock
train,--none till after nine.

“I think I should have fainted had not the turtle just then begun
crawling off. I was weak and dizzy; but there, there in the sand, were
the eggs! and Agassiz! and the great book! Why, I cleared the
fence--and the forty miles that lay between me and Cambridge--at a
single jump! He should have them, trains or no. Those eggs should go
to Agassiz by seven o’clock, if I had to gallop every mile of the way.
Forty miles! Any horse could cover it in three hours, if he had to;
and, upsetting the astonished turtle, I scooped out her long white
eggs.

“On a bed of sand in the bottom of the pail I laid them, with what
care my trembling fingers allowed; filled in between them with more
sand; so with layer after layer to the rim; and covering all smoothly
with more sand, I ran back for my horse.

“That horse knew, as well as I, that the turtles had laid, and that he
was to get those eggs to Agassiz. He turned out of that field into the
road on two wheels, a thing he had not done for twenty years, doubling
me up before the dashboard, the pail of eggs miraculously lodged
between my knees.

“I let him out. If only he could keep this pace all the way to
Cambridge!--or even halfway there, I would have time to finish the
trip on foot. I shouted him on, holding to the dasher with one hand,
holding the pail of eggs with the other, not daring to get off my
knees, though the bang on them, as we pounded down the wood-road, was
terrific. But nothing must happen to the eggs; they must not be
jarred, or even turned over in the sand before they came to Agassiz.

“In order to get out on the pike it was necessary to drive back away
from Boston toward the town. We had nearly covered the distance, and
were rounding a turn from the woods into the open fields, when, ahead
of me, at the station it seemed, I heard the quick, sharp whistle of a
locomotive.

“What did it mean? Then followed the _puff, puff, puff_, of a starting
train. But what train? Which way going? And jumping to my feet for a
longer view, I pulled into a side road that paralleled the track, and
headed hard for the station.

“We reeled along. The station was still out of sight, but from behind
the bushes that shut it from view, rose the smoke of a moving engine.
It was perhaps a mile away, but we were approaching, head on, and,
topping a little hill, I swept down upon a freight train, the black
smoke pouring from the stack, as the mighty creature pulled itself
together for its swift run down the rails.

“My horse was on the gallop, following the track, and going straight
toward the coming train. The sight of it almost maddened me--the bare
thought of it, on the road to Boston! On I went; on it came, a half--a
quarter of a mile between us, when suddenly my road shot out along an
unfenced field with only a level stretch of sod between me and the
engine.

“With a pull that lifted the horse from his feet, I swung him into the
field and sent him straight as an arrow for the track. That train
should carry me and my eggs to Boston!

“The engineer pulled the whistle. He saw me stand up in the rig, saw
my hat blow off, saw me wave my arms, saw the tin pail swing in my
teeth, and he jerked out a succession of sharp Halts! But it was he
who should halt, not I; and on we went, the horse with a flounder
landing the carriage on top of the track.

“The train was already grinding to a stop; but before it was near a
standstill, I had backed off the track, jumped out, and, running down
the rails with the astonished engineers gaping at me, had swung aboard
the cab.

“They offered no resistance; they hadn’t had time. Nor did they have
the disposition, for I looked strange, not to say dangerous. Hatless,
dew-soaked, smeared with yellow mud, and holding, as if it were a baby
or a bomb, a little tin pail of sand!

“‘Crazy,’ the fireman muttered, looking to the engineer for his cue.

“I had been crazy, perhaps, but I was not crazy now.

“‘Throw her wide open,’ I commanded. ‘Wide open! These are fresh
turtle eggs for Professor Agassiz of Cambridge. He must have them
before breakfast.’

“Then they knew I was crazy, and, evidently thinking it best to humor
me, threw the throttle wide open, and away we went.

“I kissed my hand to the horse, grazing unconcernedly in the open
field, and gave a smile to my crew. That was all I could give them,
and hold myself and the eggs together. But the smile was enough. And
they smiled through their smut at me, though one of them held fast to
his shovel, while the other kept his hand upon a big ugly wrench.
Neither of them spoke to me, but above the roar of the swaying engine
I caught enough of their broken talk to understand that they were
driving under a full head of steam, with the intention of handing me
over to the Boston police, as perhaps the safest way of disposing of
me.

“I was only afraid that they would try it at the next station. But
that station whizzed past without a bit of slack, and the next, and
the next; when it came over me that this was the through freight,
which should have passed in the night, and was making up lost time.

“Only the fear of the shovel and the wrench kept me from shaking hands
with both men at this discovery. But I beamed at them; and they at me.
I was enjoying it. The unwonted jar beneath my feet was wrinkling my
diaphragm with spasms of delight. And the fireman beamed at the
engineer, with a look that said, ‘See the lunatic grin; he likes it!’

“He did like it. How the iron wheels sang to me as they took the
rails! How the rushing wind in my ears sang to me! From my stand on
the fireman’s side of the cab I could catch a glimpse of the track
just ahead of the engine, where the ties seemed to leap into the
throat of the mile-devouring monster. The joy of it! of seeing space
swallowed by the mile!

“I shifted the eggs from hand to hand and thought of my horse, of
Agassiz, of the great book, of my great luck,--luck,--luck,--until the
multitudinous tongues of the thundering train were all chiming ‘luck!
luck! luck!’ They knew! they understood! This beast of fire and
tireless wheels was doing its best to get the eggs to Agassiz!

“We swung out past the Blue Hills, and yonder flashed the morning sun
from the towering dome of the State House. I might have leaped from
the cab and run the rest of the way on foot, had I not caught the eye
of the engineer watching me narrowly. I was not in Boston yet, nor in
Cambridge either. I was an escaped lunatic, who had held up a train,
and forced it to carry me from Middleboro to Boston.

“Perhaps I had overdone the lunacy business. Suppose these two men
should take it into their heads to turn me over to the police, whether
I would or no? I could never explain the case in time to get the eggs
to Agassiz. I looked at my watch. There were still a few minutes left
in which I might explain to these men, who, all at once, had become my
captors. But how explain? Nothing could avail against my actions, my
appearance, and my little pail of sand.

“I had not thought of my appearance before. Here I was, face and
clothes caked with yellow mud, my hair wild and matted, my hat gone,
and in my full-grown hands a tiny tin pail of sand, as if I had been
digging all night with a tiny tin shovel on the shore! And thus to
appear in the decent streets of Boston of a Sunday morning!

“I began to _feel_ like a lunatic. The situation was serious, or
might be, and rather desperately funny at its best. I must in some way
have shown my new fears, for both men watched me more sharply.

“Suddenly, as we were nearing the outer freight-yard, the train slowed
down and came to a stop. I was ready to jump, but still I had no
chance. They had nothing to do, apparently, but to guard me. I looked
at my watch again. What time we had made! It was only six o’clock,--a
whole hour left in which to get to Cambridge!

“But I didn’t like this delay. Five minutes--ten--went by.

“‘Gentlemen,’ I began, but was cut short by an express train coming
past. We were moving again, on--into a siding--on to the main
track--on with a bump and a crash and a succession of crashes, running
the length of the train--on, on at a turtle’s pace, but on,--when the
fireman, quickly jumping for the bell-rope, left the way to the step
free, and--

“I never touched the step, but landed in the soft sand at the side of
the track, and made a line for the freight-yard fence.

“There was no hue or cry. I glanced over my shoulder to see if they
were after me. Evidently their hands were full, or they didn’t know I
had gone.

“But I had gone; and was ready to drop over the high board-fence, when
it occurred to me that I might drop into a policeman’s arms. Hanging
my pail in a splint on top of a post, I peered cautiously over--a
very wise thing to do before you jump a high board-fence. There,
crossing the open square toward the station, was a big, burly fellow
with a club--looking for me!

“I flattened for a moment, when some one in the freight-yard yelled at
me. I preferred the policeman, and, grabbing my pail, I slid softly
over to the street. The policeman moved on past the corner of the
station out of sight. The square was free, and yonder stood a cab.

“Time was flying now. Here was the last lap. The cabman saw me coming,
and squared away. I waved a dollar-bill at him, but he only stared the
more. A dollar can cover a good deal, but I was too much for one
dollar. I pulled out another, thrust them both at him, and dodged into
the cab, calling, ‘Cambridge!’

“He would have taken me straight to the police-station, had I not
said, ‘Harvard College. Professor Agassiz’s house! I’ve got eggs for
Agassiz,’ pushing another dollar up at him through the hole.

“It was nearly half past six.

“‘Let him go!’ I ordered. ‘Here’s another dollar if you make Agassiz’s
house in twenty minutes. Let him out; never mind the police!’

“He evidently knew the police, or there were none around at that time
on a Sunday morning. We went down the sleeping streets, as I had gone
down the wood-roads from the pond two hours before, but with the
rattle and crash now of a fire brigade. Whirling a corner into
Cambridge Street, we took the bridge at a gallop, the driver shouting
out something in Hibernian to a pair of waving arms and a belt and
brass buttons.

“Across the bridge with a rattle and jolt that put the eggs in
jeopardy, and on over the cobble-stones, we went. Half standing, to
lessen the jar, I held the pail in one hand and held myself in the
other, not daring to let go even to look at my watch.

“But I was afraid to look at the watch. I was afraid to see how near
to seven o’clock it might be. The sweat was dropping down my nose, so
close was I running to the limit of my time.

“Suddenly there was a lurch, and I dived forward, ramming my head into
the front of the cab, coming up with a rebound that landed me across
the small of my back on the seat, and sent half of my pail of eggs
helter-skelter over the floor.

“We had stopped. Here was Agassiz’s house; and without taking time to
pick up the eggs that were scattered, I jumped out with my pail and
pounded at the door.

“No one was astir in the house. But I would stir some one. And I did.
Right in the midst of the racket the door opened. It was the maid.

“‘Agassiz,’ I gasped, ‘I want Professor Agassiz, quick!’ And I pushed
by her into the hall.

“‘Go ’way, sir. I’ll call the police. Professor Agassiz is in bed. Go
’way, sir!’

“‘Call him--Agassiz--instantly, or I’ll call him myself.’

“But I didn’t; for just then a door overhead was flung open, a great
white-robed figure appeared on the dim landing above, and a quick loud
voice called excitedly,--

“‘Let him in! Let him in. I know him. He has my turtle eggs!’

“And the apparition, slipperless, and clad in anything but an academic
gown, came sailing down the stairs.

“The maid fled. The great man, his arms extended, laid hold of me with
both hands, and dragging me and my precious pail into his study, with
a swift, clean stroke laid open one of the eggs, as the watch in my
trembling hands ticked its way to seven--as if nothing unusual were
happening to the history of the world.”




CHAPTER XII

AN ACCOUNT WITH NATURE


There were chipmunks everywhere. The stone walls squeaked with them.
At every turn, from early spring to early autumn, a chipmunk was
scurrying away from me. Chipmunks were common. They did no particular
harm, no particular good; they did nothing in particular, being only
chipmunks and common, or so I thought, until one morning (it was
June-bug time) when I stopped and watched a chipmunk that sat atop the
stone wall down in the orchard. He was eating, and the shells of his
meal lay in a little pile upon the big flat stone which served as his
table.

They were acorn-shells, I thought; yet June seemed rather late in the
season for acorns, and, looking closer, I discovered that the pile was
entirely composed of June-bug shells--wings and hollow bodies of the
pestiferous beetles!

Well, well! I had never seen this before, never even heard of it.
Chipmunk, a _useful_ member of society! actually eating bugs in this
bug-ridden world of mine! This was interesting and important. Why, I
had really never known Chipmunk, after all!

So I hadn’t. He had always been too common. Flying squirrels were
more worth while, because there were none on the farm. Now, however, I
determined to cultivate the acquaintance of Chipmunk, for there might
be other discoveries awaiting me. And there were.

A narrow strip of grass separated the orchard and my garden-patch. It
was on my way to the garden that I most often stopped to watch this
chipmunk, or rather the pair of them, in the orchard wall. June
advanced, the beetles disappeared, and the two chipmunks in the wall
were now seven, the young ones almost as large as their parents, and
both young and old on the best of terms with me.

For the first time in four years there were prospects of good
strawberries. Most of my small patch was given over to a new variety,
one that I had originated; and I was waiting with an eagerness which
was almost anxiety for the earliest berries.

I had put a little stick beside each of the three big berries that
were reddening first (though I could have walked from the house
blindfolded and picked them). I might have had the biggest of the
three on June 7th, but for the sake of the flavor I thought it best to
wait another day. On the 8th I went down to get it. The big berry was
gone, and so was one of the others, while only half of the third was
left on the vine!

Gardening has its disappointments, its seasons of despair--and wrath,
too. Had a toad showed himself at that moment, he might have fared
badly, for more than likely, I thought, it was he who had stolen my
berries. On the garden wall sat a friendly chipmunk eying me
sympathetically.

[Illustration: CHIPMUNK EATING JUNE-BUGS]

A few days later several fine berries were ripe, and I was again on my
way to the garden when I passed the chipmunks in the orchard. A
shining red spot among the vine-covered stones of their wall brought
me to a stop. For an instant I thought that it was my rose-breasted
grosbeak, and that I was about to get a clew to its nest. Then up to
the slab where he ate the June-bugs scrambled the chipmunk, and the
rose-red spot on the breast of the supposed grosbeak dissolved into a
big scarlet-red strawberry. And by its long wedge shape I knew it was
one of my new variety.

I hurried across to the patch and found every berry gone, while a line
of bloody fragments led me back to the orchard wall, where a
half-dozen fresh calyx crowns completed my second discovery.

No, it did not complete it. It took a little watching to find out that
the whole family--all seven!--were after those berries. They were
picking them half ripe, even, and actually storing them away, canning
them, down in the cavernous depths of the stone-pile!

Alarmed? Yes, and I was wrathful, too. The taste for strawberries is
innate, original; you can’t be human without it. But joy in chipmunks
is a cultivated liking. What chance in such a circumstance has the
nature-lover with the human man? What shadow of doubt as to his choice
between the chipmunks and the strawberries?

I had no gun and no time to go over to my neighbor’s to borrow his. So
I stationed myself near by with a fistful of stones, and waited for
the thieves to show themselves. I came so near to hitting one of them
with a stone that the sweat started all over me. After that there was
no danger. I had lost my nerve. The little scamps knew that war had
been declared, and they hid and dodged and sighted me so far off that
even with a gun I should have been all summer killing the seven of
them.

Meantime, a good rain and the warm June days were turning the berries
red by the quart. They had more than caught up to the chipmunks. I
dropped my stones and picked. The chipmunks picked, too; so did the
toads and the robins. Everybody picked. It was free for all. We picked
them and ate them, jammed them, and canned them. I almost carried some
over to my neighbor, but took peas instead.

The strawberry season closed on the Fourth of July; and our taste was
not dimmed, nor our natural love for strawberries abated; but all four
of the small boys had hives from over-indulgence, so bountifully did
Nature provide, so many did the seven chipmunks leave us!

Peace between me and the chipmunks had been signed before the
strawberry season closed, and the pact still holds. Other things have
occurred since to threaten it, however. Among them, an article in a
recent number of an out-of-door magazine, of wide circulation. Herein
the chipmunk family was most roundly rated, in fact condemned to
annihilation because of its wicked taste for birds’ eggs and for the
young birds. Numerous photographs accompanied the article, showing the
red squirrel with eggs in his mouth, but no such proof (even the red
squirrel photographs, I strongly believe, were done from a _stuffed_
squirrel) of Chipmunk’s guilt, though he was counted equally bad and,
doubtless, will suffer with Chickaree at the hands of those who have
taken the article seriously.

I believe that would be a great mistake. Indeed, I believe the article
a deliberate falsehood, concocted in order to sell the made-up
photographs. Chipmunk is not an egg-sucker, else I should have found
it out. But of course that does not mean that no one else has found it
out. It does mean, however, that if Chipmunk robs at all he does it so
seldom as to call for no alarm or retribution.

There is scarcely a day in the nesting-season when I fail to see half
a dozen chipmunks about the walls, yet I have never noticed one even
suspiciously near a bird’s nest. In an apple tree, scarcely six jumps
from the home of the family in the orchard wall, a brood of tree
swallows came to wing this spring; while robins, chippies, and
red-eyed vireos--not to mention a cowbird, which I wish they had
devoured--have also hatched and flown away from nests that these
squirrels might easily have rifled.

It is not often that one comes upon even the red squirrel in the very
act of robbing a nest. But the black snake, the glittering fiend! and
the dear house cats! If I run across a dozen black snakes in the early
summer, it is safe to say that six of them are discovered to me by the
cries of the birds that they are robbing. So is it with the cats. No
creature larger than a June-bug, however, is often distressed by a
chipmunk. In a recent letter to me Mr. Burroughs says:--

“No, I never knew the chipmunk to suck or destroy eggs of any kind,
and I have never heard of any well-authenticated instance of his doing
so. The red squirrel is the sinner in this respect, and probably the
gray squirrel also.”

It will be difficult to find a true bill against him. Were the
evidence all in, I believe that instead of a culprit we should find
Chipmunk a useful citizen. Does not that pile of June-bug bodies on
the flat stone leave me still in debt to him? He may err occasionally,
and may, on occasion, make a nuisance of himself--but so do my four
small boys, bless them! And, well,--who doesn’t? When a family of
chipmunks, which you have fed all summer on the veranda, take up their
winter quarters inside the closed cabin, and chew up your quilts,
hammocks, table-cloths, and whatever else there is of chewable
properties, then they are anathema.

The havoc certain chipmunks in the mountains once made among our
possessions was dreadful. But instead of exterminating them root and
branch, a big box was prepared the next summer and lined with tin, in
which the linen was successfully wintered.

But how real was the loss, after all? Here was a rough log cabin on
the side of Thorn Mountain. What sort of table-cloth ought to be found
in such a cabin, if not one that has been artistically chewed by
chipmunks? Is it for fine linen that we take to the woods in summer?
The chipmunks are well worth a table-cloth now and then--well worth,
besides these, all the strawberries and all the oats they can steal
from my small patch.

Only it isn’t stealing. Since I ceased throwing stones and began to
watch the chipmunks carefully, I do not find that their manner is in
the least the manner of thieves. They do not act as if they were
taking what they have no right to. For who has told Chipmunk to earn
his oats in the sweat of his brow? No one. Instead, he seems to
understand that he is one of the innumerable factors ordained to make
me sweat--a good and wholesome experience for me so long as I get the
necessary oats.

And I get them, in spite of the chipmunks, though I don’t like to
guess at the quantity of oats they have carried off--anywhere, I
should say, from a peck to a bushel, which they have stored as they
tried to store the berries, somewhere in the big recesses of the stone
wall.

All this, however, is beside the point. It isn’t a case of oats and
berries against June-bugs. You don’t haggle with Nature after that
fashion. The farm is not a market-place where you get exactly what you
pay for. You must spend on the farm all you have of time and strength
and brains; but you must not expect in return merely your money’s
worth. Infinitely more than that, and oftentimes less. Farming is like
virtue,--its own reward. It pays the man who loves it, no matter how
short the crop of oats and corn.

So it is with Chipmunk. Perhaps his books don’t balance--a few
June-bugs short on the credit side. What then? It isn’t mere bugs and
berries, as I have just suggested, but stone-piles. What is the
difference in value to me between a stone-pile with a chipmunk in it
and one without. Just the difference, relatively speaking, between the
house with my four boys in it, and the house without.

Chipmunk, with his sleek, round form, his rich color and his stripes,
is the daintiest, most beautiful of all our squirrels. He is one of
the friendliest of my tenants, too, friendlier even than the
friendliest of my birds--Chickadee. The two are very much alike in
spirit; but however tame and confiding Chickadee may become, he is
still a bird and belongs to a different and, despite his wings, lower
order of beings. Chickadee is often curious about me; he can be coaxed
to eat from my hand. Chipmunk is more than curious; he is interested;
and it is not crumbs that he wants, but friendship. He can be coaxed
to eat from my lips, sleep in my pocket, and even come to be stroked.

I have sometimes seen Chickadee in winter when he seemed to come to me
out of very need for living companionship. But in the flood-tide of
summer life Chipmunk will watch me from his stone-pile and tag me
along with every show of friendship.

The family in the orchard wall have grown very familiar. They flatter
me. One or another of them, sitting upon the high flat slab, sees me
coming. He sits on the very edge of the crack, to be truthful; and if
I take a single step aside toward him, he flips, and all there is left
of him is a little angry squeak from the depths of the stones. If,
however, I pass properly along, do not stop or make any sudden motion,
he sees me past, then usually follows me, especially if I get well off
and pause.

During a shower one day I halted under a large hickory just beyond his
den. He came running after me, so interested that he forgot to look to
his footing, and just opposite me slipped and bumped his nose hard
against a stone--so hard that he sat up immediately and vigorously
rubbed it. Another time he followed me across to the garden and on
until he came to the barbed-wire fence along the meadow. Here he
climbed a post and continued after me by way of the middle strand of
the wire, wriggling, twisting, even grabbing the barbs, in his efforts
to maintain his balance. He got midway between the posts, when the
sagging strand tripped him and he fell with a splash into a shallow
pool below. No, he did not drown, but his curiosity did get a ducking.

Did the family in the orchard wall stay together as a family for the
first summer? I should like to know. As late as August they all seemed
to be in the wall; for in August I cut my oats, and during this
harvest we all worked together.

I mowed the oats as soon as they began to yellow, cocking them to cure
for hay. It was necessary to let them “make” for six or seven days,
and all this time the chipmunks raced back and forth between the cocks
and the stone wall. They might have hidden their gleanings in a dozen
crannies nearer at hand; but evidently they had a particular
storehouse, near the home nest, where the family could get at their
provisions in bad weather without coming forth.

Had I removed the stones and dug out the nest, I should have found a
tunnel leading into the ground for a few feet and opening into a
chamber filled with a bulky grass nest--a bed capable of holding half
a dozen chipmunks--and, adjoining this, by a short passageway, the
storehouse of the oats.

How many trips they made between this crib and the oat-patch, how
many kernels they carried in their pouches at a trip, and how big a
pile they had when all the grains were in,--these are more of the
things I should like to know.

When the first frosts come, the family--if they are still a
family--seek the nest in the ground beneath the stone wall. But they
do not go to sleep immediately. Their outer entrances have not yet
been closed. There is still plenty of fresh air and, of course, plenty
of food--acorns, chestnuts, hickory-nuts, and oats. They doze quietly
for a time and then they eat, pushing the empty shells and hulls into
some side passage prepared beforehand to receive the débris.

But soon the frost is creeping down through the stones and earth
overhead, the rains are filling the outer doorways and shutting off
the supply of fresh air; and one day, though not sound sleepers, the
family cuddle down and forget to wake entirely until the frost has
begun to creep back toward the surface, and in through the softened
soil is felt the thrill of the waking spring.




CHAPTER XIII

WOODS MEDICINE


The real watcher in the woods usually goes off by himself. He hates to
have anybody along; for Anybody wants to be moving all the time, and
Anybody wants to be talking all the time, and Anybody wants to be
finding a circus, or a zoo, or a natural history museum in the middle
of the woods, else Anybody wishes he had stayed at home or gone to the
ball-game.

Now I always say to Mr. Anybody when he asks me to take him into the
woods, “Yes, come along, if you can stand stock-still for an hour,
without budging; if you can keep stock-still for an hour, without
talking; if you can get as excited watching two tumble-bugs trying to
roll their ball up hill, as you do watching nine baseball men trying
to bat their ball about a field.”

The doctor pulled a small blankbook out of his vest pocket, scribbled
something in Latin and Chinese (at least it looked like Chinese), and
then at the bottom wrote in English, “Take one teaspoonful every
hour”; and, tearing off the leaf, handed it to the patient. It was a
prescription for some sort of medicine.

Now I am going to give you a prescription,--for some woods
medicine,--a magic dose that will cure you of blindness and deafness
and clumsy-footedness, that will cause you to see things and hear
things and think things in the woods that you have never thought or
heard or seen in the woods before. Here is the prescription:--

    WOOD CHUCK, M. D.,

     MULLEIN HILL.


     Office Hours: 5.30 A.M. until Breakfast.


     Rx: No moving for one hour.... No talking for one hour.... No
     dreaming or thumb-twiddling the while....

     _Sig_: The dose to be taken from the top of a stump with a bit
     of sassafras bark or a nip of Indian turnip every time you go
     into the woods.


     WOOD CHUCK.

I know that this compound will cure if you begin taking it early
enough--along, I should say, from the Fifth to the Eighth Grades. It
is a very difficult dose to take at any age, but it is almost
impossible for grown-ups to swallow it; for they have so many things
to do, or think they have, that they can’t sit still a whole hour
anywhere--a terrible waste of time! And then they have been talking
for so many years that to stop for a whole hour might--kill them, who
knows! And they have been working nervously with their hands so long
that their thumbs will twiddle, and to sleep they will go the minute
they sit down, in spite of themselves. It is no use to give this
medicine to grown-ups. They are what Dr. Wood Chuck calls
“chronics”--hopeless hurriers who will never sit down upon a stump,
who, when the Golden Chariot comes for them, will stand up and drive
all the way to heaven.

However, I am not giving this medicine to grown-ups, but to you. Of
course you will make a bad face over it, too; for, young or old, it is
hard to sit still and even harder to keep still--I mean not to talk. I
have closely watched four small boys these several years now, and I
never knew one of them to sit still for a whole hour _at home_--not
once in his whole life! And as for his tongue! he might tuck that into
his cheek, hold it down between his teeth, crowd it back behind his
fist--no matter. The tongue is an unruly member. But let these four
boys get into the woods, and every small pale-face of them turns
Indian instinctively, tip-toeing up and down the ridges with lips as
close-sealed as if some finger of the forest were laid upon them. So
it must be with you when you enter the fields and woods.

The wood-born people are all light-footed and cautious in their
stirring. Only the box turtles scuff carelessly along; and that is
because they can shut themselves up--head, paws, tail--inside their
lidded shells, and defy their enemies.

The skunk, however, is sometimes careless in his going; for he knows
that he will neither be crowded nor jostled along the street, so he
naturally behaves as if all the woods were his. Yet, how often do you
come upon a skunk? Seldom--because, he is quite as unwilling to meet
you as you are to meet him; but as one of your little feet makes as
much noise in the leaves as all four of his, he hears you coming and
turns quietly down some alley or in at some burrow and allows you to
pass on.

Louder than your step in the woods is the sound of your voice. Perhaps
there is no other noise so far-reaching, so alarming, so silencing in
the woods as the human voice. When your tongue begins, all the other
tongues cease. Songs stop as by the snap of a violin string;
chatterings cease; whisperings end--mute are the woods and empty as a
tomb, except the wind be moving aloft in the trees.

Three things all the animals can do supremely well: they can hear
well; they can see motion well; they can wait well.

If you would know how well an animal can wait, scare Dr. Wood Chuck
into his office, then sit down outside and wait for him to come out.
It would be a rare and interesting thing for you to do. No one has
ever done it yet, I believe! Establish a world’s record for keeping
still! But you should scare him in at the beginning of your summer
vacation so as to be sure you have all the waiting-time the state
allows: for you may have to leave the hole in September and go back to
school.

When the doctor wrote the prescription for this medicine, “No moving
for an hour,” he was giving you a very small, a homeopathic dose of
patience, as you can see; for _an hour_ at a time, every wood-watcher
knows, will often be only a waste of time, unless followed
immediately by another hour of the same.

On the road to the village one day, I passed a fox-hunter sitting atop
an old stump. It was about seven o’clock in the morning.

“Hello, Will!” I called, “been out all night?”

“No, got here ’bout an hour ago,” he replied.

I drove on and, returning near noon, found Will still atop the stump.

“Had a shot yet?” I called.

“No, the dogs brought him down ’tother side the brook, and carried him
over to the Shanty field.”

About four o’clock that afternoon I was hurrying down to the station,
and there was Will atop that same stump.

“Got him yet?” I called.

“No, dogs are fetching him over the Quarries now”--and I was out of
hearing.

It was growing dark when I returned; but there was Will Hall atop the
stump. I drew up in the road.

“Grown fast to that stump, Will?” I called. “Want me to try to pull
you off?”

“No, not yet,” he replied, jacking himself painfully to his feet.
“Chillin’ up some, ain’t it?” he added shaking himself. “Might’s well
go home, I guess”--when from the direction of Young’s Meadows came the
eager voice of his dogs; and, waving me on, he got quickly back atop
the stump, his gun ready across his knees.

I was nearly home when, through the muffle of the darkening woods, I
heard the quick _bang! bang!_ of Will’s gun.

Yes, he got him, a fine red fox. And speaking to me about it one day,
he said,--

“There’s a lot more to sittin’ still than most folks thinks. The
trouble is, most folks in the woods can’t stand the monopoly of it.”

Will’s English needs touching up in spots; but he can show the
professors a great many things about the ways of the woods.

And now what does the doctor mean by “No dreaming or thumb-twiddling”
in the woods? Just this: that not only must you be silent and
motionless for hours at a time, but you must also be alert--watchful,
keen, ready to take a hint, to question, guess, and interpret. The
fields and woods are not full of life, but full only of the sounds,
shadows, and signs of life.

You are atop of your stump, when over the ridge you hear a slow, quiet
rustle in the dead leaves--a skunk; then a slow, _loud_ rustle--a
turtle; then a _quick_, loud--_one-two-three_--rustle--a chewink; then
a tiny, rapid rustle--a mouse; then a long, rasping rustle--a snake;
then a measured, galloping rustle--a squirrel; then a light-heavy,
hop-thump rustle--a rabbit; then--and not once have you seen the
rustlers in the leaves beyond the ridge; and not once have you stirred
from your stump.

Perhaps this understanding of the leaf-sounds might be called
“interpretation”; but before you can interpret them, you must hear
them; and no dozing, dreaming, fuddling sitter upon a stump has ears
to hear.

As you sit there, you notice a blue jay perched silent and unafraid
directly over you--not an ordinary, common way for a blue jay to act.
“Why?” you ask. Why, a nest, of course, somewhere near! Or, suddenly
round and round the trunk of a large oak tree whirls a hummingbird.
“Queer,” you say. Then up she goes--and throwing your eye ahead of her
through the tree-tops you chance to intercept her bee-line flight--a
hint! She is probably gathering lichens for a nest which she is
building somewhere near, in the direction of her flight. A whirl! a
flash!--as quick as light! You have a wonderful story!

Now do not get the impression that all one needs to do in order to
become acquainted with the life of the woods is to sit on a
stump a long time, say nothing, and listen hard. All that is
necessary--rather, the ability to do it is necessary; but in the woods
or out it is also necessary to exercise common sense. Guess, for
instance, when guessing is all that you can do. You will learn more,
however, and learn it faster, generally, by following it up, than by
sitting on a stump and guessing about it.

At twilight, in the late spring and early summer, we frequently hear
a gentle, tremulous call from the woods or from below in the orchard.
“What is it?” I had been asked a hundred times, and as many times had
guessed that it might be the hen partridge clucking to her brood; or
else I had replied that it made me think of the mate-call of a coon,
or that I half inclined to believe it the cry of the woodchucks, or
that possibly it might be made by the owls. In fact, I didn’t know the
peculiar call, and year after year I kept guessing at it.

We were seated one evening on the porch listening to the
whip-poor-wills, when some one said, “There’s your woodchuck
singing again.” Sure enough, there sounded the tremulous
woodchuck-partridge-owl-coon cry. I slipped down through the birches
determined at last to know that cry and stop guessing about it, if I
had to follow it all night.

The moon was high and full, the footing almost noiseless, and
everything so quiet that I quickly located the clucking sounds as
coming from the orchard. I came out of the birches into the wood-road,
and was crossing the open field to the orchard, when something dropped
with a swish and a vicious clacking close upon my head. I jumped from
under my hat, almost,--and saw the screech owl swoop softly up into
the nearest apple tree. Instantly she turned toward me and uttered the
gentle purring cluck that I had been guessing at so hard for at least
three years. And even while I looked at her, I saw in the tree
beyond, silhouetted against the moonlit sky, two round bunches,--young
owls evidently,--which were the explanation of the calls. These two,
and another young one, were found in the orchard the following day.

I rejoined the guessers on the porch and gave them the satisfying
fact, but only after two or three years of guessing about it. I had
laughed once at some of my friends over on the other road who had
bolted their front door and had gone out of the door at the side of
the house for precisely twenty-one years because the key in the
front-door lock wouldn’t work. They were intending to have it fixed,
but the children being little kept them busy; then the children grew
up, and of course kept them busier; got married at last and left
home--all but one daughter. Still the locksmith was not called to fix
that front door. One day this unmarried daughter, in a fit of
impatience, got at that door herself, and found that the key had been
inserted just twenty-one years before--_upside down_!

There I had sat on the porch--on a stump, let us say, and guessed
about it. Truly, my key to this mystery had been left long in the
lock, upside down, while I had been going in and out by the side door.

No, you must _go_ into the fields and woods, go deep and far and
frequently, with eyes and ears and all your souls alert!

INTRODUCTION                                      ix
       I. THE SUMMER AFIELD                            1
      II. THE WILD ANIMALS AT PLAY                     9
     III. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO SEE THIS SUMMER      18
      IV. THE COYOTE OF PELICAN POINT                 27
       V. FROM T WHARF TO FRANKLIN FIELD              39
      VI. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO HEAR THIS SUMMER     46
     VII. THE SEA-BIRDS’ HOME                         57
    VIII. THE MOTHER MURRE                            65
      IX. MOTHER CAREY’S CHICKENS                     79
       X. RIDING THE RIM ROCK                         88
      XI. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO DO THIS SUMMER      100
     XII. THE “CONY”                                 112
          NOTES AND SUGGESTIONS                      123



    ILLUSTRATIONS


    A SUMMER EVENING--BLACK-CROWNED NIGHT HERONS        _Frontispiece_
    RED CLOVER AND BUMBLEBEE                                         4
    RED SALAMANDER, OLD AND YOUNG                                    7
    NEWTS                                                            7
    HIPPOPOTAMUS--“IT WAS HIS GAME OF SOLITAIRE”                     9
    THE OTTER AND HIS SLIDE                                         12
    “FOLLOW MY LEADER”                                              14
    BUTTERFLIES AT PLAY--“WHIRLING OVER MT. HOOD’S POINTED PEAK”    16
    RUBY-THROATED HUMMINGBIRD AND NEST                              20
    ORCHIDS                                                         22
    YOUNG COWBIRD IN VIREO’S NEST                                   25
    COYOTE--“WHAT A SHOT!”                                          28
    ARGIOPE, THE MEADOW SPIDER                                      44
    CICADA--“DOG-DAYS-Z-Z-Z-Z-Z-Z-Z”                                48
    “THE BATS FLITTING AND WAVERING ABOUT”                          49
    RED-EYED VIREO--“DO YOU BELIEVE IT?”                            52
    TUFTED PUFFINS                                                  59
    BRANDT’S CORMORANT                                              63
    A MOTHER SPIDER WITH HER SACK OF EGGS                           67
    THE FATHER STICKLEBACK ON GUARD                                 68
    CALIFORNIA MURRE--“WITH THREATENING BEAK WATCHED THE TWO MEN
        COME ON”                                                    75
    PETRELS--“SKIMMING THE HEAVING SEA LIKE SWALLOWS”               80
    RIDING THE RIM ROCK--“NECK AND NECK WITH A BIG WHITE STEER”     97
    SASSAFRAS                                                      105
    DEADLY NIGHTSHADE                                              106
    POISON SUMACH                                                  107
    POISON IVY                                                     108
    VIRGINIA CREEPER                                               109
    THE DEADLY MUSHROOMS                                           110
    POKE BERRIES                                                   111
    THE CONY, OR PIKA                                              116




INTRODUCTION


In this fourth and last volume of these outdoor books I have taken you
into the summer fields and, shall I hope? left you there. After all,
what better thing could I do? And as I leave you there, let me say one
last serious word concerning the purpose of such books as these and
the large subject of nature-study in general.

I believe that a child’s interest in outdoor life is a kind of hunger,
as natural as his interest in bread and butter. He cannot live on
bread and butter alone, but he ought not to try to live without them.
He cannot be educated on nature-study alone, but he ought not to be
educated without it. To learn to obey and reason and feel--these are
the triple ends of education, and the greatest of these is to learn to
feel. The teacher’s word for obedience; the arithmetic for reasoning;
and for feeling, for the cultivation of the imagination, for the power
to respond quickly and deeply, give the child the out-of-doors.

“If I could teach my Rugby boys but one thing,” said Dr. Arnold, “that
one thing should be poetry.” Why? Because poetry draws out the
imagination, quickens and refines and deepens the emotions. The first
great source of poetry is Nature. Give the child poetry; and give him
the inspiration of the poem, the teacher of the poet--give him
Nature. Make a poet of the child, who is already a poet born.

How can so essential, so fundamental a need become a mere fad of
education? A child wants first to eat, then to play, then he wants to
know--particularly he wants to know the animals. And he does know an
elephant from a kangaroo long before he knows a Lincoln from a
Napoleon; just so he wants to go to the woods long before he asks to
visit a library.

The study of the ant in the school-yard walk, the leaves on the
school-yard trees, the clouds over the school-house roof, the sights,
sounds, odors coming in at the school-room windows, these are
essential studies for art and letters, to say nothing of life.

And this is the way serious men and women think about it. Captain
Scott, dying in the Antarctic snows, wrote in his last letter to his
wife: “Make our boy interested in natural history if you can. It is
better than games. Keep him in the open air.”

I hope that these four volumes may help to interest you in natural
history, that they may be the means of taking you into the open air of
the fields many times the seasons through.

    DALLAS LORE SHARP.
    MULLEIN HILL, February, 1914.




SUMMER




CHAPTER I

THE SUMMER AFIELD


The word summer, being interpreted, means vacation; and vacation,
being interpreted, means--so many things that I have not space in this
book to name them. Yet how can there be a vacation without mountains,
or seashore, or the fields, or the forests--days out of doors? My
ideal vacation would have to be spent in the open; and this book, the
larger part of it, is the record of one of my summer vacations--the
vacation of the summer of 1912. That was an ideal vacation, and along
with my account of it I wish to give you some hints on how to make the
most of your summer chance to tramp the fields and woods.

For the real lover of nature is a tramp; not the kind of tramp that
walks the railroad-ties and carries his possessions in a tomato-can,
but one who follows the cow-paths to the fields, who treads the
rabbit-roads in the woods, watching the ways of the wild things that
dwell in the tree-tops, and in the deepest burrows under ground.

Do not tell anybody, least of all yourself, that you love the
out-of-doors, unless you have your own path to the woods, your own
cross-cut to the pond, your own particular huckleberry-patch and
fishing-holes and friendships in the fields. The winds, the rain, the
stars, the green grass, even the birds and a multitude of other wild
folk try to meet you more than halfway, try to seek you out even in
the heart of the great city; but the great out-of-doors you must seek,
for it is not in books, nor in houses, nor in cities. It is out at the
end of the car-line or just beyond the back-yard fence, maybe--far
enough away, anyhow, to make it necessary for you to put on your
tramping shoes and with your good stout stick go forth.

You must learn to be a good tramper. You thought you learned how to
walk soon after you got out of the cradle, and perhaps you did, but
most persons only know how to hobble when they get into the unpaved
paths of the woods.

With stout, well-fitting shoes, broad in the toe and heel; light,
stout clothes that will not catch the briers, good bird-glasses, and a
bite of lunch against the noon, swing out on your _legs_; breathe to
the bottom of your lungs; balance your body on your hips, not on your
collar-bones, and, going leisurely, but not slowly (for crawling is
deadly dull), do ten miles up a mountain-side or through the brush;
and if at the end you feel like _eating up_ ten miles more, then you
may know that you can walk, can _tramp_, and are in good shape for the
summer.

In your tramping-kit you need: a pocket-knife; some string; a pair of
field-glasses; a botany-can or fish-basket on your back; and perhaps a
notebook. This is all and more than you need for every tramp. To these
things might be added a light camera. It depends upon what you go for.
I have been afield all my life and have never owned or used a camera.
But there are a good many things that I have never done. A camera may
add a world of interest to your summer, so if you find use for a
camera, don’t fail to make one a part of your tramping outfit.

After all, what you carry on your back or on your feet or in your
hands does not matter half so much as what you carry in your head and
heart--your eye, and spirit, and purpose. For instance, when you go
into the fields have some purpose in your going besides the indefinite
desire to get out of doors.

If you long for the wide sky and the wide winds and the wide slopes of
green, then that is a real and a definite desire. You want to get out,
OUT, OUT, because you have been shut _in_. Very good; for you will get
what you wish, what you go out to get. The point is this: always go
out for something. Never yawn and slouch out to the woods as you might
to the corner grocery store, because you don’t know how else to kill
time.

Go with some purpose; because you wish to visit some particular spot,
see some bird, find some flower, catch some--fish! Anything that takes
you into the open is good--ploughing, hoeing, chopping, fishing,
berrying, botanizing, tramping. The aimless person anywhere is a
failure, and he is sure to get lost in the woods!

It is a good plan to go frequently over the same fields, taking the
beaten path, watching for the familiar things, until you come to know
your haunt as thoroughly as the fox or the rabbit knows his. Don’t be
afraid of using up a particular spot. The more often you visit a place
the richer you will find it to be in interest for you.

Now, do not limit your interest and curiosity to any one kind of life
or to any set of things out of doors. Do not let your likes or your
prejudices interfere with your seeing the whole out-of-doors with all
its manifold life, for it is all interrelated, all related to you, all
of interest and meaning. The clover blossom and the bumblebee that
carries the fertilizing pollen are related; the bumblebee and the
mouse that eats up its grubs are related; and every one knows that
mice and cats are related; thus the clover, the bumblebee, the mouse,
the cat, and, finally, the farmer, are all so interrelated that if the
farmer keeps a cat, the cat will catch the mice, the mice cannot eat
the young bumblebees, the bumblebees can fertilize the clover, and the
clover can make seed. So if the farmer wants clover seed to sow down a
new field with, he must keep a cat.

I think it is well for you to have some one thing in which you are
particularly interested. It may be flowers or birds or shells or
minerals. But as the whole is greater than any of its parts, so a love
and knowledge of nature, of the earth and the sky over your head and
under your feet, with all that lives with you there, is more than a
knowledge of its birds or trees or reptiles.

But be on your guard against the purpose to spread yourselves over too
much. Don’t be thin and superficial. Don’t be satisfied with learning
the long Latin names of things while never watching the ways of the
things that have the names. As they sat on the porch, so the story
goes, the school trustee called attention to a familiar little
orange-colored bug, with black spots on his back, that was crawling on
the floor.

“I s’pose you know what that is?” he said.

“Yes,” replied the applicant, with conviction; “that is a _Coccinella
septempunctata_.”

“Young man,” was the rejoinder, “a feller as don’t know a ladybug when
he sees it can’t get my vote for teacher in this deestrict.”

The “trustee” was right; for what is the use of knowing that the
little ladybug is _Coc-ci-nel’-la sep-tem-punc-ta’-ta_ when you do not
know that she is a ladybug, and that you ought to say to her:--

    “Ladybug, ladybug, fly away home;
    Your house is on fire, your children alone”?

Let us say, now, that you are spending your vacation in the edge of
the country within twenty miles of a great city such as Boston. That
might bring you out at Hingham, where I am spending mine. In such an
ordinary place (if any place _is_ ordinary,) what might you expect to
see and watch during the summer?

Sixty species of birds, to begin with! They will keep you busy all
summer. The wild animals, beasts, that you will find depend so very
much upon your locality--woods, waters, rocks, etc.--that it is hard
to say how many they will be. Here in my woods you might come upon
three or four species of mice, three species of squirrels, the mink,
the muskrat, the weasel, the mole, the shrew, the fox, the skunk, the
rabbit, and even a wild deer. Of reptiles and amphibians you would see
several more species than of fur-bearing animals,--six snakes, four
common turtles, two salamanders, frogs, toads, newts,--a wonderfully
interesting group, with a real live rattler among them if you should
go over to the Blue Hills, fifteen miles away.

[Illustration: RED SALAMANDERS, OLD AND YOUNG]

You will go many times into the fields before you can make of the
reptiles your friends and neighbors. But by and by you will watch them
and note their ways with as much interest as you watch the other wild
folk about you. It is a pretty shallow lover of nature who jumps upon
a little snake with both feet, or who shivers when a little salamander
drops out of the leaf-mould at his feet.

[Illustration: NEWTS]

And what shall I say of the fishes? There are a dozen of them in the
stream and ponds within the compass of my haunt. They are a
fascinating family, and one very little watched by the ordinary
tramper. But _you_ are not ordinary. Quiet and patience and much
putting together of scraps of observations will be necessary if you
are to get at the whole story of any fish’s life. The story will be
worth it, however.

No, I shall not even try to _number_ the insects--the butterflies,
beetles, moths, wasps, bees, bugs, ticks, mites, and such small “deer”
as you will find in the round of your summer’s tramp. Nor shall I try
to name the flowers and trees, the ferns and mosses. It is with the
common things that you ought now to become familiar, and one summer is
all too short for the things you ought to see and hear and do in your
vacation out of doors.




CHAPTER II

THE WILD ANIMALS AT PLAY


The watcher of wild animals never gets used to the sight of their
mirthless sport. In all other respects animal play is entirely human.

A great deal of human play is serious--desperately serious on the
football-field, and at the card-table, as when a lonely player is
trying to kill time with solitaire.

I have watched a great ungainly hippopotamus for hours trying to do
the same solemn thing by cuffing a croquet-ball back and forth from
one end of his cage to the other. His keepers told me that without the
plaything the poor caged giant would fret and worry himself to death.
It was his game of solitaire.

In all their games of rivalry the animals are serious as humans, and,
forgetting the fun, often fall to fighting--a sad case, indeed. But
brutes are brutes. We cannot expect anything better of the animals.
Only this morning the whole flock of chickens in the hen-yard started
suddenly on the wild flap to see which would beat to the back fence
and wound up on the “line” in a free fight, two of the cockerels
tearing the feathers from each other in a desperate set-to.

You have seen puppies fall out in the same human fashion, and kittens
also, and older folk as well. I have seen a game of wood-tag among
friendly gray squirrels come to a finish in a fight. As the crows pass
over during the winter afternoon, you will notice their play--racing
each other through the air, diving, swooping, cawing in their fun,
when suddenly some one’s temper snaps, and there is a mix-up in the
air.

They can get angry, but they cannot laugh. I once saw what I thought
was a twinkle of merriment, however, in an elephant’s eye. It was at
the circus several years ago. The keeper had just set down for one of
the elephants a bucket of water which a perspiring youth had brought
in. The big beast sucked it quietly up,--the whole of it,--swung
gently around as if to thank the perspiring boy, then soused him, the
whole bucketful! Everybody roared, and one of the other elephants
joined in with trumpetings, so huge and jolly was the joke.

The elephant who played the trick looked solemn enough, except for a
twitch at the lips and a glint in the eye. There is something of a
smile about every elephant’s lips, to be sure, and fun is so
contagious that one should hesitate to say that he saw an elephant
laugh. But if that elephant didn’t laugh, it was not his fault.

From the elephant to the infusorian, the microscopic animal of a
single cell known as the paramœcium, is a far cry--to the extreme
opposite end of the animal kingdom, worlds apart. Yet I have seen
_Paramœcium caudatum_ at play in a drop of water under a compound
microscope, as I have seen elephants at play in their big bath-tub at
the zoölogical gardens.

Place a drop of stagnant water under your microscope and watch these
atoms of life for yourself. Invisible to the naked eye, they are
easily followed on the slide as they skate and whirl and chase one
another to the boundaries of their playground and back again, first
one of them “it,” then another. They stop to eat, they slow up to
divide their single-celled bodies into two cells, the two cells now
two living creatures where a moment before they were but one, both of
them swimming off immediately to feed and multiply and play.

Play seems to be as natural and as necessary to the wild animals as it
is to human beings. Like us the animals play hardest while young, but
as some human children never outgrow their youth and love of play, so
there are old animals that never grow too fat nor too stiff nor too
stupid to play.

The condition of the body has a great deal to do with the state of the
spirit. The sleek, lithe otter could not possibly grow fat. He keeps
in trim because he cannot help it, perhaps, but however that may be,
he is a very boy for play, and even goes so far as to build himself a
slide or chute for the fun of diving down it into the water. A writer
in one of the magazines tells of an otter in the New York Zoölogical
Park that swam and dived with a round stone balanced on his head.

Building a slide is more than we children used to do, for we had
ready-made for us grandfather’s two big slanting cellar-doors, down
which we slid and slid and slid till the wood was scoured white and
slippery with the sliding. The otter loves to slide. Up he climbs on
the bank, then down he goes--splash--into the stream. Up he climbs
and down he goes--time after time, day after day. There is nothing
like a slide, unless it is a cellar-door.

How much of a necessity to the otter is his play, one would like to
know--what he would give up for it, and how he would do deprived of
it. In the case of Pups, my neighbor’s beautiful young collie, play
seems more needful than food. There are no children, no one, to play
with him there, so that the sight of my small boys sets him almost
frantic.

His efforts to induce a hen or a rooster to play with him are
pathetic. The hen cannot understand. She hasn’t a particle of play in
her anyhow, but Pups cannot get that through his head. He runs rapidly
around her, drops on all fours flat, swings his tail, cocks his ears,
looks appealingly and barks a few little cackle-barks, as nearly
hen-like as he can bark them, then dashes off and whirls back--while
the hen picks up another bug. She never sees Pups. The old white coon
cat is better; but she is usually up the miff-tree. Pups steps on her,
knocks her over, or otherwise offends, especially when he tags her out
into the fields and spoils her hunting. The Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals ought to send some child or puppy out to play
with Pups of a Saturday.

I doubt if among the lower forms of animals play holds any such
prominent place as with the dog and the keen-witted, intelligent
otter. To catch these lower animals at play is a rare experience. One
of our naturalists describes the game of “follow my leader,” as he
watched it played by a school of minnows--a most unusual record, but
not at all hard to believe, for I saw recently, from the bridge in the
Boston Public Garden, a school of goldfish playing at something very
much like it.

This naturalist was lying stretched out upon an old bridge, watching
the minnows through a large crack between the planks, when he saw one
leap out of the water over a small twig floating at the surface.
Instantly another minnow broke the water and flipped over the twig,
followed by another and another, the whole school, as so many sheep,
or so many children, following the leader over the twig.

The love of play seems to be one of the elemental needs of all life
above the plants, and the games of us human children seem to have
been played before the dry land was, when there were only water babies
in the world, for certainly the fish never learned “follow my leader”
from us. Nor did my young bees learn from us their game of “prisoners’
base” which they play almost every summer noontime in front of the
hives. And what is the game the flies play about the cord of the
drop-light in the centre of the kitchen ceiling?

One of the most interesting animal games that I ever saw was played by
a flock of butterflies on the very top of Mount Hood, whose pointed
snow-piled peak looks down from the clouds over the whole vast State
of Oregon.

Mount Hood is an ancient volcano, eleven thousand two hundred
twenty-five feet high. Some seven thousand feet or more up, we came to
“Tie-up Rock”--the place on the climb where the glacier snows lay
before us and we were tied up to one another and all of us fastened by
rope to the guide.

From this point to the peak, it was sheer deep snow. For the last
eighteen hundred feet we clung to a rope that was anchored on the edge
of the crater at the summit, and cut our steps as we climbed.

Once we had gained the peak, we lay down behind a pile of sulphurous
rock, out of the way of the cutting wind, and watched the steam float
up from the crater, with the widest world in view that I ever turned
my eyes upon.

The draft pulled hard about the openings among the rock-piles, but
hardest up a flue, or chimney, that was left in the edge of the
crater-rim where parts of the rock had fallen away.

As we lay at the side of this flue, we soon discovered that
butterflies were hovering about us; no, not hovering, but flying
swiftly up between the rocks from somewhere down the flue. I could
scarcely believe my eyes. What could any living thing be doing
here?--and of all things, butterflies? This was three or four thousand
feet above the last vestige of vegetation, a mere point of volcanic
rock (the jagged edge-piece of an old crater) wrapped in eternal ice
and snow, with sulphurous gases pouring over it, and across it
blowing a wind that would freeze as soon as the sun was out of the
sky.

But here were real butterflies. I caught two or three of them and
found them to be vanessas (_Vanessa californica_), a close relative of
our mourning-cloak butterfly. They were all of one species,
apparently, but what were they doing here?

Scrambling to the top of the piece of rock behind which I had been
resting, I saw that the peak was alive with butterflies, and that they
were flying--over my head, out down over the crater, and out of sight
behind the peak, whence they reappeared, whirling up the flue past me
on the wings of the draft that pulled hard through it, to sail down
over the crater again, and again to be caught by the draft and pulled
up the flue, to their evident delight, up and out over the peak, where
they could again take wings, as boys take their sleds, and so down
again for the fierce upward draft that bore them whirling over Mount
Hood’s pointed peak.

Here they were, thousands of feet above the snow-line, where there was
no sign of vegetation, where the heavy vapors made the air to smell,
where the very next day a wild snowstorm wrapped its frozen folds
about the peak--here they were, butterflies, playing, a host of them,
like so many schoolboys on the first coasting snow!




CHAPTER III

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO SEE THIS SUMMER


I

The dawn, the breaking dawn! I know nothing lovelier, nothing fresher,
nothing newer, purer, sweeter than a summer dawn. I am just back from
one--from the woods and cornfields wet with dew, the meadows and
streams white with mist, and all the world of paths and fences running
off into luring spaces of wavering, lifting, beckoning horizons where
shrouded forms were moving and hidden voices calling. By noontime the
buzz-saw of the cicada will be ripping the dried old stick of this
August day into splinters and sawdust. No one could imagine that this
midsummer noon at 90° in the shade could have had so Maylike a
beginning.


II

I said in “The Spring of the Year” that you should see a farmer
ploughing, then a few weeks later the field of sprouting corn. Now in
July or August you must see that field in silk and tassel, blade and
stalk standing high over your head.

You might catch the same sight of wealth in a cotton-field, if cotton
is “king” in your section; or in a vast wheat-field, if wheat is your
king; or in a potato-field if you live in Maine--but no, not in a
potato-field. It is all underground in a potato-field. Nor can cotton
in the South, or wheat in the Northwest, give you quite the _depth_
and the ranked and ordered wealth of long, straight lines of tall
corn.

Then to hear a summer rain sweep down upon it and the summer wind run
swiftly through it! You must see a great field of standing corn.


III

Keep out from under all trees, stand away from all tall poles, but get
somewhere in the open and watch a blue-black thunderstorm come up. It
is one of the wonders of summer, one of the shows of the sky, a thing
of terrible beauty that I must confess I cannot look at without dread
and a feeling of awe that rests like a load upon me.

    “All heaven and earth are still--though not in sleep,
    But breathless, as we grow when feeling most;
    And silent, as we stand in thoughts too deep:--
           *       *       *       *       *
    The sky is changed!--and such a change! Oh night,
    And storm, and darkness, ye are wondrous strong,
    Yet lovely in your strength. .. .. ..
    .. .. .. .. . Far along,
    From peak to peak the rattling crags among,
    Leaps the live thunder! Not from one lone cloud,
    But every mountain now hath found a tongue,
    And Jura answers, through her misty shroud,
    Back to the joyous Alps who call to her aloud.”


IV

But there are many smaller, individual things to be seen this summer,
and among them, notable for many reasons, is a hummingbird’s nest.
“When completed it is scarcely larger than an English walnut and is
usually saddled on a small horizontal limb of a tree or shrub
frequently many feet from the ground. It is composed almost entirely
of soft plant fibers, fragments of spiders’ webs sometimes being used
to hold them in shape. The sides are thickly studded with bits of
lichen, and practiced, indeed, is the eye of the man who can
distinguish it from a knot on the limb.”

This is the smallest of birds’ nests and quite as rare and difficult
to find as any single thing that you can go out to look for. You will
stumble upon one now and then; but not many in a whole lifetime. Let
it be a test of your keen eye--this finding of a little hummer’s nest
with its two white eggs the size of small pea-beans or its two tiny
young that are up and off on their marvelous wings within three weeks
from the time the eggs are laid!


V

Have you read Mr. William L. Finley’s story of the California condor’s
nest? The hummingbird young is out and gone within three weeks; but
the condor young is still in the care of its watchful parents three
months after it is hatched. You ought to watch the slow, guarded youth
of one of the larger hawks or owls during the summer. Such birds build
very early,--before the snow is gone sometimes,--but they are to be
seen feeding their young far into the summer. The wide variety in
bird-life, both in size and habits, will be made very plain to you if
you will watch the nests of two such birds as the hummer and the
vulture or the eagle.


VI

This is the season of flowers. But what among them should you
especially see? Some time ago one of the school-teachers near me
brought in a list of a _dozen_ species of wild orchids, gathered out
of the meadows, bogs, and woods about the neighborhood. Can you do as
well?

Suppose, then, that you try to find as many. They were the pink
lady’s-slipper; the yellow lady’s-slipper; the yellow fringed-orchis
(_Habenaria ciliaris_); the ladies’-tresses, two species; the
rattlesnake-plantain; arethusa, or Indian pink; calopogon, or grass
pink; pogonia, or snake-mouth (_ophioglossoides_ and _verticillata_);
the ragged fringed-orchis; and the showy or spring orchis. Arethusa
and the showy orchis really belong to the spring but the others will
be task enough for you, and one that will give point and purpose to
your wanderings afield this summer.

[Illustration: ORCHIDS

    1. _Arethusa bulbosa_
    2. _Pogonia ophioglossoides_
    3. Pink Lady’s-Slipper
    4. Yellow Lady’s-Slipper
    5. Showy Orchis
]


VII

There are a certain number of moths and butterflies that you should
see and know also. If one could come to know, say, one hundred and
fifty flowers and the moths and butterflies that visit them (for the
flower and its insect pollen-carrier are to be thought of and studied
together), one would have an excellent speaking acquaintance with the
blossoming out-of-doors.

Now, among the butterflies you ought to know the mourning-cloak, or
vanessa; the big red-brown milkweed butterfly; the big yellow tiger
swallowtail; the small yellow cabbage butterfly; the painted beauty;
the red admiral; the common fritillary; the common wood-nymph--but I
have named enough for this summer, in spite of the fact that I have
not named the green-clouded or Troilus butterfly, and Asterias, the
black swallowtail, and the red-spotted purple, and the viceroy.

Among the moths to see are the splendid Promethea, Cecropia,
bullseye, Polyphemus, and Luna, to say nothing of the hummingbird
moth, and the sphinx, or hawk, moths, especially the large
one that feeds as a caterpillar upon the tomato-vines,
_Ma-cros’-i-la-quin-que-mac-u-la’-ta_.


VIII

There is a like list of interesting beetles and other insects, that
play a large part in even _your_ affairs, which you ought to watch
during the summer: the honeybee, the big droning golden bumblebee, the
large white-faced hornet that builds the paper nests in the bushes and
trees, the gall-flies, the ichneumon-flies, the burying beetle, the
tumble-bug beetle, the dragon-fly, the caddis-fly--these are only a
few of a whole world of insect folk about you, whose habits and
life-histories are of utmost importance and of tremendous interest.
You will certainly believe it if you will read the Peckhams’ book
called “Wasps, Social and Solitary,” or the beautiful and fascinating
insect stories by the great French entomologist Fabre. Get also
“Every-day Butterflies,” by Scudder; and “Moths and Butterflies,” by
Miss Dickerson, and “Insect Life,” by Kellogg.


IX

You see I cannot stop with this list of the things. That is the
trouble with summer--there is too much of it while it lasts, too much
variety and abundance of life. One is simply compelled to limit one’s
self to some particular study, and to pick up mere scraps from other
fields.

But, to come back to the larger things of the out-of-doors, you should
see the mist some summer morning very early or some summer evening,
sheeted and still over a winding stream or pond, especially in the
evening when the sun has gone down behind the hill, the flame has
faded from the sky, and over the rim of the circling slopes pours the
soft, cool twilight, with a breeze as soft and cool, and a spirit that
is prayer. For then from out the deep shadows of the wooded shore, out
over the pond, a thin white veil will come creeping--the mist, the
breath of the sleeping water, the soul of the pond!


X

You should see it rain down little toads this summer--_if you can!_
There are persons who claim to have seen it. But I never have. I have
stood on Maurice River Bridge, however, and apparently had them
pelting down upon my feet as the big drops of the July shower struck
the planks--myriads of tiny toads covering the bridge across the
river! Did they rain down? No, they had been hiding in the dirt
between the planks and hopped out to meet the sweet rain and to soak
their little thirsty skins full.


XI

You should see a cowbird’s young in a vireo’s nest and the efforts of
the poor deceived parents to satisfy its insatiable appetite at the
expense of their own young ones’ lives! Such a sight will set you to
thinking.


XII

I shall not tell you what else you should see, for the whole book
could be filled with this one chapter, and then you might lose your
forest in your trees. The individual tree is good to look at--the
mighty wide-limbed hemlock or pine; but so is a whole dark, solemn
forest of hemlocks and pines good to look at. Let us come to the
out-of-doors with our study of the separate, individual plant or
thing; but let us _go on to Nature_, and not stop with the individual
thing.




CHAPTER IV

THE COYOTE OF PELICAN POINT


“We have stopped the plumers,” said the game-warden, “and we are
holding the market-hunters to something like decency; but there’s a
pot-hunter yonder on Pelican Point that I’ve got to do up or lose my
job.”

Pelican Point was the end of a long, narrow peninsula that ran out
into the lake, from the opposite shore, twelve miles across from us.
We were in the Klamath Lake Reservation in southern Oregon, one of the
greatest wild-bird preserves in the world.

Over the point, as we drew near, the big white pelicans were winging,
and among them, as our boat came up to the rocks, rose a colony of
black cormorants. The peninsula is chiefly of volcanic origin,
composed of crumbling rock and lava, and ends in well-stratified
cliffs at the point. Patches of scraggly sagebrush grew here and
there, and out near the cliffs on the sloping lava sides was a field
of golden California poppies.

The gray, dusty ridge in the hot sun, with cliff swallows and
cormorants and the great pouched pelicans as inhabitants, seemed the
last place that a pot-hunter would frequent. What could a pot-hunter
find here? I wondered.

We were pulling the boat up on the sand at a narrow neck in the
peninsula, when the warden touched my arm. “Up there near the sky-line
among the sage! What a shot!”

I was some seconds in making out the head and shoulders of a coyote
that was watching us from the top of the ridge.

“The rascal knows,” went on the warden, “I have no gun; he can smell a
gun clear across the lake. I have tried for three years to get that
fellow. He’s the terror of the whole region, and especially of the
Point; if I don’t get him soon, he’ll clean out the pelican colony.

“Why don’t I shoot him? Poison him? Trap him? I have offered fifty
dollars for his hide. Why don’t I? I’ll show you. Now you watch the
critter as I lead you up the slope toward him.”

We had not taken a dozen steps when I found myself staring hard at the
place where the coyote had been, but not at the coyote, for he was
gone. He had vanished before my eyes. I had not seen him move,
although I had been watching him steadily.

“Queer, isn’t it?” said the warden. “It’s not his particular dodge,
for every old coyote that has been hunted learns to work it; but I
never knew one that had it down so fine as this sinner. There’s next
to nothing here for him to skulk behind. Why, he has given my dog the
slip right here on the bare rock! But I’ll fix him yet.”

I did not have to be persuaded to stay overnight with the warden for
the coyote-hunt the next day. The warden, I found, had fallen in with
a Mr. Harris, a homesteader, who had been something of a professional
coyote-hunter. Harris had just arrived in southern Oregon, and had
brought with him his dogs, a long, graceful greyhound, and his
fighting mate, a powerful Russian wolfhound; both were crack coyote
dogs from down Saskatchewan. He had accepted the warden’s offer of
fifty dollars for the hide of the coyote of Pelican Point, and was now
on his way round the lake.

The outfit appeared late the next day, and consisted of the two dogs,
a horse and buckboard, and a big, empty dry-goods box.

I had hunted possums in the gum swamps of the South with a stick and a
gunny-sack, but this rig, on the rocky, roadless shores of the lake--a
dry-goods box for coyotes!--beat any hunting combination I had ever
seen.

We had pitched the tent on the south shore of the point where the
peninsula joined the mainland, and were finishing our supper, when not
far from us, back on shore, we heard the doleful yowl of the coyote.

We were on our feet in an instant.

“There he is,” said the warden, “lonesome for a little play with your
dogs, Mr. Harris.”

There was still an hour and a half of good light, and Harris untied
his dogs. I had never seen the coyote hunted, and was greatly
interested. Harris, with his dogs close in hand, led us directly away
from where we had heard the coyote bark. Then we stopped and sat down.
At my look of inquiry, Harris smiled.

“Oh, no, we’re not after coyotes to-night, not _that_ coyote, anyhow,”
he said. “You know a coyote is made up of equal parts of curiosity,
cowardice, and craft; and it’s a long hunt unless you can get a lead
on his curiosity. We are not out for _him_. He sees that. In fact,
we’ll amble back now--but we’ll manage to get up along the crest of
that little ridge where he is sitting, so that the dogs can follow him
whichever way he runs. You hunt coyotes wholly by sight, you know.”

The little trick worked perfectly. The coyote, curious to see what we
were doing, had risen to his feet, and stood, plainly outlined against
the sky. He was entirely unsuspecting, and as we approached, only
edged and backed, more apparently to get a sight of the dogs behind us
than through any fear.

Suddenly Harris stepped from before the dogs, pointed them toward the
coyote, and slipped their leashes. The hounds were trained to the
work. There was just an instant’s pause, a quick yelp, then two
doubling, reaching forms ahead of us, with a little line of dust
between.

The coyote saw them coming, and started to run, not hurriedly,
however, for he had had many a run before. He was not afraid, and kept
looking behind to see what manner of dog was after him this time.

But he was not long in making up his mind that this was an entirely
new kind, for in less than three minutes the hounds had halved the
distance that separated him from them. At first, the big wolfhound was
in the lead. Then, as if it had taken him till this time to find all
four of his long legs, the greyhound pulled himself together, and in a
burst of speed that was astonishing, passed his heavier companion.

We raced along the ridge to see the finish. But the coyote ahead of
the dogs was no novice. He knew the game perfectly. He saw the gap
closing behind him. Had he been young, he would have been seized by
fear; would have darted right and left, mouthing and snapping in
abject terror. Instead of that, he dug his nails into the shore, and
with all his wits about him, sped for the desert. The greyhound was
close behind him.

I held my breath. Harris, I think, would have taken his fifty dollars
then and there! And the warden would have handed it to him, despite
his past experience with the beast; but suddenly the coyote headed
straight off for a low manzanita bush that stood up amid the scraggly
sagebrush back from the shore.

The hunt was now going directly from us, with the dust and the
wolfhound behind, following the line in front. The gap between the
greyhound and the coyote seemed to have closed, and when the hound
took the low manzanita with a bound that was half-somersault, Harris
exclaimed, “He’s nailed him!” and we ran ahead to see the wolfhound
complete the job.

The wolfhound, however, kept right on across the desert; the greyhound
lagged uncertainly far behind; in the lead, ahead of the big grizzled
wolfhound, bobbed the form of a fleeing jack-rabbit!

The look of astonishment and then of disgust on Harris’s face was
amusing to see. The warden may have been disappointed, but he did not
take any pains to repress a chuckle.

Harris said nothing. He was searching the stunted sagebrush off to the
left of us. We followed his eyes, and he and the warden, both
experienced plainsmen, picked out the skulking, shadowy shape of the
coyote, as the creature, with belly to the ground, slunk off out of
sight.

It was too late for any further attempt that night.

“An old stager, sure,” Harris commented, as we returned to camp.
“Knows a trick or two for every one of mine. But I’ll fix him.”

Nothing was seen of the coyote all the early part of the next day, and
no effort was made to find him; but toward the middle of the
afternoon, Harris hitched up the bronco, and, unpacking a flat package
in the bottom of the buckboard, showed us a large glass window, which
he fitted as a door into one end of the big dry-goods box. Then into
the glass-ended box he put the two hounds.

“Now, gentlemen,” he said, “I’m going to invite you to take a
sight-seeing trip on this auto out into the sagebrush. Incidentally,
if you chance to see a coyote, don’t mention it.”

If all the coyotes, jack-rabbits, gophers, and pelicans of the
territory had come out to see us thump and bump over the dry, uneven
desert, I should not have been surprised; and so, on coming back to
camp, it was with no wonder at all that I discovered the coyote, out
on the point, staring at us from across the neck of the peninsula.
Nothing like this had happened on his side of the lake before.

Harris saw him instantly, and was quick to recognize our advantage. We
had the coyote cornered--out on the long, narrow peninsula, where the
dogs must run him down. The wily creature had so far forgotten himself
as to get caught between us and the ridge along shore, and, partly in
curiosity, had kept running ahead and stopping to look at us, until
now he was past the place where he could skulk back without our seeing
him, into the open plain.

Even yet all depended upon our getting so close to him that the dogs
could keep him constantly in sight. The crumbling ledges at the end of
the point were full of holes and crevices into which the beast could
dodge.

We were not close enough, however. With one of us watching the coyote,
should he happen to run, Harris turned the bronco slowly round until
the glass end of the box in the back of the buckboard was pointing
directly at the creature. There was a scramble of feet inside the box.
The dogs had sighted the beast. Then Harris started as if to drive
away, the coyote watching us all the time.

Instead of driving off, he made a circle, and coming back slowly
toward the coyote, gained the top of a little knoll. Had the coyote
seen the dogs in the box, he would have vanished instantly; but the
box interested and puzzled him.

He stood looking with all his eyes as the procession turned, and once
more the glass end of the box was pointed directly toward him. The
dogs evidently knew what was expected of them. They were silent, but
ready. Suddenly, without stopping the pony, Harris pulled open the
glass door, and yelled, “Go!”

And go they did. I never saw hundred-yard runners leap from the mark
as those two hounds leaped from that box. The coyote, in his
astonishment, actually turned a back handspring and started for the
point.

The dogs were hardly two hundred yards behind him, and were making
short work of the space between. It seemed hardly fair, and I must say
that I felt something like sympathy for the under dog, wild dog though
he was; the odds against him were so great.

But the coyote knew his track thoroughly, and was taking advantage of
the rough, loose, shelving ground. For the farther out toward the end
of the point they ran, the narrower, rockier, and steeper grew the
peninsula, the more difficult and dangerous the footing.

The coyote slanted along the side of the ridge, and took a sloping
slab of rock ahead of him with a slow side-step and a climb that
brought the dogs close up behind him. They took the rock at a leap,
slid halfway across, and scrambling, rolled several yards down the
slope--and lost all the gain they had made.

Things began to even up. The chase began to be interesting. Here
judgment was called for, as well as speed. The cliff swallows swarmed
out of their nests under the overhanging rocks; the black cormorants
and great-winged pelicans saw their old enemy coming, and rose,
flapping, over the water; the circling gulls dropped low between the
runners; their strange clangor and the stranger tropical shapes thick
in the air gave the scene a wildness altogether new to me.

On fled the coyote; on bounded the dogs. He would never escape!
Nothing without wings could ever do it! Mere feet could never stand
such a test! The chances that pursued and pursuers took--the
leaps--the landings! The whole slope seemed rolling with stones,
started by the feet of the runners.

They were nearing the high, rough rocks of the tip of the point.
Between them and the ledges of the point, and reaching from the edge
of the water nearly to the top of the ridge, lay the steep golden
garden of California poppies, blooming in the dry lava soil that had
crumbled and drifted down on the rocky side.

The coyote veered, and dashed down toward the middle of the poppies;
the hounds hit the bed two jumps behind. There was a cloud of dust,
and in it we saw an avalanche of dogs ploughing a wide furrow through
the flowers nearly down to the water. Climbing slowly out near the
upper edge of the bed was the coyote, again with a good margin of
lead.

But the beast was at the end of the point, and nearing the end of his
race. Had we been out of the way, he might have turned and yet given
the dogs the slip--for behind us lay the open desert.

Straight toward the rocks he headed, with the hounds laboring up the
slope after him. He was running to the very edge of the point, as if
he were intending to leap off the cliff to death in the lake below,
and I saw Harris’s face tighten as his hounds topped the ridge, and
senselessly tore on toward the same fearful edge. But the race was not
done yet. The coyote hesitated, turned down the ledges on the south
slope, and leaping in among the cormorant nests, started back toward
us.

He was surer on his feet than were the hounds, but this hesitation on
the point had cost him several yards. The hounds would pick him up in
the little cove of smooth, hard sand that lay, encircled by rough
rocks, just ahead, unless--no, he must cross the cove, he must take
the stretch. He was taking it--knowingly, too, and with a burst of
power that he had not shown upon the slopes. He was flinging away his
last reserve.

The hounds were nearly across; the coyote was within fifty feet of the
boulders, when the greyhound, lowering his long, flat head, lunged for
the spine of his quarry.

The coyote heard him coming, spun on his fore feet, offering his fangs
to those of his foe, and threw himself backward just as the jaws of
the wolfhound clashed at him and flecked his throat with foam.

The two great dogs collided and bounded wide apart, startling a jack
rabbit that dived between them into a hole among the rocks. The
coyote, on his feet in an instant, caught the motion of the rabbit,
and like his shadow, leaped into the air after him for the hole.

He was as quick as thought, quicker than either of the hounds. He
sprang high over them,--safely over them, we thought,--when, in
mid-air, at the turn of the dive, he twisted, heeled half-over, and
landed hard against the side of the hole; and the wolfhound pulled him
down.

It was over; but there was something strange, almost unfair, it
seemed, about the finish.

Before we got down to the cove both of the dogs had slunk back,
cowering from the dead coyote. Then there came to us the buzz of a
rattlesnake--a huge, angry reptile that lay coiled in the mouth of the
hole. The rabbit had struck and roused the snake. The coyote in his
leap had caught the warning whir, but caught it too late to clear both
snake and hounds. His twist in the air to clear the snake had cost him
his life. So close is the race in the desert world.




CHAPTER V

FROM T WHARF TO FRANKLIN FIELD


Over and over I read the list of saints and martyrs on the wall across
the street, thinking dully how men used to suffer for their religion,
and how, nowadays, they suffer for their teeth. For I was reclining in
a dentist’s chair, blinking through the window at the Boston Public
Library, seeing nothing, however, nothing but the tiles on the roof,
and the names of Luther, Wesley, Wycliffe, graven on the granite wall,
while the dentist burred inside of my cranium and bored down to my
toes for nerves. So, at least, it seemed.

By and by my gaze wandered blankly off to the square patch of sky in
sight above the roof. A black cloud was driving past in the wind away
up there. Suddenly a white fleck swept into the cloud, careened,
spread two wide wings against it, and rounded a circle. Then another
and another, until eight herring gulls were soaring white against the
sullen cloud in that little square of sky high over the roofs of
Boston.

Was this the heart of a vast city? Could I be in a dentist’s chair?
There was no doubt about the chair; but how quickly the red-green roof
of the Library became the top of some great cliff; the droning noise
of traffic in the streets, the wash of waves against the rocks; and
yonder on the storm-stained sky those wheeling wings, how like the
winds of the ocean, and the raucous voices, how they seemed to fill
all the city with the sweep and the sound of the sea!

Boston, Baltimore, New York, Philadelphia, Chicago, San Francisco--do
you live in any one of them or in any other city? If you do, then you
have a surprisingly good chance to watch the ways of wild things and
even to come near to the heart of Nature. Not so good a chance, to be
sure, as in the country; but the city is by no means so lacking in
wild life or so shunned by the face of Nature as we commonly believe.

All great cities are alike, all of them very different, too, in
details; Boston’s streets, for instance, being crookeder than most,
but like them all, reaching out for many a mile before they turn into
country roads and lanes with borders of quiet and wide green fields.

But Boston has the wide waters of the Harbor and the Charles River
Basin. And it also has T Wharf! They did not throw the tea overboard
there, back in Revolutionary days, as you may be told, but T Wharf is
famous, nevertheless, famous for fish!

Fish? Swordfish and red snappers, scup, shad, squid, squeteague,
sharks, skates, smelts, sculpins, sturgeon, scallops, halibut,
haddock, hake--to say nothing of mackerel, cod, and countless freak
things caught by trawl and seine all the way from Boston Harbor to the
Grand Banks! I have many a time sat on T Wharf and caught short, flat
flounders with my line. It is almost as good as a trip to the Georges
in the “We’re Here” to visit T Wharf; and then to walk slowly up
through Quincy Market. Surely no single walk in the woods will yield a
tithe of the life to be found here, and found only here for us,
brought as the fish and game and fruits have been from the ends of the
earth and the depths of the sea.

There is no reason why city children should not know a great deal
about animal life, nor why the teachers in city schools should feel
that nature study is impossible for them. For, leaving the wharf with
its fish and gulls and fleet of schooners, you come up four or five
blocks to old King’s Chapel Burying-Ground where the Boston sparrows
roost. Boston is full of interesting sights, but none more interesting
to the bird-lover than this sparrow-roost. The great bird rocks in the
Pacific, described in another chapter of this book, are larger, to be
sure, yet hardly more clamorous when, in the dusk, the sparrow clans
begin to gather; nor hardly wilder than this city roost when the night
lengthens, and the quiet creeps down the alleys and along the empty
streets, and the sea winds stop on the corners, and the lamps, like
low-hung stars, light up the sleeping birds till their shadows waver
large upon the stark walls about the old graveyard that break far
overhead as rim rock breaks on the desert sky.

Now shift the scene to an early summer morning on Boston Common, two
blocks farther up, and on to the Public Garden across Charles Street.
There are more wild birds to be seen in the Garden on a May morning
than there are here in the woods of Hingham, and the summer still
finds some of them about the shrubs and pond. And it is an easy place
in which to watch them. One of our bird-students has found over a
hundred species in the Garden. Can any one say that the city offers a
poor chance for nature-study?

This is the story of every great city park. My friend Professor
Herbert E. Walter found nearly one hundred and fifty species of birds
in Lincoln Park, Chicago. And have you ever read Mr. Bradford Torrey’s
delightful essay called “Birds on Boston Common”?

Then there are the squirrels and the trees on the Common; the flowers,
bees, butterflies, and even the schools of goldfish, in the pond of
the Garden--enough of life, insect-life, plant-life, bird-life,
fish-life, for more than a summer of lessons.

Nor is this all. One block beyond the Garden stands the Natural
History Museum, crowded with mounted specimens of birds and beasts,
reptiles, fishes, and shells beyond number--more than you can study,
perhaps. You city folk, instead of having too little, have altogether
too much of too many things. But such a museum is always a suggestive
place for one who loves the out-of-doors. And the more one knows of
nature, the more one gets out of the museum. You can carry there, and
often answer, the questions that come to you in your tramps afield, in
your visits to the Garden, and in your reading of books. Then add to
this the great Agassiz Museum at Harvard University, and the Aquarium
at South Boston, and the Zoölogical Gardens at Franklin Park, and the
Arnold Arboretum--all of these with their multitude of mounted
specimens and their living forms for _you_! For me also; and in from
the country I come, very often, to study natural history in the city.

What is true of Boston is true of every city in some degree. The sun
and the moon and stars shine upon the city as upon the country, and
during my years of city life (I lived in the very heart of Boston) it
was my habit to climb to my roof, above the din and glare of the
crowded street, and here among the chimney-pots to lie down upon my
back, the city far below me, and overhead the blue sky, the Milky Way,
the constellations, or the moon, swinging--

    “Through the heaven’s wide pathless way,
    And oft, as if her head she bowed
    Stooping through a fleecy cloud.”

Here, too, I have watched the gulls that sail over the Harbor,
especially in the winter. From this outlook I have seen the winging
geese pass over, and heard the faint calls of other migrating flocks,
voices that were all the more mysterious for their falling through the
muffling hum that rises from the streets and spreads over the wide
roof of the city as a soft night wind over the peaked roofs of a
forest of firs.

[Illustration: ARGIOPE, THE MEADOW SPIDER]

Strangely enough here on the roof I have watched the only nighthawks
that I have ever found in Massachusetts. This is surely the last place
you would expect to find such wild, spooky, dusk-loving creatures as
nighthawks. Yet here, on the tarred and pebbled roofs, here among the
whirling, squeaking, smoking chimney-pots, here above the crowded,
noisy streets, these birds built their nests,--laid their eggs,
rather, for they build no nests,--reared their young, and in the long
summer twilight rose and fell through the smoky air, uttering their
peevish cries and making their ghostly booming sounds with their
high-diving, just as if they were out over the darkening swales along
some gloomy swamp-edge.

For many weeks I had a big tame spider in the corner of my study there
in that city flat, and I have yet to read an account of all the
species of spiders to be found dwelling within the walls of any great
city. Even Argiope of the meadows is doubtless found in the Fens. Not
far away from my flat, down near the North Station, one of my friends
on the roof of his flat kept several hives of bees. They fed on the
flowers of the Garden, on those in dooryards, and on the
honey-yielding lindens which stand here and there throughout the city.
Pigeons and sparrows built their nests within sight of my windows; and
by going early to the roof I could see the sun rise, and in the
evening I could watch it go down behind the hills of Belmont as now I
watch it from my lookout here on Mullein Hill.

One is never far from the sky, nor from the earth, nor from the free,
wild winds, nor from the wilder night that covers city and sea and
forest with its quiet, and fills them all with lurking shadows that
never shall be tamed.




CHAPTER VI

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO HEAR THIS SUMMER


I

The fullness, the flood, of life has come, and, contrary to one’s
expectations, a marked silence has settled down over the waving fields
and the cool deep woods. I am writing these lines in the lamplight,
with all the windows and doors open to the dark July night. The summer
winds are moving in the trees. A cricket and a few small green
grasshoppers are chirping in the grass; but nothing louder is near at
hand. And nothing louder is far off, except the cry of the
whip-poor-will in the wood road. But him you hear in the spring and
autumn as well as in the summer. Ah, listen! My tree-toad in the
grapevine over the bulkhead door!

This is a voice you must hear--on cloudy summer days, toward twilight,
and well into the evening. Do you know what it is to feel lonely? If
you do, I think, then, that you know how the soft, far-off, eerie cry
of the tree-toad sounds. He is prophesying rain, the almanac people
think, but I think it is only the sound of rain in his voice, summer
rain after a long drouth, cooling, reviving, soothing rain, with just
a patter of something in it that I cannot describe, something that I
used to hear on the shingles of the garret over the rafters where the
bunches of horehound and catnip and pennyroyal hung.


II

You ought to hear the lively clatter of a mowing-machine. It is hot
out of doors; the roads are beginning to look dusty; the insects are
tuning up in the grass, and, like their chorus all together, and
marching round and round the meadow, moves the mower’s whirring blade.
I love the sound. Haying is hard, sweet work. The farmer who does not
love his haying ought to be made to keep a country store and sell
kerosene oil and lumps of dead salt pork out of a barrel. He could not
appreciate a live, friendly pig.

Down the long swath sing the knives, the cogs click above the square
corners, and the big, loud thing sings on again,--the song of
“first-fruits,” the first great ingathering of the season,--a song to
touch the heart with joy and sweet solemnity.


III

You ought to hear the Katydids--two of them on the trees outside your
window. They are not saying “Katy did,” nor singing “Katy did”; they
are fiddling “Katy did,” “Katy didn’t”--by rasping the fore wings.

Is the sound “Katy” or “Katy did”? or what is said? Count the notes.
Are they at the rate of two hundred per minute? Watch the
instrumentalist--till you make sure it is the male who is wooing Katy
with his persistent guitar. The male has no long ovipositors.


IV

Another instrumentalist to hear is the big cicada or “harvest-fly.”
There is no more characteristic sound of all the summer than his big,
quick, startling whirr--a minute mowing-machine up on the limb
overhead! Not so minute either, for the creature is fully two inches
long, with bulging eyes and a click to his wings when he flies that
can be heard a hundred feet away! “Dog-days-z-z-z-z-z-z-z” is the song
he sings to me.

[Illustration: “FLITTING AND WAVERING ABOUT”]


V

This is the season of small sounds. As a test of the keenness of your
ears go out at night into some open glade in the woods or by the side
of some pond and listen for the squeaking of the bats flitting and
wavering above in the uncertain light over your head. You will need a
stirless midsummer dusk; and if you can hear the thin, fine squeak as
the creature dives near your head, you may be sure your ears are
almost as keen as those of the fox. The sound is not audible to most
human ears.


VI

Another set of small sounds characteristic of midsummer is the
twittering of the flocking swallows in the cornfields and upon the
telegraph-wires. This summer I have had long lines of the young birds
and their parents from the old barn below the hill strung on the wires
from the house across the lawn. Here they preen while some of the old
birds hawk for flies, the whole line of them breaking into a soft
little twitter each time a newcomer alights among them. One swallow
does not make a summer, but your electric light wires sagging with
them is the very soul of the summer.


VII

In the deep, still woods you will hear the soft call of the robin--a
low, pensive, plaintive note unlike its spring cry or the
after-shower song. It is as if the voice of the slumberous woods were
speaking--without alarm, reproach, or welcome either. It is an
invitation to stretch yourself on the deep moss and let the warm
shadows of the summer woods steal over you with sleep.

[Illustration: THE RED-EYED VIREO]

And this, too, is a thing to learn. Doing something, hearing
something, seeing something by no means exhausts our whole business
with the out-of-doors. To lie down and do nothing, to be able to keep
silence and to rest on the great whirling globe is as needful as to
know everything going on about us.


VIII

There is one bird-song so characteristic of midsummer that I think
every lover of the woods must know it: the oft-repeated, the constant
notes of the red-eyed vireo or “preacher.” Wilson Flagg says of him:
“He takes the part of a deliberative orator who explains his subject
in a few words and then makes a pause for his hearers to reflect upon
it. We might suppose him to be repeating moderately with a pause
between each sentence, ‘You see it--you know it--do you hear me?--do
you believe it?’ All these strains are delivered with a rising
inflection at the close, and with a pause, as if waiting for an
answer.”


IX

A few other bird-notes that are associated with hot days and stirless
woods, and that will be worth your hearing are the tree-top song of
the scarlet tanager. He is one of the summer sights, a dash of the
burning tropics is his brilliant scarlet and jet black, and his song
is a loud, hoarse, rhythmical carol that has the flame of his feathers
in it and the blaze of the sun. You will know it from the cool, liquid
song of the robin both by its peculiar quality and because it is a
short song, and soon ended, not of indefinite length like the robin’s.

Then the peculiar, coppery, reverberating, or _confined_ song of the
indigo bunting--as if the bird were singing inside some great kettle.

One more--among a few others--the softly falling, round, small,
upward-swinging call of the wood pewee. Is it sad? Yes, sad. But
sweeter than sad,--restful, cooling, and inexpressibly gentle. All day
long from high above your head and usually quite out of view, the
voice--it seems hardly a voice--breaks the long silence of the summer
woods.


X

When night comes down with the long twilight there sounds a strange,
almost awesome _quawk_ in the dusk over the fields. It sends a thrill
through me, notwithstanding its nightly occurrence all through July
and August. It is the passing of a pair of night herons--the
black-crowned, I am sure, although this single pair only fly over.
Where the birds are numerous they nest in great colonies.

It is the wild, eerie _quawk_ that you should hear, a far-off,
mysterious, almost uncanny sound that fills the twilight with a vague,
untamed something, no matter how bright and civilized the day may have
been.


XI

From the harvest fields comes the sweet whistle of Bob White, the
clear, round notes rolling far through the hushed summer noon; in the
wood-lot the crows and jays have already begun their cawings and
screamings that later on become the dominant notes of the golden
autumn. They are not so loud and characteristic now because of the
insect orchestra throbbing with a rhythmic beat through the air. So
wide, constant, and long-continued is this throbbing note of the
insects that by midsummer you almost cease to notice it. But stop and
listen--field crickets, katydids, long-horned grasshoppers, snowy
tree-crickets: _chwĭ-chwĭ-chwĭ-chwĭ--thrr-r-r-r-r-r-r
--crrri-crrri-crrri-crrri--gru-gru-gru-gru--
retreat-retreat-retreat-treat-treat_--like the throbbing of the
pulse.


XII

One can do no more than suggest in a short chapter like this; and all
that I am doing here is catching for you some of the still, small
voices of _my_ summer. How unlike those of your summer they may be I
can easily imagine, for you are in the Pacific Coast, or off on the
vast prairies of Canada, or down in the sunny fields and hill-country
of the South.

I have done enough if I have suggested that you stop and listen; for
after all it is having ears which hear _not_ that causes the trouble.
Hear the voices that make your summer vocal--the loud and still voices
which alike pass unheeded unless we pause to hear.

As a lesson in listening, go out some quiet evening, and as the
shadows slip softly over the surface of the wood-walled pond, listen
to the breathing of the fish as they come to the top, and the splash
of the muskrats, or the swirl of the pickerel as he ploughs a furrow
through the silence.




CHAPTER VII

THE SEA-BIRDS’ HOME


After my wandering for years among the quiet lanes and along the
winding cow-paths of the home fields, my trip to the wild-bird rocks
in the Pacific Ocean, as you can imagine, was a thrilling experience.
We chartered a little launch at Tillamook, and, after a fight of hours
and hours to cross Tillamook Bar at the mouth of the bay, we got out
upon the wide Pacific, and steamed down the coast for Three-Arch
Rocks, which soon began to show far ahead of us just off the rocky
shore.

I had never been on the Pacific before, nor had I ever before seen the
birds that were even now beginning to dot the sea and to sail over and
about us as we steamed along. It was all new, so new that the very
water of the Pacific looked unlike the familiar water of the Atlantic.
And surely the waves were different,--longer, grayer, smoother, with
an immensely mightier heave. At least they seemed so, for every time
we rose on the swell, it was as if our boat were in the hand of Old
Ocean, and his mighty arm were “putting” us, as the athlete “puts” the
shot. It was all new and strange and very wild to me, with the wild
cries of the sea-birds already beginning to reach us as flocks of the
birds passed around and over our heads.

The fog was lifting. The thick, wet drift that had threatened our
little launch on Tillamook Bar stood clear of the shouldering sea to
the westward, and in over the shore, like an upper sea, hung at the
fir-girt middles of the mountains, as level and as gray as the sea
below. There was no breeze. The long, smooth swell of the Pacific
swung under us and in, until it whitened at the base of the three
rocks that rose out of the sea in our course, and that now began to
take on form in the foggy distance. Gulls were flying over us, lines
of black cormorants and crowds of murres were winging past, but we
were still too far away from the looming rocks to see that the gray of
their walls was the gray of uncounted colonies of nesting birds,
colonies that covered their craggy steeps as, on shore, the green firs
clothed the slopes of the Coast Range Mountains up to the hanging fog.

As we ran on nearer, the sound of the surf about the rocks became
audible, the birds in the air grew more numerous, their cries now
faintly mingling with the sound of the sea. A hole in the side of the
middle Rock, a mere fleck of foam it seemed at first, widened rapidly
into an arching tunnel through which our boat might run; the swell of
the sea began to break over half-sunken ledges; and soon upon us fell
the damp shadows of the three great rocks, for now we were looking far
up at their sides, where we could see the birds in their guano-gray
rookeries, rookery over rookery,--gulls, cormorants, guillemots,
puffins, murres,--encrusting the sides from tide-line to pinnacles, as
the crowding barnacles encrusted the bases from the tide-line down.

[Illustration: TUFTED PUFFINS]

We had not approached without protest, for the birds were coming off
to meet us, wheeling and clacking overhead, the nearer we drew, in a
constantly thickening cloud of lowering wings and tongues. The clamor
was indescribable, the tossing flight enough to make one mad with the
motion of wings. The air was filled, thick, with the whirling and the
screaming, the clacking, the honking, close to our ears, and high up
in the peaks, and far out over the waves. Never had I been in this
world before. Was I on my earth? or had I suddenly wakened up in some
old sea world where there was no dry land, no life but this?

We rounded the outer or Shag Rock and headed slowly in opposite the
yawning hole of the middle Rock as into some mighty cave, so sheer and
shadowy rose the walls above us,--so like to cavern thunder was the
throbbing of the surf through the hollow arches, was the flapping and
screaming of the birds against the high circling walls, was the deep,
menacing grumble of the bellowing sea-lions, as, through the muffle of
surf and sea-fowl, herd after herd lumbered headlong into the foam.

It was a strange, wild scene. Hardly a mile from the Oregon coast, but
cut off by breaker and bar from the abrupt, uninhabited shore, the
three rocks of the Reservation, each pierced with its resounding arch,
heaved their huge shoulders from the waves straight up, high,
towering, till our little steamer coasted their dripping sides like
some puffing pygmy.

Each rock was perhaps as large as a solid city square and as high as
the tallest of sky-scrapers; immense, monstrous piles, each of them,
and run through by these great caverns or arches, dim, dripping,
filled with the noise of the waves and the beat of thousands of wings.

They were of no part or lot with the dry land. Their wave-scooped
basins were set with purple starfish and filled with green and pink
anemones, and beaded many deep with mussels of amethyst and jet that
glittered in the clear beryl waters; and, above the jeweled basins,
like fabled beasts of old, lay the sea-lions, uncouth forms,
flippered, reversed in shape, with throats like the caves of Æolus,
hollow, hoarse, discordant; and higher up, on every jutting bench and
shelf, in every weathered rift, over every jog of the ragged cliffs,
to their bladed backs and pointed peaks, swarmed the sea-birds,
webfooted, amphibious, shaped of the waves, with stormy voices given
them by the winds that sweep in from the sea.

As I looked up at the amazing scene, at the mighty rocks and the
multitude of winging forms, I seemed to see three swirling piles of
life, three cones that rose like volcanoes from the ocean, their sides
covered with living lava, their craters clouded with the smoke of
wings, while their bases seemed belted by the rumble of a
multi-throated thunder. The very air was dank with the smell of
strange, strong volcanic gases,--no breath of the land, no odor of
herb, no scent of fresh soil; but the raw, rank smells of rookery and
den, saline, kelpy, fetid; the stench of fish and bedded guano, and of
the reeking pools where the sea-lion herds lay sleeping on the lower
rocks in the sun.

A boat’s keel was beneath me, but as I stood out on the pointed prow,
barely above the water, and found myself thrust forward without will
or effort among the crags and caverns, among the shadowy walls, the
damps, the smells, the sounds, among the bellowing beasts in the
churning waters about me, and into the storm of wings and tongues in
the whirling air above me, I passed from the things I had known, and
the time and the earth of man, into a monstrous period of the past.

This was the home of the sea-birds. Amid all the din we landed from a
yawl and began our climb toward the top of Shag Rock, the outermost of
the three. And here we had another and a different sight of the wild
life. It covered every crag. I clutched it in my hands; I crushed it
under my feet; it was thick in the air about me. My narrow path up the
face of the rock was a succession of sea-bird rookeries, of crowded
eggs, and huddled young, hairy or naked or wet from the shell. Every
time my fingers felt for a crack overhead they touched something warm
that rolled or squirmed; every time my feet moved under me, for a
hold, they pushed in among top-shaped eggs that turned on the shelf or
went over far below; and whenever I hugged the pushing wall I must
bear off from a mass of squealing, struggling, shapeless things, just
hatched. And down upon me, as rookery after rookery of old birds
whirred in fright from their ledges, fell crashing eggs and unfledged
young, that the greedy gulls devoured ere they touched the sea.

I was midway in the climb, at a bad turn round a point, edging inch by
inch along, my face pressed against the hard face of the rock, my feet
and fingers gripping any crack or seam they could feel, when out of
the deep space behind me I caught the swash of waves. Instantly a cold
hand seemed to clasp me from behind.

I flattened against the rock, my whole body, my very mind clinging
desperately for a hold,--a falling fragment of shale, a gust of wind,
the wing-stroke of a frightened bird, enough to break the hold and
swing me out over the water, washing faint and far below. A long
breath, and I was climbing again.

[Illustration: BRANDT’S CORMORANT]

We were on the outer Rock, our only possible ascent taking us up the
sheer south face. With the exception of an occasional Western gull’s
and pigeon guillemot’s nest, these steep sides were occupied entirely
by the California murres,--penguin-shaped birds about the size of a
small wild duck, chocolate-brown above, with white breasts,--which
literally covered the sides of the three great rocks wherever they
could find a hold. If a million meant anything, I should say there
were a million murres nesting on this outer Rock; not nesting either,
for the egg is laid upon the bare ledge, as you might place it upon a
mantel,--a single sharp-pointed egg, as large as a turkey’s, and just
as many of them on the ledge as there is standing-room for the birds.
The murre broods her very large egg by standing straight up over it,
her short legs, by dint of stretching, allowing her to straddle it,
her short tail propping her securely from behind.

On, up along the narrow back, or blade, of the rock, and over the
peak, were the well-spaced nests of the Brandt’s cormorants, nests the
size of an ordinary straw hat, made of sea-grass and the
yellow-flowered sulphur-weed that grew in a dense mat over the north
slope of the top, each nest holding four long, dirty blue eggs or as
many black, shivering young; and in the low sulphur-weed, all along
the roof-like slope of the top, built the gulls and the tufted
puffins; and, with the burrowing puffins, often in the same holes,
were found the Kaeding’s petrels; while down below them, as up above
them,--all around the rock-rim that dropped sheer to the sea,--stood
the cormorants, black, silent, statuesque; and everywhere were nests
and eggs and young, and everywhere were flying, crying birds--above,
about, and far below me, a whirling, whirring vortex of wings that had
caught me in its funnel.




CHAPTER VIII

THE MOTHER MURRE


I hear the bawling of my neighbor’s cow. Her calf was carried off
yesterday, and since then, during the long night, and all day long,
her insistent woe has made our hillside melancholy. But I shall not
hear her to-night, not from this distance. She will lie down to-night
with the others of the herd, and munch her cud. Yet, when the rattling
stanchions grow quiet and sleep steals along the stalls, she will turn
her ears at every small stirring; she will raise her head to listen
and utter a low, tender _moo_. Her full udder hurts; but her cud is
sweet. She is only a cow.

Had she been a wild cow, or had she been out with her calf in a wild
pasture, the mother-love in her would have lived for six months. Here
in the barn she will be forced to forget her calf in a few hours, and
by morning her mother-love shall utterly have died.

There is a mother-principle alive in all nature that never dies. This
is different from mother-love. The oak tree responds to the
mother-principle, and bears acorns. It is a law of life. The
mother-love or passion, on the other hand, occurs only among the
higher animals. It is very common; and yet, while it is one of the
strongest, most interesting, most beautiful of animal traits, it is at
the same time the most individual and variable of all animal traits.

This particular cow of my neighbor’s that I hear lowing, is an
entirely gentle creature ordinarily, but with a calf at her side she
will pitch at any one who approaches her. And there is no other cow in
the herd that mourns so long after her calf. The mother in her is
stronger, more enduring, than in any of the other nineteen cows in the
barn. My own cow hardly mourns at all when her calf is taken away. She
might be an oak tree losing its acorns, or a crab losing her hatching
eggs, so far as any show of love is concerned.

The female crab attaches her eggs to her swimmerets and carries them
about with her for their protection as the most devoted of mothers;
yet she is no more conscious of them, and feels no more for them, than
the frond of a cinnamon fern feels for its spores. She is a mother,
without the love of the mother.

In the spider, however, just one step up the animal scale from the
crab, you find the mother-love or passion. Crossing a field the other
day, I came upon a large female spider of the hunter family, carrying
a round white sack of eggs, half the size of a cherry, attached to her
spinnerets. Plucking a long stem of grass, I detached the sack of eggs
without bursting it. Instantly the mother turned and sprang at the
grass-stem, fighting and biting until she got to the sack, which she
seized in her strong jaws and made off with as fast as her long, rapid
legs would carry her.

I laid the stem across her back and again took the sack away. She came
on for it, fighting more fiercely than before. Once more she seized
it; once more I forced it from her jaws, while she sprang at the
grass-stem and tried to tear it to pieces. She must have been fighting
for two minutes when, by a regrettable move on my part, one of her
legs was injured. She did not falter in her fight. On she rushed for
the sack as fast as I pulled it away. She would have fought for that
sack, I believe, until she had not one of her eight legs to stand on,
had I been cruel enough to compel her. It did not come to this, for
suddenly the sack burst, and out poured, to my amazement, a myriad of
tiny brown spiderlings. Before I could think what to do that mother
spider had rushed among them and caused them to swarm upon her,
covering her, many deep, even to the outer joints of her long legs. I
did not disturb her again, but stood by and watched her slowly move
off with her encrusting family to a place of safety.

I had seen these spiders try hard to escape with their egg-sacks
before, but had never tested the strength of their purpose. For a time
after this experience I made a point of taking the sacks away from
every spider I found. Most of them scurried off to seek their own
safety; one of them dropped her sack of her own accord; some of them
showed reluctance to leave it; some of them a disposition to fight;
but none of them the fierce, consuming mother-fire of the one with the
hurt leg.

Among the fishes, much higher animal forms than the spiders, we find
the mother-love only in the _males_. It is the male stickleback that
builds the nest, then goes out and _drives_ the female in to lay her
eggs, then straightway drives her out to prevent her eating them, then
puts himself on guard outside the nest to protect them from other
sticklebacks and other enemies, until the young shall hatch and be
able to swim away by themselves. Here he stays for a month, without
eating or sleeping, so far as we know.

It is the male toadfish that crawls into the nest-hole and takes
charge of the numerous family. He may dig the hole, too, as the male
stickleback builds the nest. I do not know as to that. But I have
raised many a stone in the edge of the tide along the shore of Naushon
Island in Buzzard’s Bay, to find the under surface covered with round,
drop-like, amber eggs, and in the shallow cavity beneath, an old male
toadfish, slimy and croaking, and with a countenance ugly enough to
turn a prowling eel to stone. The female deposits the eggs, glues them
fast with much nicety to the under surface of the rock, as a female
might, and finishes her work. Departing at once, she leaves the coming
brood to the care of the male, who from this time, without relief or
even food in all probability, assumes the rôle and all the
responsibilities of mother, and must consequently feel all the
mother-love.

Something like this is true of the common hornpout, or catfish, I
believe, though I have never seen it recorded, and lack the chance at
present of proving my earlier observations. I think it is father
catfish that takes charge of the brood, of the swarm of kitten
catfish, from the time the spawn is laid.

A curious sharing of mother qualities by male and female is shown in
the Surinam toads of South America, where the male, taking the newly
deposited eggs, places them upon the back of the female. Here, glued
fast by their own adhesive jelly, they are soon surrounded by cells
grown of the skin of the back, each cell capped by a lid. In these
cells the eggs hatch, and the young go through their metamorphoses,
apparently absorbing some nourishment through the skin of their
mother. Finally they break through the lids of their cells and hop
away. They might as well be toadstools upon a dead stump, so far as
motherly care or concern goes, for, aside from allowing the male to
spread the eggs upon her back, she is no more a mother to them than
the dead stump is to the toadstools. She is host only to the little
parasites.

I do not know of any mother-love among the reptiles. The
mother-passion, so far as my observation goes, plays no part whatever
in the life of reptiles. Whereas, passing on to the birds, the
mother-passion becomes by all odds the most interesting thing in
bird-life.

And is not the mother-passion among the mammals even more interesting?
It is as if the watcher in the woods went out to see the mother animal
only. It is her going and coming that we follow; her faring, foraging,
and watch-care that let us deepest into the secrets of wild animal
life.

On one of the large estates here in Hingham, a few weeks ago, a fox
was found to be destroying poultry. The time of the raids, and their
boldness, were proof enough that the fox must be a female with young.
Poisoned meat was prepared for her, and at once the raids ceased. A
few days later one of the workmen of the estate came upon the den of a
fox, at the mouth of which lay dead a whole litter of young ones. They
had been poisoned. The mother had not eaten the prepared food herself,
but had carried it home to her family. They must have died in the
burrow, for it was evident from the signs that she had dragged them
into the fresh air to revive them, and deposited them gently on the
sand by the hole. Then in her perplexity she had brought various
tidbits of mouse and bird and rabbit, which she placed at their noses
to tempt them to wake up out of their strange sleep and eat. No one
knows how long she watched beside the lifeless forms, nor what her
emotions were. She must have left the neighborhood soon after,
however, for no one has seen her since about the estate.

The bird mother is the bravest, tenderest, most appealing thing one
ever comes upon in the fields. It is the rare exception, but we
sometimes find the real mother wholly lacking among the birds, as in
the case of our notorious cowbird, who sneaks about, watching her
chance, when some smaller bird is gone, to drop her egg into its nest.
The egg must be laid, the burden of the race has been put upon the
bird, but not the precious burden of the child. She lays eggs; but is
not a mother.

The same is true of the European cuckoos, but not quite true, in spite
of popular belief, of our American cuckoos. For our birds (both
species) build rude, elementary nests as a rule, and brood their eggs.
Occasionally they may use a robin’s or a catbird’s nest, in order to
save labor. So undeveloped is the mother in the cuckoo that if you
touch her eggs she will leave them--abandon her rude nest and eggs as
if any excuse were excuse enough for an escape from the cares of
motherhood. How should a bird with so little mother-love ever learn to
build a firm-walled, safe, and love-lined nest?

The great California condor is a most faithful and anxious mother; the
dumb affection of both parent birds, indeed, for their single
offspring is pathetically human. On the other hand, the mother in the
turkey buzzard is so evenly balanced against the vulture in her that I
have known a brooding bird to be so upset by the sudden approach of a
man as to rise from off her eggs and devour them instantly, greedily,
and make off on her serenely soaring wings into the clouds.

Such mothers, however, are not the rule. The buzzard, the cuckoo, and
the cowbird are the striking exceptions. The flicker will keep on
laying eggs as fast as one takes them from the nest-hole, until she
has no more eggs to lay. The quail will sometimes desert her nest if
even a single egg is so much as touched, but only because she knows
that she has been discovered and must start a new nest, hidden in some
new place, for safety. She is a wise and devoted mother, keeping her
brood with her as a “covey” all winter long.

One of the most striking cases of mother-love which has ever come
under my observation, I saw in the summer of 1912 on the bird
rookeries of the Three-Arch Rocks Reservation off the coast of Oregon.

We were making our slow way toward the top of the outer rock. Through
rookery after rookery of birds we climbed until we reached the edge of
the summit. Scrambling over this edge, we found ourselves in the midst
of a great colony of nesting murres--hundreds of them--covering this
steep rocky part of the top.

As our heads appeared above the rim, many of the colony took wing and
whirred over us out to sea, but most of them sat close, each bird upon
its egg or over its chick, loath to leave, and so expose to us the
hidden treasure.

The top of the rock was somewhat cone-shaped, and in order to reach
the peak and the colonies on the west side we had to make our way
through this rookery of the murres. The first step among them, and
the whole colony was gone, with a rush of wings and feet that sent
several of the top-shaped eggs rolling, and several of the young birds
toppling over the cliff to the pounding waves and ledges far below.

We stopped, but the colony, almost to a bird, had bolted, leaving
scores of eggs and scores of downy young squealing and running
together for shelter, like so many beetles under a lifted board.

But the birds had not every one bolted, for here sat two of the colony
among the broken rocks. These two had not been frightened off. That
both of them were greatly alarmed, any one could see from their open
beaks, their rolling eyes, their tense bodies on tiptoe for flight.
Yet here they sat, their wings out like props, or more like gripping
hands, as if they were trying to hold themselves down to the rocks
against their wild desire to fly.

And so they were, in truth, for under their extended wings I saw
little black feet moving. Those two mother murres were not going to
forsake their babies! No, not even for these approaching monsters,
such as they had never before seen, clambering over their rocks.

What was different about these two? They had their young ones to
protect. Yes, but so had every bird in the great colony its young one,
or its egg, to protect, yet all the others had gone. Did these two
have more mother-love than the others? And hence, more courage, more
intelligence?

We took another step toward them, and one of the two birds sprang into
the air, knocking her baby over and over with the stroke of her wing,
and coming within an inch of hurling it across the rim to be battered
on the ledges below. The other bird raised her wings to follow, then
clapped them back over her baby. Fear is the most contagious thing in
the world; and that flap of fear by the other bird thrilled her, too,
but as she had withstood the stampede of the colony, so she caught
herself again and held on.

She was now alone on the bare top of the rock, with ten thousand
circling birds screaming to her in the air above, and with two men
creeping up to her with a big black camera that clicked ominously. She
let the multitude scream, and with threatening beak watched the two
men come on. A motherless baby, spying her, ran down the rock
squealing for his life. She spread a wing, put her bill behind him
and shoved him quickly in out of sight with her own baby. The man with
the camera saw the act, for I heard his machine click, and I heard him
say something under his breath that you would hardly expect a mere man
and a game-warden to say. But most men have a good deal of the mother
in them; and the old bird had acted with such decision, such courage,
such swift, compelling instinct, that any man, short of the wildest
savage, would have felt his heart quicken at the sight.

“Just how compelling might that mother-instinct be?” I wondered. “Just
how much would that mother-love stand?” I had dropped to my knees, and
on all fours had crept up within about three feet of the bird. She
still had chance for flight. Would she allow me to crawl any nearer?
Slowly, very slowly, I stretched forward on my hands, like a
measuring-worm, until my body lay flat on the rocks, and my fingers
were within three _inches_ of her. But her wings were twitching, a
wild light danced in her eyes, and her head turned toward the sea.

For a whole minute I did not stir. I was watching--and the wings again
began to tighten about the babies, the wild light in the eyes died
down, the long, sharp beak turned once more toward me.

Then slowly, very slowly, I raised my hand, touched her feathers with
the tip of one finger--with two fingers--with my whole hand, while
the loud camera click-clacked, click-clacked hardly four feet away!

It was a thrilling moment. I was not killing anything. I had no
long-range rifle in my hands, coming up against the wind toward an
unsuspecting creature hundreds of yards away. This was no wounded
leopard charging me; no mother-bear defending with her giant might a
captured cub. It was only a mother-bird, the size of a wild duck, with
swift wings at her command, hiding under those wings her own and
another’s young, and her own boundless fear!

For the second time in my life I had taken captive with my bare hands
a free wild bird. No, I had not taken her captive. She had made
herself a captive; she had taken herself in the strong net of her
mother-love.

And now her terror seemed quite gone. At the first touch of my hand I
think she felt the love restraining it, and without fear or fret she
let me reach under her and pull out the babies. But she reached after
them with her bill to tuck them back out of sight, and when I did not
let them go, she sidled toward me, quacking softly, a language that I
perfectly understood, and was quick to respond to. I gave them back,
fuzzy and black and white. She got them under her, stood up over them,
pushed her wings down hard around them, her stout tail down hard
behind them, and together with them pushed in an abandoned egg that
was close at hand. Her own baby, some one else’s baby, and some one
else’s forsaken egg! She could cover no more; she had not feathers
enough. But she had heart enough; and into her mother’s heart she had
already tucked every motherless egg and nestling of the thousands of
frightened birds, screaming and wheeling in the air high over her
head.




CHAPTER IX

MOTHER CAREY’S CHICKENS


“Who has not wondered,” I asked, many years ago, “as he has seen the
red rim of the sun sink down in the sea, where the little brood of
Mother Carey’s chickens skimming round the vessel would sleep that
night?” Here on the waves, no doubt, but what a bed! You have seen
them, or you will see them the first time you cross the ocean, far out
of sight of land--a little band of small dark birds, veering,
glancing, skimming the heaving sea like swallows, or riding the great
waves up and down, from crest to trough, as easily as Bobolink rides
the swaying clover billows in the meadow behind the barn.

I have stood at the prow and watched them as the huge steamer ploughed
her way into the darkening ocean. Down in the depths beneath me the
porpoises were playing,--as if the speeding ship, with its mighty
engines, were only another porpoise playing tag with them,--and off on
the gray sea ahead, where the circle of night seemed to be closing in,
this little flock of stormy petrels, Mother Carey’s chickens, rising,
falling with the heave and sag of the sea, so far, for such little
wings, from the shore!

You will see them, and you will ask yourself, as I asked myself,
“Where is their home? Where do they nest?” I hope you will also have a
chance to answer the question some time for yourself, as I had a
chance to answer it for myself recently, out on the Three-Arch Rocks,
in the Pacific, just off the coast of Oregon.

I visited the rocks to see all their multitudinous wild life,--their
gulls, cormorants, murres, guillemots, puffins, oyster-catchers, and
herds of sea-lions,--but more than any other one thing I wanted to see
the petrels, Kaeding’s petrels, that nest on the top of Shag Rock, the
outermost of the three rocks of the Reservation.

No, not merely to _see_ the petrels: what I really wished to do was to
stay all night on the storm-swept peak in order to hear the petrels
come back to their nests on the rock in the dusk and dark. My friend
Finley had done it, years before, on this very rock. On the steep
north slope of the top he had found a safe spot between two jutting
crags, and, wrapping himself in his blanket as the sun went down
behind the hill of the sea, had waited for the winnowing of the small
mysterious wings.

Just to sleep in such a bed would be enough. To lie down far up on the
ragged peak of this wild sea rock, with the break and swash of the
waves coming up from far beneath you, with the wide sea-wind coming
in, and the dusk spreading down, and the wild sea-birds murmuring in
their strange tongues all about you--it would be enough just to turn
one’s face to the lonely sky in such a spot and listen. But how much
more to hear suddenly, among all these strange sounds, the swift
fanning of wings--to feel them close above your face--and to see in
the dim dusk wavering shadowy forms, like a troop of longwinged bats,
hovering over the slope and chittering in a rapid, unbirdlike talk, as
if afraid the very dark might hear them!

That was what I wanted so much to hear and to see. For down in a
little burrow, in the accumulated earth and guano of the top, under
each of these hovering shadows, would be another shadow, waiting to
hear the beating of the wings and the chitter above; and I wanted to
see the mate in the burrow come out and greet the mate that had been
all day upon the sea.

This petrel digs itself a little burrow and lays one egg. The burrow
might hold both birds at once, but one seldom finds two birds in the
burrow together. While one is brooding, the other is off on its
wonderful wings--away off in the wake of your ocean steamer, perhaps,
miles and miles from shore. But when darkness falls it remembers its
nest and speeds home to the rock, taking its place down in the little
black burrow, while the mate comes forth and spreads its wings out
over the heaving water, not to return, it may be, until the night and
the day have passed and twilight falls again.

We landed on a ledge of Shag Rock, driving off a big bull sea-lion who
claimed this particular slab of rock as his own. We backed up close to
the shelf in a yawl boat, and as the waves rose and fell, watched our
chance to leap from the stern of the little boat to the rock. Thus we
landed our cameras, food and water, and other things, then we dragged
the boat up, so that, a storm arising or anything happening to the
small steamer that had brought us, we might still get away to the
shore.

It was about the middle of the forenoon. All the morning, as we had
steamed along, a thick fog had threatened us; but now the sun broke
out, making it possible to use our cameras, and after a hasty lunch we
started for the top of the rock--a climb that looked impossible, and
that was pretty nearly as impossible as it looked.

It had been a slow, perilous climb; but, once on the summit, where we
could move somewhat freely and use the cameras, we hurried from colony
to colony to take advantage of the uncertain sunlight, which, indeed,
utterly failed us after only an hour’s work. But, as I had no camera,
I made the best of it, giving all my time to studying the ways of the
birds. Besides, I had come to stay on the peak all night; I could do
my work well enough in the dark. But I could not do it in the wind and
rain.

The sun went into the clouds about four o’clock, but so absorbed was I
in watching, and so thick was the air with wings, so clangorous with
harsh tongues, that I had not seen the fog moving in, or noticed that
the gray wind of the morning had begun to growl about the crags.
Looking off to seaward, I now saw that a heavy bank of mist had
blurred the sky-line and settled down upon the sea. The wind had
freshened; a fine, cold drizzle was beginning to fall, and soon came
slanting across the peak. The prospect was grim and forbidding. Then
the rain began. The night was going to be dark and stormy, too wet and
wild for watching, here where I must hang on with my hands or else
slip and go over--down--down to the waves below.

We started to descend at once, while there was still light enough to
see by, and before the rocks were made any slipperier by the rain. We
did not fear the wind much, for that was from the north, and we must
descend by the south face, up which we had come.

I was deeply disappointed. My night with the petrels on the top was
out of the question. Yet as I backed over the rim of that peak, and
began to pick my way down, it was not disappointment, but fear that I
felt. It had been bad enough coming up; but this going down!--with the
cold, wet shadow of night encircling you and lying dark on the cold,
sullen sea below--this was altogether worse.

The rocks were already wet, and the footing was treacherous. As we
worked slowly along, the birds in the gathering gloom seemed to fear
us less, flying close about our heads, their harsh cries and winging
tumult adding not a little to the peril of the descent. And then the
looking down! and then the impossibility at places of even looking
down--when one could only hang on with one’s hands and feel around in
the empty air with one’s feet for something to stand on!

I got a third of the way down, perhaps, and then stopped. The men did
not laugh at me. They simply looped a rope about me, under my arms,
and lowered me over the narrow shelves into the midst of a large murre
colony, from which point I got on alone. Then they tied the rope about
Dallas, my eleven-year-old son, who was with me on the expedition, and
lowered him.

He came bumping serenely down, smoothing all the little murres and
feeling of all the warm eggs on the way, as if they might have been so
many little kittens, and as if he might have been at home on the
kitchen floor, instead of dangling down the face of a cliff two
hundred or more feet above the sea.

Some forty feet from the waves was a weathered niche, or shelf, eight
or ten feet wide. Here we stopped for the night. The wind was from the
other side of the rock; the overhanging ledge protected us somewhat
from above, though the mist swept about the steep walls to us, and the
drizzle dripped from overhead. But as I pulled my blanket about me and
lay down beside the other men the thought of what the night must be on
the summit made the hard, damp rock under me seem the softest and
warmest of beds.

But what a place was this to sleep in!--this narrow ledge with a
rookery of wild sea-birds just above it, with the den of a wild
sea-beast just below it, with the storm-swept sky shut down upon it,
and the sea, the crawling, sinister sea, coiling and uncoiling its
laving folds about it, as with endless undulations it slipped over the
sunken ledges and swam round and round the rock.

What a place was this to sleep! I could not sleep. I was as wakeful as
the wild beasts that come forth at night to seek their prey. I must
catch a glimpse of Night through her veil of mist, the gray, ghostly
Night, as she came down the long, rolling slope of the sea, and I must
listen, for my very fingers seemed to have ears, so many were the
sounds, and so strange--the talk of the wind on the rock, the sweep
of the storm, the lap of the waves, the rumbling mutter of the wakeful
caverns, the cry of birds, the hoarse grumbling growl of the sea-lions
swimming close below.

The clamor of the birds was at first disturbing. But soon the
confusion caused by our descent among them subsided; the large colony
of murres close by our heads returned to their rookery; and with the
rain and thickening dark there spread everywhere the quiet of a low
murmurous quacking. Sleep was settling over the rookeries.

Down in the sea below us rose the head of an old sea-lion, the old
lone bull whose den we had invaded. He was coming back to sleep. He
rose and sank, blinking dully at the cask we had left on his ledge;
then clambered out and hitched slowly up toward his sleeping-place. I
counted the scars on his head, and noted the fresh deep gash on his
right side. I could hear him blow and breathe.

I drew back from the edge, and, pulling the piece of sail-cloth over
me and the small boy at my side, turned my face up to the slanting
rain. Two young gulls came out of their hiding in a cranny and nestled
against my head, their parents calling gently to them from time to
time all night long. In the murre colony overhead there was a constant
stir and a soft, low talk, and over all the rock, through all the
darkened air there was a silent coming and going of wings--wings--of
the stormy petrels, some of them, I felt sure, the swift shadow wings
of Mother Carey’s chickens that I had so longed to hear come winnowing
in from afar on the sea.

The drizzle thickened. And now I heard the breathing of the sleeping
men beside me; and under me I felt the narrow shelf of rock dividing
the waters from the waters, and then--I, too, must have slept; for
utter darkness was upon the face of the deep.




CHAPTER X

RIDING THE RIM ROCK


From P Ranch to Winnemucca is a seventeen-day drive through a desert
of rim rock and greasewood and sage, which, under the most favorable
of conditions, is beset with difficulty; but which, in the dry season,
and with a herd of anything like four thousand, becomes an unbroken
hazard. More than anything else on such a drive is feared the wild
herd-spirit, the quick black temper of the cattle, that by one sign or
another ever threatens to break the spell of the rider’s power and
sweep the maddened or terrorized herd to destruction. The handling of
the herd to keep this spirit sleeping is ofttimes a thrilling
experience.

Some time before my visit to P Ranch, in Harney County, southeastern
Oregon, in the summer of 1912, the riders had taken out a herd of four
thousand steers on what proved to be one of the most difficult drives
ever made to Winnemucca, the shipping station in northern Nevada.

For the first two days on the trail the cattle were strange to each
other, having been gathered from widely distant grazing-grounds,--from
the Double O and the Home ranches,--and were somewhat clannish and
restive under the driving. At the beginning of the third day signs of
real ugliness appeared. The hot weather and a shortage of water began
to tell on the temper of the herd.

The third day was long and exceedingly hot. The line started forward
at dawn and all day long kept moving, with the sun cooking the bitter
smell of sage into the air, and with the sixteen thousand hoofs
kicking up a still bitterer smother of alkali dust that inflamed eyes
and nostrils and coated the very lungs of the cattle. The fierce
desert thirst was upon the herd long before it reached the creek where
it was to bed for the night. The heat and the dust had made slow work
of the driving, and it was already late when they reached the
creek--only to find it dry.

This was bad. The men were tired. But, worse, the cattle were thirsty,
and Wade, the “boss of the buckaroos,” pushed the herd on toward the
next rim rock, hoping to get down to the plain below to water before
the end of the slow desert twilight. Anything for the night but a dry
camp.

They had hardly started on when a whole flank of the herd, as if by
prearrangement, suddenly breaking away and dividing about two of the
riders, tore off through the brush. The horses were as tired as the
men, and before the chase was over the twilight was gray in the sage
and it became necessary to halt at once and make camp where they were.
They would have to go without water.

The runaways were brought up and the herd closed in till it formed a
circle nearly a mile around. This was as close as it could be drawn,
for the cattle would not bed--lie down. They wanted water more than
they wanted rest. Their eyes were red, their tongues raspy with
thirst. The situation was a serious one.

But camp was made. Two of the riders were sent back along the trail to
bring up the “drags,” while Wade with his other men circled the uneasy
cattle, closing them in, quieting them, and doing everything possible
to make them bed.

But they were thirsty, and, instead of bedding, the herd began to
“growl”--a distant mutter of throats, low, rumbling, ominous, as when
faint thunder rolls behind the hills. Every plainsman fears the growl,
for it usually is a prelude to the “milling,” as it proved to be now,
when the whole vast herd began to stir, slowly, singly, and without
direction, till at length it moved together, round and round, a great
compact circle, the multitude of clicking hoofs, of clashing horns,
and chafing sides like the sound of rushing rain across a field of
corn.

Nothing could be worse for the cattle. The cooler twilight was
falling, but, mingling with it, rose and thickened and spread the
choking dust from their feet that soon covered them and shut out all
but the dark wall of the herd from sight.

Slowly, evenly swung the wall, round and round without a break. Only
one who has watched a milling herd can know its suppressed
excitement. To keep that excitement in check was the problem of Wade
and his men. And the night had not yet begun.

When the riders had brought in the drags and the chuck-wagon had
lumbered up with supper, Wade set the first watch.

Along with the wagon had come the fresh horses--and Peroxide Jim, a
supple, powerful, clean-limbed buckskin, that had, I think, as fine
and intelligent an animal-face as any I ever saw. And why should he
not have been saved fresh for just such a need as this? Are there not
superior horses to match superior men--a Peroxide Jim to complement a
Wade and so combine a real centaur, noble physical power controlled by
noble intelligence? At any rate, the horse understood the situation,
and though there was nothing like sentiment about the boss of the P
Ranch riders, his faith in Peroxide Jim was complete.

The other night horses were saddled and tied to the wheels of the
wagon. It was Wade’s custom to take his turn with the second watch;
but, shifting his saddle to Peroxide Jim, he rode out with the four of
the first watch, who, evenly spaced, were quietly circling the herd.

The night, for this part of the desert, was unusually warm; it was
close, silent, and without a sky. The near thick darkness blotted out
the stars. There is usually a breeze at night over these highest
rim-rock plains that, no matter how hot the day, crowds the cattle
together for warmth. To-night not a breath stirred the sage as Wade
wound in and out among the bushes, the hot dust stinging his eyes and
caking rough on his skin.

Round and round moved the weaving, shifting forms, out of the dark and
into the dark, a gray spectral line like a procession of ghosts, or
some slow morris of the desert’s sheeted dead. But it was not a line,
it was a sea of forms; not a procession, but the even surging of a
maelstrom of hoofs a mile around.

Wade galloped out on the plain for a breath of air and a look at the
sky. A quick cold rain would quiet them; but there was no feel of rain
in the darkness, no smell of it in the air. Only the powdery taste of
bitter sage.

The desert, where the herd had camped, was one of the highest of a
series of tablelands, or benches, that lay as level as a floor, and
rimmed by a sheer wall of rock over which it dropped to the bench of
sage below. The herd had been headed for a pass, and was now halted
within a mile of the rim rock on the east, where there was about three
hundred feet of perpendicular fall.

It was the last place an experienced plainsman would have chosen for a
camp; and every time Wade circled the herd and came in between the
cattle and the rim, he felt its nearness. The darkness helped to
bring it near. The height of his horse brought it near--he seemed to
look down from his saddle over it, into its dark depths. The herd in
its milling was surely warping slowly in the direction of the
precipice. But this was all fancy--the trick of the dark and of
nerves, if a plainsman has nerves.

At twelve o’clock the first guard came in and woke the second watch.
Wade had been in his saddle since dawn, but this was his regular
watch. More than that, his trained ear had timed the milling hoofs.
The movement of the herd had quickened.

If now he could keep them going and could prevent their taking any
sudden fright! They must not stop until they stopped from utter
weariness. Safety lay in their continued motion. So Wade, with the
fresh riders, flanked them closely, paced them, and urged them quietly
on. They must be kept milling, and they must be kept from fright.

In the taut silence of the starless desert night, with the tension of
the cattle at the snapping-point, any quick, unwonted sight or sound
would stampede the herd--the sneezing of a horse, the flare of a
match, enough to send the whole four thousand headlong--blind,
frenzied, tramping--till spent and scattered over the plain.

And so, as he rode, Wade began to sing. The rider ahead of him took up
the air and passed it on, until, above the stepping stir of the hoofs,
rose the faint voices of the men, and all the herd was bound about by
the slow, plaintive measure of some old song. It was not to soothe
their savage breasts that the riders sang to the cattle, but to
prevent the shock of any loud or sudden noise.

So they sang and rode, and the night wore on to one o’clock, when
Wade, coming up on the rim-rock side, felt a cool breeze fan his face,
and caught a breath of fresh, moist wind with the taste of water in
it.

He checked his horse instantly, listening as the wind swept past him
over the cattle. But they must already have smelled it, for they had
ceased their milling. The whole herd stood motionless, the indistinct
forms nearest him showing, in the dark, their bald faces lifted to
drink the sweet wet breath that came over the rim. Then they started
again, but faster, and with a rumbling from their hoarse throats that
tightened Wade’s grip on his reins.

The sound seemed to come out of the earth, a low, rumbling mumble, as
deep as the night and as wide as the plain, a thick, inarticulate
bellow that stood every rider stiff in his stirrups.

The breeze caught the dust and carried it back from the gray-coated,
ghostly shapes, and Wade saw that they were still moving in a circle.
If only he could keep them going! He touched his horse to ride on with
them, when across the black sky flashed a vivid streak of lightning.

There was a snort from the steers, a quick clap of horns and hoofs
from within the herd, a tremor of the plain, a roar, a surging
mass--and Wade was riding the flank of a wild stampede. Before him,
behind him, beside him, pressing hard upon his horse, galloped the
frenzied steers, and beyond them a multitude, borne on, and bearing
him on, by the heave of the galloping herd.

Wade was riding for his life. He knew it. His horse knew it. He was
riding to turn the herd, too,--back from the rim,--as the horse also
knew. The cattle were after water--water-mad--and would go over the
precipice to get it, carrying horse and rider with them.

Wade was the only rider between the herd and the rim. It was black as
death. He could see nothing in the sage, could scarcely discern the
pounding, panting shadows at his side; but he knew by the swish of the
brush and the plunging of the horse that the ground was growing
stonier, that they were nearing the rocks.

To outrun the cattle seemed his only chance. If he could come up with
the leaders he might yet head them off upon the plain and save the
herd. There were cattle still ahead of him,--how many, what part of
the herd, he could not tell. But the horse knew. The reins hung on his
straight neck, while Wade, yelling and firing into the air, gave him
the race to win, to lose.

Suddenly they veered and went high in the air, as a steer plunged
headlong into a draw almost beneath his feet. They cleared the narrow
ravine, landed on bare rock, and reeled on.

They were riding the rim. Close on their left bore down the flank of
the herd, and on their right, under their very feet, was the
precipice, so close that they felt its blackness--its three hundred
feet of fall.

A piercing, half-human bawl of terror told where a steer had been
crowded over. Would the next leap crowd them over too? Then Wade found
himself racing neck and neck with a big white steer, which the horse,
with marvelous instinct, seemed to pick from a bunch, and to cling to,
forcing him gradually ahead, till, cutting him free from the bunch
entirely, he bore him off into the sage.

The group coming on behind followed the leader, and after them swung
others. The tide was turning. Within a short time the whole herd had
veered, and, bearing off from the cliffs, was pounding over the open
plains.

Whose race was it? It was Peroxide Jim’s, according to Wade, for not
by word or by touch of hand or knee had he been directed in the run.
From the flash of the lightning the horse had taken the bit, had
covered an indescribably perilous path at top speed, had outrun the
herd and turned it from the edge of the rim rock, without a false step
or a shaken nerve.

[Illustration: (Page 7) “NECK AND NECK WITH A BIG WHITE STEER”]

Bred on the desert, broken in at the round-up, trained to think steer
as the rider thinks it, the horse knew, as swiftly, as clearly as his
rider, the work before him. But that he kept himself from fright, that
none of the wild herd-madness passed into him, is a thing for great
wonder. He was as thirsty as any of the herd; he knew his own peril, I
believe, as none of the herd had ever known anything, and yet such
coolness, courage, wisdom, and power!

Was it training? Superior intelligence? More intimate association with
the man on his back, and so a farther remove from the wild thing that
domestication does not seem to touch? Or was it all by suggestion, the
superior intelligence above him riding, not only the flesh, but the
spirit?

Not all suggestion, I believe. Perhaps a herd of horses could not be
stampeded so easily as these P Ranch cattle. In this race, however,
nothing of the wild herd-spirit touched the horse. Had the cattle been
horses, would Peroxide Jim have been able to keep himself outside the
stampede and above the spirit of the herd?




CHAPTER XI

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO DO THIS SUMMER


I

First, select some bird or beast or insect that lives with you in your
dooryard or house or near neighborhood, and keep track of his doings
all summer long, jotting down in a diary your observations. You might
take the white-faced hornet that builds the big paper nests in the
trees; or the mud wasp, or the toad under the steps, or the swifts in
the chimney, or the swallows in the barn. It hardly matters what you
take, for every life is interesting. The object is to learn how to
follow up your study, how to watch one life long enough, and under
circumstances different enough, to discover its many-sidedness, its
fascination and romance. Such careful and prolonged study will surely
reveal to you something no one else has seen, too. It will be good
training in patience and independence.


II

Along with this study of _one_ life, keep a list of all the beasts,
birds, insects, flowers, etc., that live--I mean, that build nests or
dig holes and rear families--in your dooryard or in this “haunt” that
I told you in “The Spring of the Year” (see page 42, Sections III and
IV) you ought to pick out as your own field of study. This list will
grow all through the summer and from year to year. I have a list of
seventy-six wild neighbors (not counting the butterflies and insects)
that are sharing my fourteen-acre farm with me. How many and _what_
wild things are sharing your dooryard, your park, your favorite haunt
or farm with you? Such a list of names, with a blank place left for
each where observations can be entered from time to time, would be one
of the most useful and interesting journals you could keep.


III

All through June and into July you should have a round of birds’ nests
that you visit daily, and to which you can take your friends and
visitors--that is, if you live in or near the country. One will be in
the big unused chimney of the house, perhaps, and that will be the
first; then one in the barn, or in a bird-house in the yard; or in the
pear-or apple-tree hole; one in the lilac or honeysuckle bushes, and
then down into the orchard, out into the meadow, on into the woods and
back--taking in twenty to thirty birds’ nests with eggs and young! Did
you ever do it? Can you do it this summer? Don’t you think it would be
quite as exciting and interesting as going to the circus? I can do it;
and if you come out to Mullein Hill in June or July, any one of my
small boys will take you on his “birds’ nest round.”


IV

You should camp out--even if you have to pitch your tent in the back
yard or up on the roof! You should go to sleep on a bed of
boughs,--pine, or spruce, or hickory, if possible,--or swing your
hammock between the trunks of sweet-smelling forest trees, and turn
your face up to the stars! You will never want to sleep in a room with
closed windows after that. To see the stars looking down upon you; to
see the tree-tops swaying over you; to feel the fresh night wind
stealing across your face and breathing into your very soul--yes, you
must sleep at least _one_ night this summer right out on a bed of
boughs; but with a blanket of wool and a piece of sail-cloth or rubber
coat over you and under you, and perhaps some mosquito-netting.


V

But you must _not_ build a fire in the woods, unless you have a guide
or older people with a permit along. Fires are terrible masters, and
it is almost as dangerous to build a fire in the woods as to build one
in the waste-paper basket in the basement of some large store. Along
the seashore or by the margin of a river or lake, if you take every
precaution, it might be safe enough; but in the woods, if camping out,
make all preparations by clearing a wide space down to the bare
ground, then see that it is bare ground and not a boggy, rooty
peat-bed beneath, that will take fire and smoulder and burn away down
under the surface out of sight, to break through, perhaps, a week
after you have gone, and set the whole mountain-side afire. Build your
fire on bare, sandy earth; have a shovel and can of water at hand, and
put the fire out when you are done with it. It is against the law in
most States to set a fire out of doors after the 1st of April, without
a permit from the fire-warden.

Now, after this caution, you ought to go out some evening by the shore
with a small party and roast some green corn in the husk; then,
wrapping some potatoes in clay, bake them; if you have fish, wrap them
in clay with their scales on, and bake them. The scales will come off
beautifully when the clay is cracked off, and leave you the tastiest
meal of fish and potatoes and corn you ever ate. Every boy and girl
ought to have a little camp-life and ought to have each his share of
camp-work to perform this summer.


VI

At the close of some stifling July day you ought to go out into the
orchard or woods and watch the evening come on--to notice how the wild
life revives, flowers open, birds sing, animals stir, breezes start,
leaves whisper, and all the world awakes.

Then follow that up by getting out the next morning before sunrise,
say at half-past three o’clock, an hour before the sun bursts over the
eastern hills. If you are not a stump or a stone, the sight and the
smell--the whole indescribable freshness and wonder of it all--will
thrill you. Would you go to the Pyramids or Niagara or the Yellowstone
Park? Yes, you would, and you would take a great deal of trouble to
see any one of these wonders! Just as great a wonder, just as
thrilling an experience, is right outside of your bedroom early any
June, July, or August morning! I know boys and girls who _never_ saw
the sun get up!


VII

You ought to spend some time this summer on a real farm. Boy or girl,
you need to feel ploughed ground under your feet; you need the contact
with growing things in the ground; you need to handle a hoe, gather
the garden vegetables, feed the chickens, feed the pigs, drive the
cows to pasture, help stow away the hay--and all the other interesting
experiences that make up the simple, elemental, and wonderfully varied
day of farm life. A mere visit is not enough. You need to take part in
the digging and weeding and planting. The other day I let out my cow
after keeping her all winter in the barn. The first thing she did was
to kick up her heels and run to a pile of fresh earth about a newly
planted tree and fall to eating it--not the tree, but the earth, the
raw, rich soil--until her muzzle was muddy halfway to her eyes. You do
not need to eat it; but the need to smell it, to see it, to feel it,
to work in it, is just as real as the cow’s need to eat it.


VIII

You ought to learn how to browse and nibble in the woods. What do I
mean? Why, just this: that you ought to learn how to taste the woods
as well as to see them. Maurice Thompson, in “Byways and Bird Notes,”
a book you ought to read (and that is another “ought to do” for this
summer), has a chapter called “Browsing and Nibbling” in which his
mountain guide says: “What makes me allus a-nibblin’ an’ a-browsin’ of
the bushes an’ things as I goes along? I kinder b’lieve hit keeps a
feller’s heart stiddy an’ his blood pure for to nibble an’ browse
kinder like a deer does. You know a deer is allus strong an’ active,
an’ hit is everlastin’ly a-nibblin’ an’ a-browsin’. Ef hit is good for
the annymel, hit otter be good for the feller.”

[Illustration: SASSAFRAS]

[Illustration: DEADLY NIGHTSHADE]

The guide may not be right about the strength to be had from tasting
the roots and barks and buds of things, but I know that I am right
when I tell you that the very sap of the summer woods will seem to
mingle with your blood at the taste of the aromatic sassafras root,
the spicy bark of the sweet birch and the biting bulb of the Indian
turnip. Many of the perfumes, odors, resins, gums, saps, and nectars
of the woods can be known to you only by sense of taste.


IX

[Illustration: POISON SUMACH]

“But I shall bite into something poisonous,” you say. Yes, you must
look out for that, and you must take the pains this summer to learn
the poisonous things of our woods and fields. So before you begin to
browse and nibble, make a business of learning the deadly nightshade
with its green or its red berries; the poison sumach with its _loose_
panicles or clusters of grayish-white berries; the three-leaved poison
ivy or “ground oak” (which you can easily tell from the five-leaved
Virginia creeper); and the deadly mushrooms with their _bulbous_
roots. These are the poisonous plants that you will meet with most
frequently, but there are a few others, and it will be safest not to
nibble any plant that is strange to you. Nor am I suggesting that you
make a meal on the pitch of the pine trees or anything else. Do not
_eat_ any of these things; taste them only. I was once made
desperately ill by eating poke root (I was a very little child) which
I took for sweet potato. Poke berries are not good to _eat_. Take
along a few good sandwiches from home to eat. But learn to know the
mints, the medicinal roots and barks, and that long list of
old-fashioned “herbs” that our grandmothers hung from the garret
rafters and made us take occasionally as “tea.”

[Illustration: POISON IVY]

[Illustration: VIRGINIA CREEPER]


X

[Illustration: THE DEADLY AMANITA]

Finally, as a lover of the woods and wild life, you ought to take a
personal responsibility for the preservation of the trees and woods in
your neighborhood, and of the birds and beasts and other lowlier forms
of wild life. Year by year the wild things are vanishing never to
return to your woods, and never to be seen again by man. Do what you
can to stop the hunting and ignorant killing of every sort. You ought
to get and read “Our Vanishing Wild Life,” by William T. Hornaday, and
then join the growing host of us who, alarmed at the fearful increase
of insect pests, and the loss to the beauty and interest of the
out-of-doors through the extermination of wild life, are doing our
best to save the wild things we still have and to increase their
numbers.

[Illustration: POKE]




CHAPTER XII

THE “CONY”


We were threading our slow way along the narrow divide of the Wallowa
Mountains that runs between the branches of the Snake River. Our guide
was a former “camp-tender,” one who carries provisions to the
sheep-herders in the mountains. As we were stopping a moment to
breathe our horses and to look down upon the head springs of Big Sheep
and Salt Lick Creeks on one side, and the narrow ribbon of the Imnaha
on the other, this guide and our mammal-collector rode on ahead. An
hour later I saw them round the breast of a peak far along on the
trail and disappear. That night they brought into camp a “cony,” or
pika, or little chief hare.

The year before, this camp-tender, in passing a certain rock-slide
among the high peaks of the pass, had heard and seen a peculiar little
animal about the size and shape of a small guinea-pig, whistling among
the broken rock. He had never seen the little creature before,--had
never heard of it. It was to this slide that he now took our
naturalist, in the hope of showing him the mountain guinea-pig, and,
sure enough, they brought one back with them, and showed me my first
“cony,” one of the rarest of American mammals.

But I was broken-hearted. That I should have been so near and missed
it! For we had descended to Aneroid Lake to camp that night, and there
were no cony slides below us on the trail.

While the men were busy about camp the next morning, I slipped off
alone on foot, and, following the trail, got back about ten o’clock to
the rock-slide where they had killed the cony.

A wilder, barrener, more desolate land of crags and peaks I never
beheld. Eternal silence seemed to wrap it round. The slide was of
broken pieces of rock, just as if the bricks from an immense chimney
had cracked off and rolled down into the valley of the roof. Stunted
vegetation grew around, with scraggly wild grass and a few snow-line
flowers, for this was on the snow-line, several melting banks
glistening in the morning sun about me.

I crept round the sharp slope of the peak and down to the edge of the
rock-slide. “Any living thing in that long heap of broken rock!” I
said to myself incredulously. That barren, blasted pile of splintered
peaks the home of an animal? Why, I was on the top of the world! A
great dark hawk was wheeling over toward Eagle Cap Mountain in the
distance; far below me flapped a band of ravens; and down, down,
immeasurably far down, glistened the small winding waters of the
Imnaha; while all about me were the peaks, lonely, solitary, mighty,
terrible! Such bleakness and desolation!

But here, they told me, they had shot the cony. I could not believe
it. Why should any animal live away up here on the roof of the world?
For several feet each side of the steep, piled-up rock grew spears of
thin, wiry grass about six inches high, and a few stunted
flowers,--pussy’s-paws, alpine phlox, and beardtongue, all of them
flat to the sand,--and farther down the sides of the ravine were low,
twisted pines,--mere prostrate mats of trees that had crept in narrow
ascending tongues, up and up, until they could hang on no longer to
the bare alpine slopes. But here above the stunted pines, here in the
slide rock, where only mosses and a few flat plants could
live,--plants that blossom in the snow,--dwell the conies.

I sat down on the edge of the slide, feeling that I had had my labor
for my pains. We had been climbing these peaks in the hope of seeing
one of the last small bands of mountain sheep that made these
fastnesses their home. But, much as I wished to see a wild mountain
sheep among the crags, I wished more to see the little cony among the
rocks. “As for the stork,” says the Bible, “the fir trees are her
house. The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats; and the rocks
for the conies.” I had always wondered about those conies--what they
looked like and how they lived among the rocks.

I knew that these little conies here in the slide (if indeed they
_could_ be here) were not those of the mountain-peaks of Palestine.
What of that! The very rocks might be different in kind from the rocks
of Nebo or Lebanon; but peaks are peaks, and rocks are rocks, and the
strange little “rabbits” that dwell in their broken slides are all
conies to me. The cony of the Bible is the little hyrax, a relative of
the elephant.

I sat for a while watching. Was this the place? I must make sure
before I settled down to waiting, for when in all my life again might
I have this chance?

Out in the middle of the slide was a pile of rocks with an uneven look
about them, as if they had been heaped up there by other hands than
those that hurled them from the peak. Going quietly out, I examined
them closely, and found the perfect print of a little bloody paw on
one of them.

This was the right place. Here was where they had shot the specimen
brought into camp. I got back to my seat, ready now to wait, even
while I knew that I was holding back the camp from its day’s march.

Perhaps I had been watching for half an hour, when from somewhere, in
the rock-slide surely, though I could not tell, there sounded a shrill
bleating whistle, not unlike the whistles of the ground squirrels and
marmots that I had heard all through the mountains, yet more
tremulous and not so piercing.

I waited. Presently a little gray form crept over a stone, stopped and
whistled, then disappeared. It was my cony!

If you can think of Molly Cottontail turned into the shape of a
guinea-pig about eight inches long, with positively no tail at all,
and with big round broad ears, and with all four legs of equal length
so that the creature walks instead of hopping,--if you can imagine
such a rabbit,--you will get a pretty clear picture of the cony, or
pika, or “little chief hare.”

I kept as still as the stones. Presently the plaintive, bleating
whistle sounded from nowhere again--behind me, beyond me, up the slide
or down, I could not tell. The rocks were rough, rusty chunks two or
three feet long, piled helter-skelter without form or order, so that
any one spot in the slide looked precisely like every other spot. I
could not tell just the piece the cony had crossed, once my eyes were
off of it, nor into which of the cracks he had disappeared. I could
only sit still and wait till I caught him moving, so completely did
his color blend with the rusty brown tone of the slide.

All the while the shrill, piteous call kept coming from anywhere in
the slide. But it was not the call of several voices, not a colony
whistling at once. The conies live in colonies, but, judging from the
single small haycock which they had curing in the sun, I think there
could not have been more than two or three pairs of them in this
particular slide. Possibly there was only the single pair, one of
which had been shot, for presently, when my eyes grew sharp enough to
pick the little creature out against the rocks, I found that one was
doing all the calling, and that for some reason he was greatly
disturbed.

Now he would stop on a slab and whistle, then dive into some long
passage under the stones, to reappear several feet or yards away. Here
he would pause to listen, and, hearing nothing, would call again,
waiting for an answer to his tremulous cry which did not come.

Under and over the stones, up and down the slide, now close to me, now
on the extreme opposite edge of the pile he traveled, nervously,
anxiously looking for something--for some _one_, I truly think; and my
heart smote me when I thought it might be for the dead mate whose
little bare foot-pads had left the bloody print upon the rock.

Up and down, in and out, he ran, calling, calling, calling, but
getting no answer back. He was the only one that showed himself, the
only live one I have ever seen, but this one I followed, as he went
searching and crying over the steep rock-slide, with my eye and with
the field-glasses, until long past noon--with a whole camp down the
cañon looking for me!

But they must know where to look. Let them climb out of the cañon,
back to the top of the world to the cony slide, if they could not wait
for me.

Higher up than the mountain sheep or the goat can live, where only the
burrowing pocket gopher and rare field mice are ever found, dwells the
cony. This particular slide was on one of the minor peaks,--loftier
ones towered all about,--nor do I know just how high it was, but the
cony dwells above the tree-line, up in the Arctic-Alpine Zone, in a
world of perpetual snow, from ten to fourteen thousand feet above the
sea.

By perpetual snow I mean that the snow-banks never melt in the
shadowed ravines and on the bare north slopes. Here, where I was
watching, the rock-slide lay open to the sun, the scanty grass was
green beyond the gully, and the squat alpine flowers were in bloom,
the saxifrage and a solitary aster (April and September together!)
blossoming in the edges of the snow just as fast as the melting banks
allowed them to lift their heads. But any day the wind might come down
from the north, keen and thick and white about the summits, and leave
the flowers and the cony slide covered deep beneath a drift.

Spring, summer, and autumn are all one season, all crowded together--a
kind of peak piercing for a few short weeks the long, bleak, unbroken
land of winter here on the roof of the world.

But during this brief period the thin grass springs up, and the conies
cut and cure it, enough of it to last them from the falling of the
September snows until the drifts are once more melted and their
rock-slide warms in another summer’s sun.

For the cony does not hibernate. He stays awake down in his catacombs.
Think of being buried alive in pitch-black night with snow twenty-five
feet thick above you for nine out of twelve months of the year! Yet
here they are away up on the sides of the wildest summits, living
their lives, keeping their houses, rearing their children, visiting
back and forth through their subways for all this long winter,
protected by the drifts which lie so deep that they keep out the cold.

As I looked about me I could not see grass enough to feed a pair of
conies for a winter. Right near me was one of their little haycocks,
nearly cured and ready for storing in their barns beneath the rocks;
but this would not last long. It was already early August and what
haying they had to do must be done quickly or winter would catch them
hungry.

They cut the grass that grows in the vicinity of the slide, and cock
it until it is cured, then they carry it all below against the coming
of the cold; and naturalists who have observed them describe with what
hurry and excitement the colony falls to taking in the hay when bad
weather threatens to spoil it.

Hardy little farmers! Bold small folk! Why climb for a home with your
tiny, bare-soled feet above the aerie of the eagle and the cave of the
soaring condor of the Sierras? Why not descend to the warm valleys,
where winter, indeed, comes, but cannot linger?--or farther down where
the grass is always green, with never a need to cut and cure a
winter’s hay?

I do not know why--nor why upon the tossing waves the little petrel
makes her bed; nor why, beneath the waves, “down to the dark, to the
utter dark” on

    “The great gray level plains of ooze,”

the “blind white sea-snakes” make their home; nor why at the north, in
the fearful, far-off, frozen north, the little lemmings dwell; nor
why, nor why. But as I sat there above the clouds, listening to the
plaintive, trembling whistle of the little cony, and hoping his mate
was not dead, and wondering why he stayed here in the barren peak, and
how he must fare in the black, bitter winter, I said over to myself
the lines of Kipling for an answer,--

    “And God who clears the grounding berg
    And steers the grinding floe,
    He hears the cry of the little kit-fox
    And the lemming on the snow.”

WINTER SUNSHINE




PREFATORY

The only part of my book I wish to preface is the last part,--the
foreign sketches,--and it is not much matter about these, since if they
do not contain their own proof, I shall not attempt to supply it here.

I have been told that De Lolme, who wrote a notable book on the English
Constitution, said that after he had been in England a few weeks, he
fully made up his mind to write a book on that country; after he had
lived there a year, he still thought of writing a book, but was not so
certain about it, but that after a residence of ten years he abandoned
his first design altogether. Instead of furnishing an argument against
writing out one's first impressions of a country, I think the
experience of the Frenchman shows the importance of doing it at once.
The sensations of the first day are what we want,--the first flush of
the traveler's thought and feeling, before his perception and
sensibilities become cloyed or blunted, or before he in any way becomes
a part of that which he would observe and describe. Then the American
in England is just enough at home to enable him to discriminate subtle
shades and differences at first sight which might escape a traveler of
another and antagonistic race. He has brought with him, but little
modified or impaired, his whole inheritance of English ideas and
predilections, and much of what he sees affects him like a memory. It
is his own past, his ante-natal life, and his long-buried ancestors
look through his eyes and perceive with his sense.

I have attempted only the surface, and to express my own first day's
uncloyed and unalloyed satisfaction. Of course, I have put these things
through my own processes and given them my own coloring, (as who would
not), and if other travelers do not find what I did, it is no fault of
mine; or if the "Britishers" do not deserve all the pleasant things I
say of them, why then so much the worse for them.

In fact, if it shall appear that I have treated this part in the same
spirit that I have the themes in the other chapters, reporting only
such things as impressed me and stuck to me and tasted good, I shall be
satisfied.

   ESOPUS-ON-HUDSON, November, 1875.



CONTENTS
    I. WINTER SUNSHINE
   II. THE EXHILARATIONS OF THE ROAD
  III. THE SNOW-WALKERS
   IV. THE FOX
    V. A MARCH CHRONICLE
   VI. AUTUMN TIDES
  VII. THE APPLE
 VIII. AN OCTOBER ABROAD:
             I. MELLOW ENGLAND
            II. ENGLISH CHARACTERISTICS
           III. A GLIMPSE OF FRANCE
            IV. FROM LONDON TO NEW YORK
        INDEX



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
 AN ENGLISH LANE
     From a photograph by Walmsley Brothers
 DRIFTS ABOUT A STONE WALL
     From a photograph by Herbert W.  Gleason
 DOWNY WOODPECKER
     From drawing by L.  A.  Fuertes
 COWS IN AN ENGLISH LANDSCAPE
     From a photograph by Walmsley Brothers
 St. PAUL'S CATHEDRAL
     From a photograph by Clifton Johnson
 IRISH COTTAGES
     From a photograph by Clifton Johnson




WINTER SUNSHINE

I. WINTER SUNSHINE

An American resident in England is reported as saying that the English
have an atmosphere but no climate. The reverse of this remark would
apply pretty accurately to our own case. We certainly have a climate, a
two-edged one that cuts both ways, threatening us with sun-stroke on
the one hand and with frost-stroke on the other; but we have no
atmosphere to speak of in New York and New England, except now and then
during the dog-days, or the fitful and uncertain Indian Summer. An
atmosphere, the quality of tone and mellowness in the near distance, is
the product of a more humid climate. Hence, as we go south from New
York,the atmospheric effects become more rich and varied, until on
reaching the Potomac you find an atmosphere as well as a climate. The
latter is still on the vehement American scale, full of sharp and
violent changes and contrasts, baking and blistering in summer, and
nipping and blighting in winter, but the spaces are not so purged and
bare; the horizon wall does not so often have the appearance of having
just been washed and scrubbed down. There is more depth and visibility
to the open air, a stronger infusion of the Indian Summer element
throughout the year, than is found farther north. The days are softer
and more brooding, and the nights more enchanting. It is here that Walt
Whitman saw the full moon

       "Pour down Night's nimbus floods,"

as any one may see her, during the full, from October to May.  There is
more haze and vapor in the atmosphere during that period, and every
pariticle seems to collect and hold the pure radiance until the world
swims with the lunar outpouring. Is not the full moon always on the
side of fair weather? I think it is Sir William Herschel who says her
influence tends to dispel the clouds. Certain it is her beauty is
seldom lost or even veiled in this southern or semi-southern clime.

       "Floods of the yellow gold of the gorgeous,
       Indolent sinking sun, burning, expanding the air,"

a description that would not apply with the same force farther north,
where the air seems thinner and less capable of absorbing and holding
the sunlight. Indeed, the opulence and splendor of our climate, at
least the climate of the Atlantic seaboard, cannot be fully appreciated
by the dweller north of the thirty-ninth parallel. It seemed as if I
had never seen but a second-rate article of sunlight or moonlight until
I had taken up my abode in the National Capital. It may be, perhaps,
because we have such splendid specimens of both at the period of the
year when one values such things highest, namely, in the fall and
winter and early spring. Sunlight is good any time, but a bright,
evenly tempered day is certainly more engrossing to the attention in
winter than in summer, and such days seem the rule, and not the
exception, in the Washington winter. The deep snows keep to the north,
the heavy rains to the south, leaving a blue space central over the
border States. And there is not one of the winter months but wears this
blue zone as a girdle.

I am not thinking especially of the Indian summer, that charming but
uncertain second youth of the New England year, but of regularly
recurring lucid intervals in the weather system of Virginia fall and
winter, when the best our climate is capable of stand
revealed,--southern days with northern blood in their veins,
exhilarating, elastic, full of action, the hyperborean oxygen of the
North tempered by the dazzling sun of the South, a little bitter in
winter to all travelers but the pedestrian,--to him sweet and
warming,--but in autumn a vintage that intoxicates all lovers of the
open air.

It is impossible not to dilate and expand under such skies.  One
breathes deeply and steps proudly, and if he have any of the eagle
nature in him, it comes to the surface then. There is a sense of
altitude about these dazzling November and December days, of
mountain-tops and pure ether. The earth in passing through the fire of
summer seems to have lost all its dross, and life all its impediments.

But what does not the dweller in the National Capital endure in
reaching these days! Think of the agonies of the heated term, the
ragings of the dog-star, the purgatory of heat and dust, of baking,
blistering pavements, of cracked and powdered fields, of dead, stifling
night air, from which every tonic and antiseptic quality seems
eliminated, leaving a residuum of sultry malaria and all-diffusing
privy and sewer gases, that lasts from the first of July to near the
middle of September! But when October is reached, the memory of these
things is afar off, and the glory of the days is a perpetual surprise.

I sally out in the morning with the ostensible purpose of gathering
chestnuts, or autumn leaves, or persimmons, or exploring some run or
branch. It is, say, the last of October or the first of November. The
air is not balmy, but tart and pungent, like the flavor of the
red-cheeked apples by the roadside. In the sky not a cloud, not a
speck; a vast dome of blue ether lightly suspended above the world. The
woods are heaped with color like a painter's palette,--great splashes
of red and orange and gold. The ponds and streams bear upon their
bosoms leaves of all tints, from the deep maroon of the oak to the pale
yellow of the chestnut. In the glens and nooks it is so still that the
chirp of a solitary cricket is noticeable. The red berries of the
dogwood and spice-bush and other shrubs shine in the sun like rubies
and coral. The crows fly high above the earth, as they do only on such
days, forms of ebony floating across the azure, and the buzzards look
like kingly birds, sailing round and round.

Or it may be later in the season, well into December.  The days are
equally bright, but a little more rugged. The mornings are ushered in
by an immense spectrum thrown upon the eastern sky. A broad bar of red
and orange lies along the low horizon, surmounted by an expanse of
color in which green struggles with yellow and blue with green half the
way to the zenith. By and by the red and orange spread upward and grow
dim, the spectrum fades, and the sky becomes suffused with yellow white
light, and in a moment the fiery scintillations of the sun begin to
break across the Maryland hills. Then before long the mists and vapors
uprise like the breath of a giant army, and for an hour or two, one is
reminded of a November morning in England. But by mid-forenoon the only
trace of the obscurity that remains is a slight haze, and the day is
indeed a summons and a challenge to come forth. If the October days
were a cordial like the sub-acids of a fruit, these are a tonic like
the wine of iron. Drink deep, or be careful how you taste this December
vintage. The first sip may chill, but a full draught warms and
invigorates. No loitering by the brooks or in the woods now, but
spirited, rugged walking along the public highway. The sunbeams are
welcome now. They seem like pure electricity,--like a friendly and
recuperating lightning. Are we led to think electricity abounds only in
the summer when we see storm-clouds, as it were, the veins and ore-beds
of it? I imagine it is equally abundant in winter, and more equable and
better tempered. Who ever breasted a snowstorm without being excited
and exhilarated, as if this meteor had come charged with latent aurorae
of the North, as doubtless it has? It is like being pelted with sparks
from a battery. Behold the frost-work on the pane,--the wild, fantastic
limnings and etchings! can there be any doubt but this subtle agent has
been here? Where is it not? It is the life of the crystal, the
architect of the flake, the fire of the frost, the soul of the sunbeam.
This crisp winter air is full of it. When I come in at night after an
all-day tramp I am charged like a Leyden jar; my hair crackles and
snaps beneath the comb like a cat's back, and a strange, new glow
diffuses itself through my system.

It is a spur that one feels at this season more than at any other.  How
nimbly you step forth! The woods roar, the waters shine, and the hills
look invitingly near. You do not miss the flowers and the songsters, or
wish the trees or the fields any different, or the heavens any nearer.
Every object pleases. A rail fence, running athwart the hills, now in
sunshine and now in shadow,--how the eye lingers upon it! Or the
strait, light-gray trunks of the trees, where the woods have recently
been laid open by a road or clearing,--how curious they look, and as if
surprised in undress! Next year they will begin to shoot out branches
and make themselves a screen. Or the farm scenes,--the winter barnyards
littered with husks and straw, the rough-coated horses, the cattle
sunning themselves or walking down to the spring to drink, the domestic
fowls moving about,--there is a touch of sweet, homely life in these
things that the winter sun enhances and brings out. Every sign of life
is welcome at this season. I love to hear dogs bark, hens cackle, and
boys shout; one has no privacy with nature now, and does not wish to
seek her in nooks and hidden ways. She is not at home if he goes there;
her house is shut up and her hearth cold; only the sun and sky, and
perchance the waters, wear the old look, and to-day we will make love
to them, and they shall abundantly return it.

Even the crows and the buzzards draw the eye fondly.  The National
Capital is a great place for buzzards, and I make the remark in no
double or allegorical sense either, for the buzzards I mean are black
and harmless as doves, though perhaps hardly dovelike in their tastes.
My vulture is also a bird of leisure, and sails through the ether on
long flexible pinions, as if that was the one delight of his life. Some
birds have wings, others have "pinions." The buzzard enjoys this latter
distinctions. There is something in the sound of the word that suggests
that easy, dignified, undulatory movement. He does not propel himself
along by sheer force of muscle, after the plebeian fashion of the crow,
for instance, but progresses by a kind of royal indirection that
puzzles the eye. Even on a windy winter day he rides the vast aerial
billows as placidly as ever, rising and falling as he comes up toward
you, carving his way through the resisting currents by a slight
oscillation to the right and left, but never once beating the air
openly.

This superabundance of wing power is very unequally distributed among
the feathered races, the hawks and vultures having by far the greater
share of it. They cannot command the most speed, but their apparatus
seems the most delicate and consummate. Apparently a fine play of
muscle, a subtle shifting of the power along the outstretched wings, a
perpetual loss and a perpetual recovery of the equipoise, sustains them
and bears them along. With them flying is a luxury, a fine art; not
merely a quicker and safer means of transit from one point to another,
but a gift so free and spontaneous that work becomes leisure and
movement rest. They are not so much going somewhere, from this perch to
that, as they are abandoning themselves to the mere pleasure of riding
upon the air.

And it is beneath such grace and high-bred leisure that Nature hides in
her creatures the occupation of scavenger and carrion-eater!

But the worst thing about the buzzard is his silence.  The crow caws,
the hawk screams, the eagle barks, but the buzzard says not a word. So
far as I have observed, he has no vocal powers whatever. Nature dare
not trust him to speak. In his case she preserves discreet silence.

The crow may not have the sweet voice which the fox in his flattery
attributed to him, but he has a good, strong, native speech,
nevertheless. How much character there is in it! How much thrift and
independence! Of course his plumage is firm, his color decided, his wit
quick. He understands you at once and tells you so; so does the hawk by
his scornful, defiant whir-r-r-r-r. Hardy, happy outlaws, the crows,
how I love them! Alert, social, republican, always able to look out for
himself, not afraid of the cold and the snow, fishing when flesh is
scarce, and stealing when other resources fail, the crow is a character
I would not willingly miss from the landscape. I love to see his track
in the snow or the mud, and his graceful pedestrianism about the brown
fields.

He is no interloper, but has the air and manner of being thoroughly at
home, and in rightful possession of the land. He is no sentimentalist
like some of the plaining, disconsolate song-birds, but apparently is
always in good health and good spirits. No matter who is sick, or
dejected, or unsatisfied, or what the weather is, or what the price of
corn, the crow is well and finds life sweet. He is the dusky embodiment
of worldly wisdom and prudence. Then he is one of Nature's
self-appointed constables and greatly magnifies his office. He would
fain arrest every hawk or owl or grimalkin that ventures abroad. I have
known a posse of them to beset the fox and cry "Thief!" till Reynard
hid himself for shame. Do I say the fox flattered the crow when he told
him he had a sweet voice? Yet one of the most musical sounds in nature
proceeds from the crow. All the crow tribe, from the blue jay up, are
capable of certain low ventriloquial notes that have peculiar cadence
and charm. I often hear the crow indulging in his in winter, and am
reminded of the sound of the dulcimer. The bird stretches up and exerts
himself like a cock in the act of crowing, and gives forth a peculiarly
clear, vitreous sound that is sure to arrest and reward your attention.
This is no doubt the song the fox begged to be favored with, as in
delivering it the crow must inevitably let drop the piece of meat.

The crow in his purity, I believe, is seen and heard only in the North.
Before you reach the Potomac there is an infusion of a weaker element,
the fish crow, whose helpless feminine call contrasts strongly with the
hearty masculine caw of the original Simon.

In passing from crows to colored men, I hope I am not guilty of any
disrespect toward the latter. In my walks about Washington, both winter
and summer, colored men are about the only pedestrians I meet; and I
meet them everywhere, in the fields and in the woods and in the public
road, swinging along with that peculiar, rambling, elastic gait, taking
advantage of the short cuts and threading the country with paths and
byways. I doubt if the colored man can compete with his white brother
as a walker; his foot is too flat and the calves of his legs too small,
but he is certainly the most picturesque traveler to be seen on the
road. He bends his knees more than the white man, and oscillates more
to and fro, or from side to side. The imaginary line which his head
describes is full of deep and long undulations. Even the boys and young
men sway as if bearing a burden.

Along the fences and by the woods I come upon their snares, dead-falls,
and rud box-traps. The freedman is a successful trapper and hunter, and
has by nature an insight into these things. I frequently see him in
market or on his way thither with a tame 'possum clinging timidly to
his shoulders, or a young coon or fox led by a chain. Indeed, the
colored man behaves precisely like the rude unsophisticated peasant
that he is, and there is fully as much virtue in him, using the word in
its true sense, as in the white peasant; indeed, much more than in the
poor whites who grew up by his side; while there is often a benignity
and a depth of human experience and sympathy about some of these dark
faces that comes home to one like the best one sees in art or reads in
books.

One touch of nature makes all the world akin, and there is certainly a
touch of nature about the colored man; indeed, I had almost said, of
Anglo-Saxon nature. They have the quaintness and homeliness of the
simple English stock. I seem to see my grandfather and grandmother in
the ways and doings of these old "uncles" and "aunties;" indeed, the
lesson comes nearer home than even that, for I seem to see myself in
them, and, what is more, I see that they see themselves in me, and that
neither party has much to boast of.

The negro is a plastic human creature, and is thoroughly domesticated
and thoroughly anglicized. The same cannot be said of the Indian, for
instance, between whom and us there can never exist any fellowship, any
community of feeling or interest; or is there any doubt but the
Chinaman will always remain to us the same impenetrable mystery he has
been from the first?

But there is no mystery about the negro, and he touches the Anglo-Saxon
at more points than the latter is always willing to own, taking as
kindly and naturally to all his customs and usages, yea, to all his
prejudices and superstitions, as if to the manner born. The colored
population in very many respects occupies the same position as that
occupied by our rural populations a generation or two ago, seeing signs
and wonders, haunted by the fear of ghosts and hobgoblins, believing in
witchcraft, charms, the evil eye, etc. In religious matters, also, they
are on the same level, and about the only genuine shouting Methodists
that remain are to be found in the colored churches. Indeed, I fear the
negro tries to ignore or forget himself as far as possible, and that he
would deem it felicity enough to play second fiddle to the white man
all his days. He liked his master, but he likes the Yankee better, not
because he regards him as his deliverer, but mainly because the
two-handed thrift of the Northerner, his varied and wonderful ability,
completely captivates the imagination of the black man, just learning
to shift for himself.

How far he has caught or is capable of being imbued with the Yankee
spirit of enterprise and industry, remains to be seen. In some things
he has already shown himself an apt scholar. I notice, for instance,
that he is about as industrious an office-seeker as the most patriotic
among us, and that he learns with amazing ease and rapidity all the
arts and wiles of the politicians. He is versed in parades, mass
meetings, caucuses, and will soon shine on the stump. I observe, also,
that he is not far behind us in the observance of the fashions, and
that he is as good a church-goer, theatre-goer, and pleasure-seeker
generally, as his means will allow.

As a bootblack or newsboy, he is an adept in all the tricks of the
trade; and as a fast young man about town among his kind, he is worthy
his white prototype: the swagger, the impertinent look, the coarse
remark, the loud laugh, are all in the best style. As a lounger and
starer also, on the street corners of a Sunday afternoon, he has taken
his degree.

On the other hand, I know cases among our colored brethren, plenty of
them, of conscientious and well-directed effort and industry in the
worthiest fields, in agriculture, in trade, in the mechanic arts, that
show the colored man has in him all the best rudiments of a citizen of
the States.

Lest my winter sunshine appear to have too many dark rays in
it,--buzzards, crows, and colored men,--I hasten to add the brown and
neutral tints; and maybe a red ray can be extracted from some of these
hard, smooth, sharp-gritted roads that radiate from the National
Capital. Leading out of Washington there are several good roads that
invite the pedestrian. There is the road that leads west or northwest
from Georgetown, the Tenallytown road, the very sight of which, on a
sharp, lustrous winter Sunday, makes the feet tingle. Where it cuts
through a hill or high knoll, it is so red it fairly glows in the
sunlight. I'll warrant you will kindle, and your own color will mount,
if you resign yourself to it. It will conduct you to the wild and rocky
scenery of the upper Potomac, to Great Falls, and on to Harper's Ferry,
if your courage holds out. Then there is the road that leads north over
Meridian Hill, across Piny Branch, and on through the wood of Crystal
Springs to Fort Stevens, and so into Maryland. This is the proper route
for an excursion in the spring to gather wild flowers, or in the fall
for a nutting expedition, as it lays open some noble woods and a great
variety of charming scenery; or for a musing moonlight saunter, say in
December, when the Enchantress has folded and folded the world in her
web, it is by all means the course to take. Your staff rings on the
hard ground; the road, a misty white belt, gleams and vanishes before
you; the woods are cavernous and still; the fields lie in a lunar
trance, and you will yourself return fairly mesmerized by the beauty of
the scene.

Or you can bend your steps eastward over the Eastern Branch, up Good
Hope Hill, and on till you strike the Marlborough pike, as a trio of us
did that cold February Sunday we walked from Washington to Pumpkintown
and back.

A short sketch of this pilgrimage is a fair sample of these winter
walks.

The delight I experienced in making this new acquisition to my
geography was of itself sufficient to atone for any aches or weariness
I may have felt. The mere fact that one may walk from Washington to
Pumpkintown was a discovery I had been all these years in making. I had
walked to Sligo, and to the Northwest Branch, and had made the Falls of
the Potomac in a circuitous route of ten miles, coming suddenly upon
the river in one of its wildest passes; but I little dreamed all the
while that there, in a wrinkle (or shall I say furrow?) of the Maryland
hills, almost visible from the outlook of the bronze squaw on the dome
of the Capitol, and just around the head of Oxen Run, lay Pumpkintown.

The day was cold but the sun was bright, and the foot took hold of
those hard, dry, gritty Maryland roads with the keenest relish. How the
leaves of the laurel glistened! The distant oak woods suggested
gray-blue smoke, while the recesses of the pines looked like the lair
of Night. Beyond the District limits we struck the Marlborough pike,
which, round and hard and white, held squarely to the east and was
visible a mile ahead. Its friction brought up the temperature amazingly
and spurred the pedestrians into their best time. As I trudged along,
Thoreau's lines came naturally to mind:--

       "When the spring stirs my blood
         With the instinct of travel,

       I can get enough gravel
         On the old Marlborough road."

Cold as the day was (many degrees below freezing), I heard and saw
bluebirds, and as we passed along, every sheltered tangle and overgrown
field or lane swarmed with snowbirds and sparrows,--the latter mainly
Canada or tree sparrows, with a sprinkling of the song, and, maybe, one
or two other varieties. The birds are all social and gregarious in
winter, and seem drawn together by common instinct. Where you find one,
you will not only find others of the same kind, but also several
different kinds. The regular winter residents go in little bands, like
a well-organized pioneer corps,--the jays and woodpeckers in advance,
doing the heavier work; the nuthatches next, more lightly armed; and
the creepers and kinglets, with their slender beaks and microscopic
eyes, last of all. [Footnote: It seems to me this is a borrowed
observation, but I do not know to whom to credit it.]

Now and then, among the gray and brown tints, there was a dash of
scarlet,--the cardinal grosbeak, whose presence was sufficient to
enliven any scene. In the leafless trees, as a ray of sunshine fell
upon him, he was visible a long way off, glowing like a crimson
spar,--the only bit of color in the whole landscape.

Maryland is here rather a level, unpicturesque country,--the gaze of
the traveler bounded, at no great distance, by oak woods, with here and
there a dark line of pine. We saw few travelers, passed a ragged squad
or two of colored boys and girls, and met some colored women on their
way to or from church, perhaps. Never ask a colored person--at least
the crude, rustic specimens--any question that involves a memory of
names, or any arbitrary signs; you will rarely get a satisfactory
answer. If you could speak to them in their own dialect, or touch the
right spring in their minds, you would, no doubt, get the desired
information. They are as local in their notions and habits as the
animals, and go on much the same principles, as no doubt we all do,
more or less. I saw a colored boy come into a public office one day,
and ask to see a man with red hair; the name was utterly gone from him.
The man had red whiskers, which was as near as he had come to the mark.
Ask your washerwoman what street she lives on, or where such a one has
moved to, and the chances are that she cannot tell you, except that it
is a "right smart distance" this way or that, or near Mr. So-and-so, or
by such and such a place, describing some local feature. I love to
amuse myself, when walking through the market, by asking the old
aunties, and the young aunties, too, the names of their various
"yarbs." It seems as if they must trip on the simplest names. Bloodroot
they generally call "grubroot;" trailing arbutus goes by the names of
"troling" arbutus, "training arbuty-flower," and ground "ivory;" in
Virginia they call woodchucks "moonacks."

On entering Pumpkintown--a cluster of five or six small, whitewashed
blockhouses, toeing squarely on the highway--the only inhabitant we saw
was a small boy, who was as frank and simple as if he had lived on
pumpkins and marrow squashes all his days.

Half a mile farther on, we turned to the right into a characteristic
Southern road,--a way entirely unkempt, and wandering free as the wind;
now fading out into a broad field; now contracting into a narrow track
between hedges; anon roaming with delightful abandon through swamps and
woods, asking no leave and keeping no bounds. About two o'clock we
stopped in an opening in a pine wood and ate our lunch. We had the good
fortune to hit upon a charming place. A wood-chopper had been there,
and let in the sunlight full and strong; and the white chips, the
newly-piled wood, and the mounds of green boughs, were welcome
features, and helped also to keep off the wind that would creep through
under the pines. The ground was soft and dry, with a carpet an inch
thick of pine-needles; and with a fire, less for warmth than to make
the picture complete, we ate our bread and beans with the keenest
satisfaction, and with a relish that only the open air can give.

A fire, of course,--an encampment in the woods at this season without a
fire would be like leaving Hamlet out of the play. A smoke is your
standard, your flag; it defines and locates your camp at once; you are
an interloper until you have made a fire; then you take possession;
then the trees and rocks seem to look upon you more kindly, and you
look more kindly upon them. As one opens his budget, so he opens his
heart by a fire. Already something has gone out from you, and comes
back as a faint reminiscence and home feeling in the air and place. One
looks out upon the crow or the buzzard that sails by as from his own
fireside. It is not I that am a wanderer and a stranger now; it is the
crow and the buzzard. The chickadees were silent at first, but now they
approach by little journeys, as if to make our acquaintance. The
nuthatches, also, cry "Yank! yank!" in no inhospitable tones; and those
purple finches there in the cedars,--are they not stealing our
berries?

How one lingers about a fire under such circumstances, loath to leave
it, poking up the sticks, throwing in the burnt ends, adding another
branch and yet another, and looking back as he turns to go to catch one
more glimpse of the smoke going up through the trees! I reckon it is
some remnant of the primitive man, which we all carry about with us. He
has not yet forgotten his wild, free life, his arboreal habitations,
and the sweet-bitter times he had in those long-gone ages. With me, he
wakes up directly at the smell of smoke, of burning branches in the
open air; and all his old love of fire and his dependence upon it, in
the camp or the cave, come freshly to mind.

On resuming our march, we filed off along a charming wood-path,--a
regular little tunnel through the dense pines, carpeted with silence,
and allowing us to look nearly the whole length of it through its soft
green twilight out into the open sunshine of the fields beyond. A pine
wood in Maryland or in Virginia is quite a different thing from a pine
wood in Maine or Minnesota,--the difference, in fact, between yellow
pine and white. The former, as it grows hereabout, is short and
scrubby, with branches nearly to the ground, and looks like the
dwindling remnant of a greater race.

Beyond the woods, the path led us by a colored man's habitation,--a
little, low frame house, on a knoll, surrounded by the quaint devices
and rude makeshifts of these quaint and rude people. A few poles stuck
in the ground, clapboarded with cedar-boughs and cornstalks, and
supporting a roof of the same, gave shelter to a rickety one-horse
wagon and some farm implements. Near this there was a large, compact
tent, made entirely of cornstalks, with, for door, a bundle of the
same, in the dry, warm, nest-like interior of which the husking of the
corn crop seemed to have taken place. A few rods farther on, we passed
through another humble dooryard, musical with dogs and dusky with
children. We crossed here the outlying fields of a large, thrifty,
well-kept-looking farm with a showy, highly ornamental frame house in
the centre. There was even a park with deer, and among the gayly
painted outbuildings I noticed a fancy dovecote, with an immense flock
of doves circling aboxe it; some whiskey-dealer from the city, we were
told, trying to take the poison out of his money by agriculture.

We next passed through some woods, when we emerged into a broad,
sunlit, fertile-looking valley, called Oxen Run. We stooped down and
drank of its clear white-pebbled stream, in the veritable spot, I
suspect, where the oxen do. There were clouds of birds here on the warm
slopes, with the usual sprinkling along the bushy margin of the stream
of scarlet grosbeaks. The valley of Oxen Run has many good-looking
farms, with old picturesque houses, and loose rambling barns, such as
artists love to put into pictures.

But it is a little awkward to go east.  It always seems left-handed.  I
think this is the feeling of all walkers, and that Thoreau's experience
in this respect was not singular. The great magnet is the sun, and we
follow him. I notice that people lost in the woods work to the
westward. When one comes out of his house and asks himself, "Which way
shall I walk?" and looks up and down and around for a sign or a token,
does he not nine times out of ten turn to the west? He inclines this
way as surely as the willow wand bends toward the water. There is
something more genial and friendly in this direction.

Occasionally in winter I experience a southern inclination, and cross
Long Bridge and rendezvous for the day in some old earthwork on the
Virginia hills. The roads are not so inviting in this direction, but
the line of old forts with rabbits burrowing in the bomb-proofs, and a
magazine, or officers' quarters turned into a cow stable by colored
squatters, form an interesting feature. But, whichever way I go, I am
glad I came. All roads lead up to the Jerusalem the walker seeks. There
is everywhere the vigorous and masculine winter air, and the impalpable
sustenance the mind draws from all natural forms.



II. THE EXHILARATIONS OF THE ROAD

       Afoot and light-hearted I take to the open road.
                                               WALT WHITMAN.

Ocasionally on the sidewalk, amid the dapper, swiftly moving,
high-heeled boots and gaiters, I catch a glimpse of the naked human
foot. Nimbly it scuffs along, the toes spread, the sides flatten, the
heel protrudes; it grasps the curbing, or bends to the form of the
uneven surfaces,--a thing sensuous and alive, that seems to take
cognizance of whatever it touches or passes. How primitive and uncivil
it looks in such company,--a real barbarian in the parlor! We are so
unused to the human anatomy, to simple, unadorned nature, that it looks
a little repulsive; but it is beautiful for all that. Though it be a
black foot and an unwashed foot, it shall be exalted. It is a thing of
life amid leather, a free spirit amid cramped, a wild bird amid caged,
an athlete amid consumptives. It is the symbol of my order, the Order
of Walkers. That unhampered, vitally playing piece of anatomy is the
type of the pedestrian, man returned to first principles, in direct
contact and intercourse with the earth and the elements, his faculties
unsheathed, his mind plastic, his body toughened, his heart light, his
soul dilated; while those cramped and distorted members in the calf and
kid are the unfortunate wretches doomed to carriages and cushions.

I am not going to advocate the disuse of boots and shoes, or the
abandoning of the improved modes of travel; but I am going to brag as
lustily as I can on behalf of the pedestrian, and show how all the
shining angels second and accompany the man who goes afoot, while all
the dark spirits are ever looking out for a chance to ride.

When I see the discomforts that able-bodied American men will put up
with rather than go a mile or half a mile on foot, the abuses they will
tolerate and encourage, crowding the street car on a little fall in the
temperature or the appearance of an inch or two of snow, packing up to
overflowing, dangling to the straps, treading on each other's toes,
breathing each other's breaths, crushing the women and children,
hanging by tooth and nail to a square inch of the platform, imperiling
their limbs and killing the horses,--I think the commonest tramp in the
street has good reason to felicitate himself on his rare privilege of
going afoot. Indeed, a race that neglects or despises this primitive
gift, that fears the touch of the soil, that has no footpaths, no
community of ownership in the land which they imply, that warns off the
walker as a trespasser, that knows no way but the highway, the
carriage-way, that forgets the stile, the foot-bridge, that even
ignores the rights of the pedestrian in the public road, providing no
escape for him but in the ditch or up the bank, is in a fair way to far
more serious degeneracy.

Shakespeare makes the chief qualification of the walker a merry
heart:--

       "Jog on, jog on, the footpath way,
          And merrily hent the stile-a;

       A merry heart goes all the day,
          Your sad tires in a mile-a."

The human body is a steed that goes freest and longest under a light
rider, and the lightest of all riders is a cheerful heart. Your sad, or
morose, or embittered, or preoccupied heart settles heavily into the
saddle, and the poor beast, the body, breaks down the first mile.
Indeed, the heaviest thing in the world is a heavy heart. Next to that,
the most burdensome to the walker is a heart not in perfect sympathy
and accord with the body,--a reluctant or unwilling heart. The horse
and rider must not only both be willing to go the same way, but the
rider must lead the way and infuse his own lightness and eagerness into
the steed. Herein is no doubt our trouble, and one reason of the decay
of the noble art in this country. We are unwilling walkers. We are not
innocent and simple-hearted enough to enjoy a walk. We have fallen from
that state of grace which capacity to enjoy a walk implies. It cannot
be said that as a people we are so positively sad, or morose, or
melancholic as that we are vacant of that sportiveness and surplusage
of animal spirits that characterized our ancestors, and that springs
from full and harmonious life,--a sound heart in accord with a sound
body. A man must invest himself near at hand and in common things, and
be content with a steady and moderate return, if he would know the
blessedness of a cheerful heart and the sweetness of a walk over the
round earth. This is a lesson the American has yet to
learn,--capability of amusement on a low key. He expects rapid and
extraordinary returns. He would make the very elemental laws pay usury.
He has nothing to invest in a walk; it is too slow, too cheap. We crave
the astonishing, the exciting, the far away, and do not know the
highways of the gods when we see them,--always a sign of the decay of
the faith and simplicity of man.

If I say to my neighbor, "Come with me, I have great wonders to show
you," he pricks up his ears and comes forthwith; but when I take him on
the hills under the full blaze of the sun, or along the country road,
our footsteps lighted by the moon and stars, and say to him, "Behold,
these are the wonders, these are the circuits of the gods, this we now
tread is a morning star," he feels defrauded, and as if I had played
him a trick. And yet nothing less than dilatation and enthusiasm like
this is the badge of the master walker.

If we are not sad, we are careworn, hurried, discontented, mortgaging
the present for the promise of the future. If we take a walk, it is as
we take a prescription, with about the same relish and with about the
same purpose; and the more the fatigue, the greater our faith in the
virtue of the medicine.

Of those gleesome saunters over the hills in spring, or those sallies
of the body in winter, those excursions into space when the foot
strikes fire at every step, when the air tastes like a new and finer
mixture, when we accumulate force and gladness as we go along, when the
sight of objects by the roadside and of the fields and woods pleases
more than pictures or than all the art in the world,--those ten or
twelve mile dashes that are but the wit and effluence of the corporeal
powers,--of such diversion and open road entertainment, I say, most of
us know very little.

I notice with astonishment that at our fashionable watering-places
nobody walks; that, of all those vast crowds of health-seekers and
lovers of country air, you can never catch one in the fields or woods,
or guilty of trudging along the country road with dust on his shoes and
sun-tan on his hands and face. The sole amusement seems to be to eat
and dress and sit about the hotels and glare at each other. The men
look bored, the women look tired, and all seem to sigh, "O Lord! what
shall we do to be happy and not be vulgar?" Quite different from our
British cousins across the water, who have plenty of amusement and
hilarity, spending most of the time at their watering-places in the
open air, strolling, picnicking, boating, climbing, briskly walking,
apparently with little fear of sun-tan or of compromising their
"gentility."

It is indeed astonishing with what ease and hilarity the English walk.
To an American it seems a kind of infatuation. When Dickens was in this
country, I imagine the aspirants to the honor of a walk with him were
not numerous. In a pedestrian tour of England by an American, I read
that, "after breakfast with the Independent minister, he walked with us
for six miles out of town upon our road. Three little boys and girls,
the youngest six years old, also accompanied us. They were romping and
rambling about all the while, and their morning walk must have been as
much as fifteen miles; but they thought nothing of it, and when we
parted were apparently as fresh as when they started, and very loath to
return."

I fear, also, the American is becoming disqualified for the manly art
of walking by a falling off in the size of his foot. He cherishes and
cultivates this part of his anatomy, and apparently thinks his taste
and good breeding are to be inferred from its diminutive size. A small,
trim foot, well booted or gaitered, is the national vanity. How we
stare at the big feet of foreigners, and wonder what may be the price
of leather in those countries, and where all the aristocratic blood is,
that these plebeian extremities so predominate! If we were admitted to
the confidences of the shoemaker to Her Majesty or to His Royal
Highness, no doubt we should modify our views upon this latter point,
for a truly large and royal nature is never stunted in the extremities;
a little foot never yet supported a great character.

It is said that Englishmen, when they first come to this country, are
for some time under the impression that American women all have
deformed feet, they are so coy of them and so studiously careful to
keep them hid. That there is an astonishing difference between the
women of the two countries in this respect, every traveler can testify;
and that there is a difference equally astonishing between the
pedestrian habits and capabilities of the rival sisters, is also
certain.

The English pedestrian, no doubt, has the advantage of us in the matter
of climate; for, notwithstanding the traditional gloom and moroseness
of English skies, they have in that country none of those relaxing,
sinking, enervating days, of which we have so many here, and which seem
especially trying to the female constitution,--days which withdraw all
support from the back and loins, and render walking of all things
burdensome. Theirs is a climate of which it has been said that "it
invites men abroad more days in the year and more hours in the day than
that of any other country."

Then their land is threaded with paths which invite the walker, and
which are scarcely less important than the highways. I heard of a surly
nobleman near London who took it into his head to close a footpath that
passed through his estate near his house, and open another a little
farther off. The pedestrians objected; the matter got into the courts,
and after protracted litigation the aristocrat was beaten. The path
could not be closed or moved. The memory of man ran not to the time
when there was not a footpath there, and every pedestrian should have
the right of way there still.

I remember the pleasure I had in the path that connects
Stratford-on-Avon with Shottery, Shakespeare's path when he went
courting Anne Hathaway. By the king's highway the distance is some
farther, so there is a well-worn path along the hedgerows and through
the meadows and turnip patches. The traveler in it has the privilege of
crossing the railroad track, an unusual privilege in England, and one
denied to the lord in his carriage, who must either go over or under
it. (It is a privilege, is it not, to be allowed the forbidden, even if
it be the privilege of being run over by the engine?) In strolling over
the South Downs, too, I was delighted to find that where the hill was
steepest some benefactor of the order of walkers had made notches in
the sward, so that the foot could bite the better and firmer; the path
became a kind of stairway, which I have no doubt the plowman respected.

When you see an English country church withdrawn, secluded, out of the
reach of wheels, standing amid grassy graves and surrounded by noble
trees, approached by paths and shaded lanes, you appreciate more than
ever this beautiful habit of the people. Only a race that knows how to
use its feet, and holds footpaths sacred, could put such a charm of
privacy and humility into such a structure. I think I should be tempted
to go to church myself if I saw all my neighbors starting off across
the fields or along paths that led to such charmed spots, and were sure
I should not be jostled or run over by the rival chariots of the
worshipers at the temple doors. I think that is what ails our religion;
humility and devoutness of heart leave one when he lays by his walking
shoes and walking clothes, and sets out for church drawn by something.

Indeed, I think it would be tantamount to an astonishing revival of
religion if the people would all walk to church on Sunday and walk home
again. Think how the stones would preach to them by the wayside; how
their benumbed minds would warm up beneath the friction of the gravel;
how their vain and foolish thoughts, their desponding thoughts, their
besetting demons of one kind and another, would drop behind them,
unable to keep up or to endure the fresh air! They would walk away from
their ennui, their worldly cares, their uncharitableness, their pride
of dress; for these devils always want to ride, while the simple
virtues are never so happy as when on foot. Let us walk by all means;
but if we will ride, get an ass.

Then the English claim that they are a more hearty and robust people
than we are. It is certain they are a plainer people, have plainer
tastes, dress plainer, build plainer, speak plainer, keep closer to
facts, wear broader shoes and coarser clothes, and place a lower
estimate on themselves,--all of which traits favor pedestrian habits.
The English grandee is not confined to his carriage; but if the
American aristocrat leaves his, he is ruined. Oh the weariness, the
emptiness, the plotting, the seeking rest and finding none, that go by
in the carriages! while your pedestrian is always cheerful, alert,
refreshed, with his heart in his hand and his hand free to all. He
looks down upon nobody; he is on the common level. His pores are all
open, his circulation is active, his digestion good. His heart is not
cold, nor are his faculties asleep. He is the only real traveler; he
alone tastes the "gay, fresh sentiment of the road." He is not
isolated, but is at one with things, with the farms and the industries
on either hand. The vital, universal currents play through him. He
knows the ground is alive; he feels the pulses of the wind, and reads
the mute language of things. His sympathies are all aroused; his senses
are continually reporting messages to his mind. Wind, frost, rain,
heat, cold, are something to him. He is not merely a spectator of the
panorama of nature, but a participator in it. He experiences the
country he passes through,--tastes it, feels it, absorbs it; the
traveler in his fine carriage sees it merely. This gives the fresh
charm to that class of books that may be called "Views Afoot," and to
the narratives of hunters, naturalists, exploring parties, etc. The
walker does not need a large territory. When you get into a railway car
you want a continent, the man in his carriage requires a township; but
a walker like Thoreau finds as much and more along the shores of Walden
Pond. The former, as it were, has merely time to glance at the headings
of the chapters, while the latter need not miss a line, and Thoreau
reads between the lines. Then the walker has the privilege of the
fields, the woods, the hills, the byways. The apples by the roadside
are for him, and the berries, and the spring of water, and the friendly
shelter; and if the weather is cold, he eats the frost grapes and the
persimmons, or even the white-meated turnip, snatched from the field he
passed through, with incredible relish.

Afoot and in the open road, one has a fair start in life at last.
There is no hindrance now. Let him put his best foot forward. He is on
the broadest human plane. This is on the level of all the great laws
and heroic deeds. From this platform he is eligible to any good
fortune. He was sighing for the golden age; let him walk to it. Every
step brings him nearer. The youth of the world is but a few days'
journey distant. Indeed, I know persons who think they have walked back
to that fresh aforetime of a single bright Sunday in autumn or early
spring. Before noon they felt its airs upon their cheeks, and by
nightfall, on the banks of some quiet stream, or along some path in the
wood, or on some hilltop, aver they have heard the voices and felt the
wonder and the mystery that so enchanted the early races of men.

I think if I could walk through a country, I should not only see many
things and have adventures that I should otherwise miss, but that I
should come into relations with that country at first hand, and with
the men and women in it, in a way that would afford the deepest
satisfaction. Hence I envy the good fortune of all walkers, and feel
like joining myself to every tramp that comes along. I am jealous of
the clergyman I read about the other day, who footed it from Edinburgh
to London, as poor Effie Deans did, carrying her shoes in her hand most
of the way, and over the ground that rugged Ben Jonson strode, larking
it to Scotland, so long ago. I read with longing of the pedestrian
feats of college youths, so gay and light-hearted, with their coarse
shoes on their feet and their knapsacks on their backs. It would have
been a good draught of the rugged cup to have walked with Wilson the
ornithologist, deserted by his companions, from Niagara to Philadelphia
through the snows of winter. I almost wish that I had been born to the
career of a German mechanic, that I might have had that delicious
adventurous year of wandering over my country before I settled down to
work. I think how much richer and firmer-grained life would be to me if
I could journey afoot through Florida and Texas, or follow the windings
of the Platte or the Yellowstone, or stroll through Oregon, or browse
for a season about Canada. In the bright, inspiring days of autumn I
only want the time and the companion to walk back to the natal spot,
the family nest, across two States and into the mountains of a third.
What adventures we would have by the way, what hard pulls, what
prospects from hills, what spectacles we would behold of night and day,
what passages with dogs, what glances, what peeps into windows, what
characters we should fall in with, and how seasoned and hardy we should
arrive at our destination!

For companion I should want a veteran of the war!  Those marches put
something into him I like. Even at this distance his mettle is but
little softened. As soon as he gets warmed up, it all comes back to
him. He catches your step and away you go, a gay, adventurous,
half-predatory couple. How quickly he falls into the old ways of jest
and anecdote and song! You may have known him for years without having
heard him hum an air, or more than casually revert to the subject of
his experience during the war. You have even questioned and
cross-questioned him without firing the train you wished. But get him
out on a vacation tramp, and you can walk it all out of him. By the
camp-fire at night, or swinging along the streams by day, song,
anecdote, adventure, come to the surface, and you wonder how your
companion has kept silent so long.

It is another proof of how walking brings out the true character of a
man. The devil never yet asked his victims to take a walk with him. You
will not be long in finding your companion out. All disguises will fall
away from him. As his pores open his character is laid bare. His
deepest and most private self will come to the top. It matters little
with whom you ride, so he be not a pickpocket; for both of you will,
very likely, settle down closer and firmer in your reserve, shaken down
like a measure of corn by the jolting as the journey proceeds. But
walking is a more vital copartnership; the relation is a closer and
more sympathetic one, and you do not feel like walking ten paces with a
stranger without speaking to him.

Hence the fastidiousness of the professional walker in choosing or
admitting a companion, and hence the truth of a remark of Emerson, that
you will generally fare better to take your dog than to invite your
neighbor. Your cur-dog is a true pedestrian, and your neighbor is very
likely a small politician. The dog enters thoroughly into the spirit of
the enterprise; he is not indifferent or preoccupied; he is constantly
sniffing adventure, laps at every spring, looks upon every field and
wood as a new world to be explored, is ever on some fresh trail, knows
something important will happen a little farther on, gazes with the
true wonder-seeing eyes, whatever the spot or whatever the road finds
it good to be there,--in short, is just that happy, delicious,
excursive vagabond that touches one at so many points, and whose human
prototype in a companion robs miles and leagues of half their power to
fatigue.

Persons who find themselves spent in a short walk to the market or the
post-office, or to do a little shopping, wonder how it is that their
pedestrian friends can compass so many weary miles and not fall down
from sheer exhaustion; ignorant of the fact that the walker is a kind
of projectile that drops far or near according to the expansive force
of the motive that set it in motion, and that it is easy enough to
regulate the charge according to the distance to be traversed. If I am
loaded to carry only one mile and am compelled to walk three, I
generally feel more fatigue than if I had walked six under the proper
impetus of preadjusted resolution. In other words, the will or
corporeal mainspring, whatever it be, is capable of being wound up to
different degrees of tension, so that one may walk all day nearly as
easy as half that time, if he is prepared beforehand. He knows his
task, and he measures and distributes his powers accordingly. It is for
this reason that an unknown road is always a long road. We cannot cast
the mental eye along it and see the end from the beginning. We are
fighting in the dark, and cannot take the measure of our foe. Every
step must be preordained and provided for in the mind. Hence also the
fact that to vanquish one mile in the woods seems equal to compassing
three in the open country. The furlongs are ambushed, and we magnify
them.

Then, again, how annoying to be told it is only five miles to the next
place when it is really eight or ten! We fall short nearly half the
distance, and are compelled to urge and roll the spent ball the rest of
the way. In such a case walking degenerates from a fine art to a
mechanic art; we walk merely; to get over the ground becomes the one
serious and engrossing thought; whereas success in walking is not to
let your right foot know what your left foot doeth. Your heart must
furnish such music that in keeping time to it your feet will carry you
around the globe without knowing it. The walker I would describe takes
no note of distance; his walk is a sally, a bonmot, an unspoken jeu
d'esprit; the ground is his butt, his provocation; it furnishes him the
resistance his body craves; he rebounds upon it, he glances off and
returns again, and uses it gayly as his tool.

I do not think I exaggerate the importance or the charms of
pedestrianism, or our need as a people to cultivate the art. I think it
would tend to soften the national manners, to teach us the meaning of
leisure, to acquaint us with the charms of the open air, to strengthen
and foster the tie between the race and the land. No one else looks out
upon the world so kindly and charitably as the pedestrian; no one else
gives and takes so much from the country he passes through. Next to the
laborer in the fields, the walker holds the closest relation to the
soil; and he holds a closer and more vital relation to nature because
he is freer and his mind more at leisure.

Man takes root at his feet, and at best he is no more than a potted
plant in his house or carriage till he has established communication
with the soil by the loving and magnetic touch of his soles to it. Then
the tie of association is born; then spring those invisible fibres and
rootlets through which character comes to smack of the soil, and which
make a man kindred to the spot of earth he inhabits.

The roads and paths you have walked along in summer and winter weather,
the fields and hills which you have looked upon in lightness and
gladness of heart, where fresh thoughts have come into your mind, or
some noble prospect has opened before you, and especially the quiet
ways where you have walked in sweet converse with your friend, pausing
under the trees, drinking at the spring,--henceforth they are not the
same; a new charm is added; those thoughts spring there perennial, your
friend walks there forever.

We have produced some good walkers and saunderers, and some noted
climbers; but as a staple recreation, as a daily practice, the mass of
the people dislike and despise walking. Thoreau said he was a good
horse, but a poor roadster. I chant the virtues of the roadster as
well. I sing of the sweetness of gravel, good sharp quartz-grit. It is
the proper condiment for the sterner seasons, and many a human gizzard
would be cured of half its ills by a suitable daily allowance of it. I
think Thoreau himself would have profited immensely by it. His diet was
too exclusively vegetable. A man cannot live on grass alone. If one has
been a lotus-eater all summer, he must turn gravel-eater in the fall
and winter. Those who have tried it know that gravel possesses an equal
though an opposite charm.

It spurs to action.  The foot tastes it and henceforth rests not.  The
joy of moving and surmounting, of attrition and progression, the thirst
for space, for miles and leagues of distance, for sights and prospects,
to cross mountains and thread rivers, and defy frost, heat, snow,
danger, difficulties, seizes it; and from that day forth its possessor
is enrolled in the noble army of walkers.



III. THE SNOW-WALKERS

He who marvels at the beauty of the world in summer will find equal
cause for wonder and admiration in winter. It is true the pomp and the
pageantry are swept away, but the essential elements remain,--the day
and the night, the mountain and the valley, the elemental play and
succession and the perpetual presence of the infinite sky. In winter
the stars seem to have rekindled their fires, the moon achieves a
fuller triumph, and the heavens wear a look of a more exalted
simplicity. Summer is more wooing and seductive, more versatile and
human, appeals to the affections and the sentiments, and fosters
inquiry and the art impulse. Winter is of a more heroic cast, and
addresses the intellect. The severe studies and disciplines come easier
in winter. One imposes larger tasks upon himself, and is less tolerant
of his own weaknesses.

The tendinous part of the mind, so to speak, is more developed in
winter; the fleshy, in summer. I should say winter had given the bone
and sinew to Literature, summer the tissues and blood.

The simplicity of winter has a deep moral.  The return of nature, after
such a career of splendor and prodigality, to habits so simple and
austere, is not lost upon either the head or the heart. It is the
philosopher coming back from the banquet and the wine to a cup of water
and a crust of bread.

And then this beautiful masquerade of the elements,--the novel
disguises our nearest friends put on! Here is another rain and another
dew, water that will not flow, nor spill, nor receive the taint of an
unclean vessel. And if we see truly, the same old beneficence and
willingness to serve lurk beneath all.

Look up at the miracle of the falling snow,--the air a dizzy maze of
whirling, eddying flakes, noiselessly transforming the world, the
exquisite crystals dropping in ditch and gutter, and disguising in the
same suit of spotless livery all objects upon which they fall. How
novel and fine the first drifts! The old, dilapidated fence is suddenly
set off with the most fantastic ruffles, scalloped and fluted after an
unheard-of fashion! Looking down a long line of decrepit stone wall, in
the trimming of which the wind had fairly run riot, I saw, as for the
first time, what a severe yet master artist old Winter is. Ah, a severe
artist! How stern the woods look, dark and cold and as rigid against
the horizon as iron!

All life and action upon the snow have an added emphasis and
significance. Every expression is underscored. Summer has few finer
pictures than this winter one of the farmer foddering his cattle from a
stack upon the clean snow,--the movement, the sharply defined figures,
the great green flakes of hay, the long file of patient cows, the
advance just arriving and pressing eagerly for the choicest
morsels,--and the bounty and providence it suggests. Or the chopper in
the woods,--the prostrate tree, the white new chips scattered about,
his easy triumph over the cold, his coat hanging to a limb, and the
clear, sharp ring of his axe. The woods are rigid and tense, keyed up
by the frost, and resound like a stringed instrument. Or the
road-breakers, sallying forth with oxen and sleds in the still, white
world, the day after the storm, to restore the lost track and demolish
the beleaguering drifts.

All sounds are sharper in winter; the air transmits better.  At night I
hear more distinctly the steady roar of the North Mountain. In summer
it is a sort of complacent purr, as the breezes stroke down its sides;
but in winter always the same low, sullen growl.

A severe artist!  No longer the canvas and the pigments, but the marble
and the chisel. When the nights are calm and the moon full, I go out to
gaze upon the wonderful purity of the moonlight and the snow. The air
is full of latent fire, and the cold warms me--after a different
fashion from that of the kitchen stove. The world lies about me in a
"trance of snow." The clouds are pearly and iridescent, and seem the
farthest possible remove from the condition of a storm,--the ghosts of
clouds, the indwelling beauty freed from all dross. I see the hills,
bulging with great drifts, lift themselves up cold and white against
the sky, the black lines of fences here and there obliterated by the
depth of the snow. Presently a fox barks away up next the mountain, and
I imagine I can almost see him sitting there, in his furs, upon the
illuminated surface, and looking down in my direction. As I listen, one
answers him from behind the woods in the valley. What a wild winter
sound, wild and weird, up among the ghostly hills! Since the wolf has
ceased to howl upon these mountains, and the panther to scream, there
is nothing to be compared with it. So wild! I get up in the middle of
the night to hear it. It is refreshing to the ear, and one delights to
know that such wild creatures are among us. At this season Nature makes
the most of every throb of life that can withstand her severity. How
heartily she indorses this fox! In what bold relief stand out the lives
of all walkers of the snow! The snow is a great tell-tale, and blabs as
effectually as it obliterates. I go into the woods, and know all that
has happened. I cross the fields, and if only a mouse has visited his
neighbor, the fact is chronicled.

The red fox is the only species that abounds in my locality; the little
gray fox seems to prefer a more rocky and precipitous country, and a
less rigorous climate; the cross fox is occasionally seen, and there
are traditions of the silver gray among the oldest hunters. But the red
fox is the sportsman's prize, and the only fur-bearer worthy of note in
these mountains.
[Footnote: A spur of the catskills.]

I go out in the morning, after a fresh fall of snow, and see at all
points where he has crossed the road. Here he has leisurely passed
within rifle-range of the house, evidently reconnoitring the premises
with an eye to the hen-roost. That clear, sharp track,--there is no
mistaking it for the clumsy footprint of a little dog. All his wildness
and agility are photographed in it. Here he has taken fright, or
suddenly recollected an engagement, and in long, graceful leaps, barely
touching the fence, has gone careering up the hill as fleet as the
wind.

The wild, buoyant creature, how beautiful he is!  I had often seen his
dead carcass, and at a distance had witnessed the hounds drive him
across the upper fields; but the thrill and excitement of meeting him
in his wild freedom in the woods were unknown to me till, one cold
winter day, drawn thither by the baying of a hound, I stood near the
summit of the mountain, waiting a renewal of the sound, that I might
determine the course of the dog and choose my position,--stimulated by
the ambition of all young Nimrods to bag some notable game. Long I
waited, and patiently, till, chilled and benumbed, I was about to turn
back, when, hearing a slight noise, I looked up and beheld a most
superb fox, loping along with inimitable grace and ease, evidently
disturbed, but not pursued by the hound, and so absorbed in his private
meditations that he failed to see me, though I stood transfixed with
amazement and admiration, not ten yards distant. I took his measure at
a glance,--a large male, with dark legs, and massive tail tipped with
white,--a most magnificent creature; but so astonished and fascinated
was I by this sudden appearance and matchless beauty, that not till I
had caught the last glimpse of him, as he disappeared over a knoll, did
I awake to my duty as a sportsman, and realize what an opportunity to
distinguish myself I had unconsciously let slip. I clutched my gun,
half angrily, as if it was to blame, and went home out, of humor with
myself and all fox-kind. But I have since thought better of the
experience, and concluded that I bagged the game after all, the best
part of it, and fleeced Reynard of something more valuable than his
fur, without his knowledge.

This is thoroughly a winter sound,--this voice of the hound upon the
mountain,--and one that is music to many ears. The long trumpet-like
bay, heard for a mile or more,--now faintly back in the deep recesses
of the mountain,--now distinct, but still faint, as the hound comes
over some prominent point and the wind favors,--anon entirely lost in
the gully,--then breaking out again much nearer, and growing more and
more pronounced as the dog approaches, till, when he comes around the
brow of the mountain, directly above you, the barking is loud and
sharp. On he goes along the northern spur, his voice rising and sinking
as the wind and the lay of the ground modify it, till lost to hearing.

The fox usually keeps half a mile ahead, regulating his speed by that
of the hound, occasionally pausing a moment to divert himself with a
mouse, or to contemplate the landscape, or to listen for his pursuer.
If the hound press him too closely, he leads off from mountain to
mountain, and so generally escapes the hunter; but if the pursuit be
slow, he plays about some ridge or peak, and falls a prey, though not
an easy one, to the experienced sportsman.

A most spirited and exciting chase occurs when the farm-dog gets close
upon one in the open field, as sometimes happens in the early morning.
The fox relies so confidently upon his superior speed, that I imagine
he half tempts the dog to the race. But if the dog be a smart one, and
their course lie downhill, over smooth ground, Reynard must put his
best foot forward, and then sometimes suffer the ignominy of being run
over by his pursuer, who, however, is quite unable to pick him up,
owing to the speed. But when they mount the hill, or enter the woods,
the superior nimbleness and agility of the fox tell at once, and he
easily leaves the dog far in his rear. For a cur less than his own size
he manifests little fear, especially if the two meet alone, remote from
the house. In such cases, I have seen first one turn tail, then the
other.

A novel spectacle often occurs in summer, when the female has young.
You are rambling on the mountain, accompanied by your dog, when you are
startled by that wild, half-threatening squall, and in a moment
perceive your dog, with inverted tail, and shame and confusion in his
looks, sneaking toward you, the old fox but a few rods in his rear. You
speak to him sharply, when he bristles up, turns about, and, barking,
starts off vigorously, as if to wipe out the dishonor; but in a moment
comes sneaking back more abashed than ever, and owns himself unworthy
to be called a dog. The fox fairly shames him out of the woods. The
secret of the matter is her sex, though her conduct, for the honor of
the fox be it said, seems to be prompted only by solicitude for the
safety of her young.

One of the most notable features of the fox is his large and massive
tail. Seen running on the snow at a distance, his tail is quite as
conspicuous as his body; and, so far from appearing a burden, seems to
contribute to his lightness and buoyancy. It softens the outline of his
movements, and repeats or continues to the eye the ease and poise of
his carriage. But, pursued by the hound on a wet, thawy day, it often
becomes so heavy and bedraggled as to prove a serious inconvenience,
and compels him to take refuge in his den. He is very loath to do this;
both his pride and the traditions of his race stimulate him to run it
out, and win by fair superiority of wind and speed; and only a wound or
a heavy and moppish tail will drive him to avoid the issue in this
manner.

To learn his surpassing shrewdness and cunning, attempt to take him
with a trap. Rogue that he is, he always suspects some trick, and one
must be more of a fox than he is himself to overreach him. At first
sight it would appear easy enough. With apparent indifference he
crosses your path, or walks in your footsteps in the field, or travels
along the beaten highway, or lingers in the vicinity of stacks and
remote barns. Carry the carcass of a pig, or a fowl, or a dog, to a
distant field in midwinter, and in a few nights his tracks cover the
snow about it.

The inexperienced country youth, misled by this seeming carelessness of
Reynard, suddenly conceives a project to enrich himself with fur, and
wonders that the idea has not occurred to him before, and to others. I
knew a youthful yeoman of this kind, who imagined he had found a mine
of wealth on discovering on a remote side-hill, between two woods, a
dead porker, upon which it appeared all the foxes of the neighborhood
had nightly banqueted. The clouds were burdened with snow; and as the
first flakes commenced to eddy down, he set out, trap and broom in
hand, already counting over in imagination the silver quarters he would
receive for his first fox-skin. With the utmost care, and with a
palpitating heart, he removed enough of the trodden snow to allow the
trap to sink below the surface. Then, carefully sifting the light
element over it and sweeping his tracks full, he quickly withdrew,
laughing exultingly over the little surprise he had prepared for the
cunning rogue. The elements conspired to aid him, and the falling snow
rapidly obliterated all vestiges of his work. The next morning at dawn
he was on his way to bring in his fur. The snow had done its work
effectually, and, he believed, had kept his secret well. Arrived in
sight of the locality, he strained his vision to make out his prize
lodged against the fence at the foot of the hill. Approaching nearer,
the surface was unbroken, and doubt usurped the place of certainty in
his mind. A slight mound marked the site of the porker, but there was
no footprint near it. Looking up the hill, he saw where Reynard had
walked leisurely down toward his wonted bacon till within a few yards
of it, when he had wheeled, and with prodigious strides disappeared in
the woods. The young trapper saw at a glance what a comment this was
upon his skill in the art, and, indignantly exhuming the iron, he
walked home with it, the stream of silver quarters suddenly setting in
another direction.

The successful trapper commences in the fall, or before the first deep
snow. In a field not too remote, with an old axe he cuts a small place,
say ten inches by fourteen, in the frozen ground, and removes the earth
to the depth of three or four inches, then fills the cavity with dry
ashes, in which are placed bits of roasted cheese. Reynard is very
suspicious at first, and gives the place a wide berth. It looks like
design, and he will see how the thing behaves before he approaches too
near. But the cheese is savory and the cold severe. He ventures a
little closer every night, until he can reach and pick a piece from the
surface. Emboldened by success, like other mortals, he presently digs
freely among the ashes, and, finding a fresh supply of the delectable
morsels every night, is soon thrown off his guard and his suspicions
quite lulled. After a week of baiting in this manner, and on the eve of
a light fall of snow, the trapper carefully conceals his trap in the
bed, first smoking it thoroughly with hemlock boughs to kill or
neutralize the smell of the iron. If the weather favors and the proper
precautions have been taken, he may succeed, though the chances are
still greatly against him.

Reynard is usually caught very lightly, seldom more than the ends of
his toes being between the jaws. He sometimes works so cautiously as to
spring the trap without injury even to his toes, or may remove the
cheese night after night without even springing it. I knew an old
trapper who, on finding himself outwitted in this manner, tied a bit of
cheese to the pan, and next morning had poor Reynard by the jaw. The
trap is not fastened, but only encumbered with a clog, and is all the
more sure in its hold by yielding to every effort of the animal to
extricate himself.

When Reynard sees his captor approaching, he would fain drop into a
mouse-hole to render himself invisible. He crouches to the ground and
remains perfectly motionless until he perceives himself discovered,
when he makes one desperate and final effort to escape, but ceases all
struggling as you come up, and behaves in a manner that stamps him a
very timid warrior,--cowering to the earth with a mingled look of
shame, guilt, and abject fear. A young farmer told me of tracing one
with his trap to the border of a wood, where he discovered the cunning
rogue trying to hide by embracing a small tree. Most animals, when
taken in a trap, show fight; but Reynard has more faith in the
nimbleness of his feet than in the terror of his teeth.

Entering the woods, the number and variety of the tracks contrast
strongly with the rigid, frozen aspect of things. Warm jets of life
still shoot and I play amid this snowy desolation. Fox-tracks are far
less numerous than in the fields; but those of hares, skunks,
partridges, squirrels, and mice abound. The mice tracks are very
pretty, and look like a sort of fantastic stitching on the coverlid of
the snow. One is curious to know what brings these tiny creatures from
their retreats; they do not seem to be in quest of food, but rather to
be traveling about for pleasure or sociability, though always going
post-haste, and linking stump with stump and tree with tree by fine,
hurried strides. That is when they travel openly; but they have hidden
passages and winding galleries under the snow, which undoubtedly are
their main avenues of communication. Here and there these passages rise
so near the surface as to be covered by only a frail arch of snow, and
a slight ridge betrays their course to the eye. I know him well. He is
known to the farmer as the "deer mouse," to the naturalist as the
white-footed mouse,--a very beautiful creature, nocturnal in his
habits, with large ears, and large, fine eyes full of a wild, harmless
look. He is daintily marked, with white feet and a white belly. When
disturbed by day he is very easily captured, having none of the cunning
or viciousness of the common Old World mouse.

It is he who, high in the hollow trunk of some tree, lays by a store of
beechnuts for winter use. Every nut is carefully shelled, and the
cavity that serves as storehouse lined with grass and leaves. The
wood-chopper frequently squanders this precious store. I have seen half
a peck taken from one tree, as clean and white as if put up by the most
delicate hands,--as they were. How long it must have taken the little
creature to collect this quantity, to hull them one by one, and convey
them up to his fifth-story chamber! He is not confined to the woods,
but is quite as common in the fields, particularly in the fall, amid
the corn and potatoes. When routed by the plow, I have seen the old one
take flight with half a dozen young hanging to her teats, and with such
reckless speed that some of the young would lose their hold and fly off
amid the weeds. Taking refuge in a stump with the rest of her family,
the anxious mother would presently come back and hunt up the missing
ones.

The snow-walkers are mostly night-walkers also, and the record they
leave upon the snow is the main clew one has to their life and doings.
The hare is nocturnal in its habits, and though a very lively creature
at night, with regular courses and run-ways through the wood, is
entirely quiet by day. Timid as he is, he makes little effort to
conceal himself, usually squatting beside a log, stump, or tree, and
seeming to avoid rocks and ledges, where he might be partially housed
from the cold and the snow, but where also--and this consideration
undoubtedly determines his choice--he would be more apt fall a prey to
his enemies. In this, as well as in many other respects, he differs
from the rabbit proper: he never burrows in the ground, or takes refuge
in a den or hole, when pursued. If caught in the open fields, he is
much confused and easily overtaken by the dog; but in the woods, he
leaves him at a bound. In summer, when first disturbed, he beats the
ground violently with his feet, by which means he would express to you
his surprise or displeasure; it is a dumb way he has of scolding. After
leaping a few yards, he pauses an instant, as if to determine the
degree of danger, and then hurries away with a much lighter tread.

His feet are like great pads, and his track has little of the sharp,
articulated expression of Reynard's, or of animals that climb or dig.
Yet it is very pretty like all the rest, and tells its own tale. There
is nothing bold or vicious or vulpine in it, and his timid, harmless
character is published at every leap. He abounds in dense woods,
preferring localities filled with a small undergrowth of beech and
birch, upon the bark of which he feeds. Nature is rather partial to
him, and matches his extreme local habits and character with a suit
that corresponds with his surroundings,--reddish gray in summer and
white in winter.

The sharp-rayed track of the partridge adds another figure to this
fantastic embroidery upon the winter snow. Her course is a clear,
strong line, sometimes quite wayward, but generally very direct,
steering for the densest, most impenetrable places,--leading you over
logs and through brush, alert and expectant, till, suddenly, she bursts
up a few yards from you, and goes humming through the trees,--the
complete triumph of endurance and vigor. Hardy native bird, may your
tracks never be fewer, or your visits to the birch-tree less frequent!

The squirrel tracks--sharp, nervous, and wiry--have their histories
also. But how rarely we see squirrels in winter! The naturalists say
they are mostly torpid; yet evidently that little pocket-faced
depredator, the chipmunk, was not carrying buckwheat for so many days
to his hole for nothing: was he anticipating a state of torpidity, or
providing against the demands of a very active appetite? Red and gray
squirrels are more or less active all winter, though very shy, and, I
am inclined to think, partially nocturnal in their habits. Here a gray
one has just passed,--came down that tree and went up this; there he
dug for a beechnut, and left the burr on the snow. How did he know
where to dig? During an unusually severe winter I have known him to
make long journeys to a barn, in a remote field, where wheat was
stored. How did he know there was wheat there? In attempting to return,
the adventurous creature was frequently run down and caught in the deep
snow.

His home is in the trunk of some old birch or maple, with an entrance
far up amid the branches. In the spring he builds himself a
summer-house of small leafy twigs in the top of a neighboring beech,
where the young are reared and much of the time is passed. But the
safer retreat in the maple is not abandoned, and both old and young
resort thither in the fall, or when danger threatens. Whether this
temporary residence amid the branches is for elegance or pleasure, or
for sanitary reasons or domestic convenience, the naturalist has
forgotten to mention.

The elegant creature, so cleanly in its habits, so graceful in its
carriage, so nimble and daring in its movements, excites feelings of
admiration akin to those awakened by the birds and the fairer forms of
nature. His passage through the trees is almost a flight. Indeed, the
flying squirrel has little or no advantage over him, and in speed and
nimbleness cannot compare with him at all. If he miss his footing and
fall, he is sure to catch on the next branch; if the connection be
broken, he leaps recklessly for the nearest spray or limb, and secures
his hold, even if it be by the aid of his teeth.

His career of frolic and festivity begins in the fall, after the birds
have left us and the holiday spirit of nature has commenced to subside.
How absorbing the pastime of the sportsman who goes to the woods in the
still October morning in quest of him! You step lightly across the
threshold of the forest, and sit down upon the first log or rock to
await the signals. It is so still that the ear suddenly seems to have
acquired new powers, and there is no movement to confuse the eye.
Presently you hear the rustling of a branch, and see it sway or spring
as the squirrel leaps from or to it; or else you hear a disturbance in
the dry leaves, and mark one running upon the ground. He has probably
seen the intruder, and, not liking his stealthy movements, desires to
avoid a nearer acquaintance. Now he mounts a stump to see if the way is
clear, then pauses a moment at the foot of a tree to take his bearings,
his tail, as he skims along, undulating behind him, and adding to the
easy grace and dignity of his movements. Or else you are first advised
of his proximity by the dropping of a false nut, or the fragments of
the shucks rattling upon the leaves. Or, again, after contemplating you
awhile unobserved, and making up his mind that you are not dangerous,
he strikes an attitude on a branch, and commences to quack and bark,
with an accompanying movement of his tail. Late in the afternoon, when
the same stillness reigns, the same scenes are repeated. There is a
black variety, quite rare, but mating freely with the gray, from which
he seems to be distinguished only in color.

The track of the red squirrel may be known by its smaller size.  He is
more common and less dignified than the gray, and oftener guilty of
petty larceny about the barns and grain-fields. He is most abundant in
old barkpeelings, and low, dilapidated hemlocks, from which he makes
excursions to the fields and orchards, spinning along the tops of the
fences, which afford not only convenient lines of communication, but a
safe retreat if danger threatens. He loves to linger about the orchard;
and, sitting upright on the topmost stone in the wall, or on the
tallest stake in the fence, chipping up an apple for the seeds, his
tail conforming to the curve of his back, his paws shifting and turning
the apple, he is a pretty sight, and his bright, pert appearance atones
for all the mischief he does. At home, in the woods, he is the most
frolicsome and loquacious. The appearance of anything unusual, if,
after contemplating it a moment, he concludes it not dangerous, excites
his unbounded mirth and ridicule, and he snickers and chatters, hardly
able to contain himself; now darting up the trunk of a tree and
squealing in derision, then hopping into position on a limb and dancing
to the music of his own cackle, and all for your special benefit.

There is something very human in this apparent mirth and mockery of the
squirrels. It seems to be a sort of ironical laughter, and implies
self-conscious pride and exultation in the laugher. "What a ridiculous
thing you are, to be sure!" he seems to say; "how clumsy and awkward,
and what a poor show for a tail! Look at me, look at me!"--and he
capers about in his best style. Again, he would seem to tease you and
provoke your attention; then suddenly assumes a tone of good-natured,
childlike defiance and derision. That pretty little imp, the chipmunk,
will sit on the stone above his den and defy you, as plainly as if he
said so, to catch him before he can get into his hole if you can. You
hurl a stone at him, and "No you didn't!" comes up from the depth of
his retreat.

In February another track appears upon the snow, slender and delicate,
about a third larger than that of the gray squirrel, indicating no
haste or speed, but, on the contrary, denoting the most imperturbable
ease and leisure, the footprints so close together that the trail
appears like a chain of curiously carved links. Sir Mephitis mephitica,
or, in plain English, the skunk, has awakened from his six weeks' nap,
and come out into society again. He is a nocturnal traveler, very bold
and impudent, coming quite up to the barn and outbuildings, and
sometimes taking up his quarters for the season under the haymow. There
is no such word as hurry in his dictionary, as you may see by his path
upon the snow. He has a very sneaking, insinuating way, and goes
creeping about the fields and woods, never once in a perceptible degree
altering his gait, and, if a fence crosses his course, steers for a
break or opening to avoid climbing. He is too indolent even to dig his
own hole, but appropriates that of a woodchuck, or hunts out a crevice
in the rocks, from which he extends his rambling in all directions,
preferring damp, thawy weather. He has very little discretion or
cunning, and holds a trap in utter contempt, stepping into it as soon
as beside it, relying implicitly for defense against all forms of
danger upon the unsavory punishment he is capable of inflicting. He is
quite indifferent to both man and beast, and will not hurry himself to
get out of the way of either. Walking through the summer fields at
twilight, I have come near stepping upon him, and was much the more
disturbed of the two. When attacked in the open field he confounds the
plans of his enemies by the unheard-of tactics of exposing his rear
rather than his front. "Come if you dare," he says, and his attitude
makes even the farm-dog pause. After a few encounters of this kind, and
if you entertain the usual hostility towards him, your mode of attack
will speedily resolve itself into moving about him in a circle, the
radius of which will be the exact distance at which you can hurl a
stone with accuracy and effect.

He has a secret to keep and knows it, and is careful not to betray
himself until he can do so with the most telling effect. I have known
him to preserve his serenity even when caught in a steel trap, and look
the very picture of injured innocence, manoeuvring carefully and
deliberately to extricate his foot from the grasp of the naughty jaws.
Do not by any means take pity on him, and lend a helping hand!

How pretty his face and head!  How fine and delicate his teeth, like a
weasel's or a cat's! When about a third grown, he looks so well that
one covets him for a pet. He is quite precocious, however, and capable,
even at this tender age, of making a very strong appeal to your sense
of smell.

No animal is more cleanly in his habits than he.  He is not an awkward
boy who cuts his own face with his whip; and neither his flesh nor his
fur hints the weapon with which he is armed. The most silent creature
known to me, he makes no sound, so far as I have observed, save a
diffuse, impatient noise, like that produced by beating your hand with
a whisk-broom, when the farm-dog has discovered his retreat in the
stone fence. He renders himself obnoxious to the farmer by his
partiality for hens' eggs and young poultry. He is a confirmed epicure,
and at plundering hen-roosts an expert. Not the full-grown fowls are
his victims, but the youngest and most tender. At night Mother Hen
receives under her maternal wings a dozen newly hatched chickens, and
with much pride and satisfaction feels them all safely tucked away in
her feathers. In the morning she is walking about disconsolately,
attended by only two or three of all that pretty brood. What has
happened?  Where are they gone?  That pickpocket, Sir Mephitis, could
solve the mystery. Quietly has he approached, under cover of darkness,
and one by one relieved her of her precious charge. Look closely and
you will see their little yellow legs and beaks, or part of a mangled
form, lying about on the ground. Or, before the hen has hatched, he may
find her out, and, by the same sleight of hand, remove every egg,
leaving only the empty blood-stained shells to witness against him. The
birds, especially the ground-builders, suffer in like manner from his
plundering propensities.

The secretion upon which he relies for defense, and which is the chief
source of his unpopularity, while it affords good reasons against
cultivating him as a pet, and mars his attractiveness as game, is by no
means the greatest indignity that can be offered to a nose. It is a
rank, living smell, and has none of the sickening qualities of disease
or putrefaction. Indeed, I think a good smeller will enjoy its most
refined intensity. It approaches the sublime, and makes the nose
tingle. It is tonic and bracing, and, I can readily believe, has rare
medicinal qualities. I do not recommend its use as eyewater, though an
old farmer assures me it has undoubted virtues when thus applied.
Hearing, one night, a disturbance among his hens, he rushed suddenly
out to catch the thief, when Sir Mephitis, taken by surprise, and no
doubt much annoyed at being interrupted, discharged the vials of his
wrath full in the farmers face, and with such admirable effect that,
for a few minutes, he was completely blinded, and powerless to revenge
himself upon the rogue, who embraced the opportunity to make good his
escape; but he declared that afterwards his eyes felt as if purged by
fire, and his sight was much clearer.

In March that brief summary of a bear, the raccoon, comes out of his
den in the ledges, and leaves his sharp digitigrade track upon the
snow,--traveling not unfrequently in pairs,--a lean, hungry couple,
bent on pillage and plunder. They have an unenviable time of
it,--feasting in the summer and fall, hibernating in winter, and
starving in spring. In April I have found the young of the previous
year creeping around the fields, so reduced by starvation as to be
quite helpless, and offering no resistance to my taking them up by the
tail and carrying them home.

The old ones also become very much emaciated, and come boldly up to the
barn or other outbuildings in quest of food. I remember, one morning in
early spring, of hearing old Cuff, the farm-dog, barking vociferously
before it was yet light. When we got up we discovered him, at the foot
of an ash-tree standing about thirty rods from the house, looking up at
some gray objects in the leafless branches, and by his manners and his
voice evincing great impatience that we were so tardy in coming to his
assistance. Arrived on the spot, we saw in the tree a coon of unusual
size. One bold climber proposed to go up and shake him down. This was
what old Cuff wanted, and he fairly bounded with delight as he saw his
young master shinning up the tree. Approaching within eight or ten feet
of the coon, he seized the branch to which it clung and shook long and
fiercely. But the coon was in no danger of losing its hold, and, when
the climber paused to renew his hold, it turned toward him with a
growl, and showed very clearly a purpose to advance to the attack. This
caused his pursuer to descend to the ground with all speed. When the
coon was finally brought down with a gun, he fought the dog, which was
a large, powerful animal, with great fury, returning bite for bite for
some moments; and after a quarter of an hour had elapsed and his
unequal antagonist had shaken him as a terrier does a rat, making his
teeth meet through the small of his back, the coon still showed fight.

They are very tenacious of life, and like the badger will always whip a
dog of their own size and weight. A woodchuck can bite severely, having
teeth that cut like chisels, but a coon has agility and power of limb
as well.

They are considered game only in the fall, or towards the close of
summer, when they become fat. and their flesh sweet. At this time,
cooning in the remote interior is a famous pastime. As this animal is
entirely nocturnal in its habits, it is hunted only at night. A piece
of corn on some remote side-hill near the mountain, or between two
pieces of woods, is most apt to be frequented by them. While the corn
is yet green they pull the ears down like hogs, and, tearing open the
sheathing of husks, eat the tender, succulent kernels, bruising and
destroying much more than they devour. Sometimes their ravages are a
matter of serious concern to the farmer. But every such neighborhood
has its coon-dog, and the boys and young men dearly love the sport. The
party sets out about eight or nine o'clock of a dark, moonless night,
and stealthily approaches the cornfield. The dog knows his business,
and when he is put into a patch of corn and told to "hunt them up" he
makes a thorough search, and will not be misled by any other scent. You
hear him rattling through the corn, hither and yon, with great speed.
The coons prick up their ears, and leave on the opposite side of the
field. In the stillness you may sometimes hear a single stone rattle on
the wall as they hurry toward the woods. If the dog finds nothing, he
comes back to his master in a short time, and says in his dumb way, "No
coon there." But if he strikes a trail, you presently hear a louder
rattling on the stone wall, and then a hurried bark as he enters the
woods, followed in a few minutes by loud and repeated barking as he
reaches the foot of the tree in which the coon has taken refuge. Then
follows a pellmell rush of the cooning party up the hill, into the
woods, through the brush and the darkness, falling over prostrate
trees, pitching into gullies and hollows, losing hats and tearing
clothes, till finally, guided by the baying of the faithful dog, the
tree is reached. The first thing now in order is to kindle a fire, and,
if its light reveals the coon, to shoot him; if not, to fell the tree
with an axe. If this happens to be too great a sacrifice of timber and
of strength, to sit down at the foot of the tree till morning.

But with March our interest in these phases of animal life, which
winter has so emphasized and brought out, begins to decline. Vague
rumors are afloat in the air of a great and coming change. We are eager
for Winter to be gone, since he, too, is fugitive and cannot keep his
place. Invisible hands deface his icy statuary; his chisel has lost its
cunning. The drifts, so pure and exquisite, are now earth-stained and
weather-worn,--the flutes and scallops, and fine, firm lines, all gone;
and what was a grace and an ornament to the hills is now a
disfiguration. Like worn and unwashed linen appear the remains of that
spotless robe with which he clothed the world as his bride.

But he will not abdicate without a struggle.  Day after day he rallies
his scattered forces, and night after night pitches his white tents on
the hills, and would fain regain his lost ground; but the young prince
in every encounter prevails. Slowly and reluctantly the gray old hero
retreats up the mountain, till finally the south rain comes in earnest,
and in a night he is dead.



IV. THE FOX

I have already spoken of the fox at some length, but it will take a
chapter by itself to do half justice to his portrait.

He furnishes, perhaps, the only instance that can be cited of a
fur-bearing animal that not only holds its own, but that actually
increases in the face of the means that are used for its extermination.
The beaver, for instance, was gone before the earliest settlers could
get a sight of him; and even the mink and marten are now only rarely
seen, or not seen at all, in places where they were once abundant.

But the fox has survived civilization, and in some localities is no
doubt more abundant now than in the time of the Revolution. For half a
century at least he has been almost the only prize, in the way of fur,
that was to be found on our mountains, and he has been hunted and
trapped and waylaid, sought for as game and pursued in enmity, taken by
fair means and by foul, and yet there seems not the slightest danger of
the species becoming extinct.

One would think that a single hound in a neighborhood, filling the
mountains with his bayings, and leaving no nook or byway of them
unexplored, was enough to drive and scare every fox from the country.
But not so. Indeed, I am almost tempted to say, the more hounds, the
more foxes.

I recently spent a summer month in a mountainous district in the State
of New York, where, from its earliest settlement, the red fox has been
the standing prize for skill in the use of the trap and gun. At the
house where I was staying were two foxhounds, and a neighbor half a
mile distant had a third. There were many others in the township, and
in season they were well employed, too; but the three spoken of,
attended by their owners, held high carnival on the mountains in the
immediate vicinity. And many were the foxes that, winter after winter,
fell before them, twenty-five having been shot, the season before my
visit, on one small range alone. And yet the foxes were apparently
never more abundant than they were that summer, and never bolder,
coming at night within a few rods of the house, and of the unchained
alert hounds, and making havoc among the poultry.

One morning a large, fat goose was found minus her head and otherwise
mangled. Both hounds had disappeared, and, as they did not come back
till near night, it was inferred that they had cut short Reynard's
repast, and given him a good chase into the bargain. But next night he
was back again, and this time got safely off with the goose. A couple
of nights after he must have come with recruits, for next morning three
large goslings were reported missing. The silly geese now got it
through their noddles that there was danger about, and every night
thereafter came close up to the house to roost.

A brood of turkeys, the old one tied to a tree a few rods to the rear
of the house, were the next objects of attack. The predaceous rascal
came, as usual, in the latter half of the night. I happened to be
awake, and heard the helpless turkey cry "quit," "quit," with great
emphasis. Another sleeper, on the floor above me, who, it seems, had
been sleeping with one ear awake for several nights in apprehension for
the safety of his turkeys, heard the sound also, and instantly divined
its cause. I heard the window open and a voice summon the dogs. A loud
bellow was the response, which caused Reynard to take himself off in a
hurry. A moment more, and the mother turkey would have shared the fate
of the geese. There she lay at the end of her tether, with extended
wings, bitten and rumpled. The young ones, roosting in a row on the
fence near by, had taken flight on the first alarm.

Turkeys, retaining many of their wild instincts, are less easily
captured by the fox than any other of our domestic fowls. On the
slightest show of danger they take to wing, and it is not unusual, in
the locality of which I speak, to find them in the morning perched in
the most unwonted places, as on the peak of the barn or hay-shed, or on
the tops of the apple-trees, their tails spread and their manners
showing much excitement. Perchance one turkey is minus her tail, the
fox having succeeded in getting only a mouthful of quills.

As the brood grows and their wings develop, they wander far from the
house in quest of grasshoppers. At such times they are all watchfulness
and suspicion. Crossing the fields one day, attended by a dog that much
resembled a fox, I came suddenly upon a brood about one third grown,
which were feeding in a pasture just beyond a wood. It so happened that
they caught sight of the dog without seeing me, when instantly, with
the celerity of wild game, they launched into the air, and, while the
old one perched upon a treetop, as if to keep an eye on the supposed
enemy, the young went sailing over the trees toward home.

The two hounds above referred to, accompanied by a cur-dog, whose
business it was to mind the farm, but who took as much delight in
running away from prosy duty as if he had been a schoolboy, would
frequently steal off and have a good hunt all by themselves, just for
the fun of the thing, I suppose. I more than half suspect that it was
as a kind of taunt or retaliation, that Reynard came and took the geese
from under their very noses. One morning they went off and stayed till
the afternoon of the next day; they ran the fox all day and all night,
the hounds baying at every jump, the cur-dog silent and tenacious. When
the trio returned, they came dragging themselves along, stiff,
footsore, gaunt, and hungry. For a day or two afterward they lay about
the kennels, seeming to dread nothing so much as the having to move.
The stolen hunt was their "spree," their "bender," and of course they
must take time to get over it.

Some old hunters think the fox enjoys the chase as much as the hound,
especially when the latter runs slow, as the best hounds do. The fox
will wait for the hound, will sit down and listen, or play about,
crossing and recrossing and doubling upon his track, as if enjoying a
mischievous consciousness of the perplexity he would presently cause
his pursuer. It is evident, however, that the fox does not always have
his share of the fun: before a swift dog, or in a deep snow, or on a
wet day, when his tail gets heavy, he must put his best foot forward.
As a last resort he "holes up." Sometimes he resorts to numerous
devices to mislead and escape the dog altogether. He will walk in the
bed of a small creek, or on a rail-fence. I heard of an instance of a
fox, hard and long pressed, that took to a rail-fence, and, after
walking some distance, made a leap to one side to a hollow stump, in
the cavity of which he snugly stowed himself. The ruse succeeded, and
the dogs lost the trail; but the hunter, coming up, passed by chance
near the stump, when out bounded the fox, his cunning availing him less
than he deserved. On another occasion the fox took to the public road,
and stepped with great care and precision into a sleigh-track. The
hard, polished snow took no imprint of the light foot, and the scent
was no doubt less than it would have been on a rougher surface. Maybe,
also, the rogue had considered the chances of another sleigh coming
along, before the hound, and obliterating the trail entirely.

Audubon tells us of a certain fox, which, when started by the hounds,
always managed to elude them at a certain point. Finally the hunter
concealed himself in the locality, to discover, if possible, the trick.
Presently along came the fox, and, making a leap to one side, ran up
the trunk of a fallen tree which had lodged some feet from the ground,
and concealed himself in the top. In a few minutes the hounds came up,
and in their eagerness passed some distance beyond the point, and then
went still farther, looking for the lost trail. Then the fox hastened
down, and, taking his back-track, fooled the dogs completely.

I was told of a silver-gray fox in northern New York, which, when
pursued by the hounds, would run till it had hunted up another fox, or
the fresh trail of one, when it would so manoeuvre that the hound would
invariably be switched off on the second track.

In cold, dry weather the fox will sometimes elude the hound, at least
delay him much, by taking to a bare, plowed field. The hard dry earth
seems not to retain a particle of the scent, and the hound gives a
loud, long, peculiar bark, to signify he has trouble. It is now his
turn to show his wit, which he often does by passing completely around
the field, and resuming the trail again where it crosses the fence or a
strip of snow.

The fact that any dry, hard surface is unfavorable to the hound
suggests, in a measure, the explanation of the wonderful faculty that
all dogs in a degree possess to track an animal by the scent of the
foot alone. Did you ever think why a dog's nose is always wet? Examine
the nose of a foxhound, for instance; how very moist and sensitive!
Cause this moisture to dry up, and the dog would be as powerless to
track an animal as you are! The nose of the cat, you may observe, is
but a little moist, and, as you know, her sense of smell is far
inferior to that of the dog. Moisten your own nostrils and lips, and
this sense is plainly sharpened. The sweat of a dog's nose, therefore,
is no doubt a vital element in its power, and, without taking a very
long logical stride, we may infer how much a damp, rough surface aids
him in tracking game.

A fox hunt in this country is, of course, quite a different thing from
what it is in England, where all the squires and noblemen of a borough,
superbly mounted, go riding over the country, guided by the yelling
hounds, till the fox is literally run down and murdered. Here the
hunter prefers a rough, mountainous country, and, as probably most
persons know, takes advantage of the disposition of the fox, when
pursued by the hound, to play or circle around a ridge or bold point,
and, taking his stand near the run-way, shoots him down.

I recently had the pleasure of a turn with some experienced hunters.
As we ascended the ridge toward the mountain, keeping in our ears the
uncertain baying of the hounds as they slowly unraveled an old trail,
my companions pointed out to me the different run-ways,--a gap in the
fence here, a rock just below the brow of the hill there, that tree
yonder near the corner of the woods, or the end of that stone wall
looking down the side-hill, or commanding a cow-path, or the outlet of
a wood-road. A half-wild apple orchard near a cross-road was pointed
out as an invariable run-way, where the fox turned toward the mountain
again, after having been driven down the ridge. There appeared to be no
reason why the foxes should habitually pass any particular point, yet
the hunters told me that year after year they took about the same
turns, each generation of foxes running through the upper corner of
that field, or crossing the valley near yonder stone wall, when pursued
by the dog. It seems the fox when he finds himself followed is
perpetually tempted to turn in his course, to deflect from a right
line, as a person would undoubtedly be under similar circumstances. If
he is on this side of the ridge, when he hears the dog break around on
his trail he speedily crosses to the other side; if he is in the
fields, he takes again to the woods; if in the valley, he hastens to
the high land, and evidently enjoys running along the ridge and
listening to the dogs, slowly tracing out his course in the fields
below. At such times he appears to have but one sense, hearing, and
that seems to be reverted toward his pursuers. He is constantly
pausing, looking back and listening, and will almost run over the
hunter if he stands still, even though not at all concealed.

Animals of this class depend far less upon their sight than upon their
hearing and sense of smell. Neither the fox nor the dog is capable of
much discrimination with the eye; they seem to see things only in the
mass; but with the nose they can analyze and define, and get at the
most subtle shades of difference. The fox will not read a man from a
stump or a rock, unless he gets his scent, and the dog does not know
his master in a crowd until he has smelled him.

On the occasion to which I refer, it was not many minutes after the
dogs entered the woods on the side of the mountain before they gave out
sharp and eager, and we knew at once that the fox was started. We were
then near a point that had been designated as a sure run-way, and
hastened to get into position with all speed. For my part I was so
taken with the music of the hounds, as it swelled up over the ridge,
that I quite forgot the game. I saw one of my companions leveling his
gun, and, looking a few rods to the right, saw the fox coming right on
to us. I had barely time to note the silly and abashed expression that
came over him as he saw us in his path, when he was cut down as by a
flash of lightning. The rogue did not appear frightened, but ashamed
and out of countenance, as one does when some trick has been played
upon him, or when detected in some mischief.

Late in the afternoon, as we were passing through a piece of woods in
the valley below, another fox, the third that day, broke from his cover
in an old treetop, under our very noses, and drew the fire of three of
our party, myself among the number, but, thanks to the interposing
trees and limbs, escaped unhurt. Then the dogs took up the trail and
there was lively music again. The fox steered through the fields direct
for the ridge where we had passed up in the morning. We knew he would
take a turn here and then point for the mountain, and two of us, with
the hope of cutting him off by the old orchard, through which we were
again assured he would surely pass, made a precipitous rush for that
point. It was nearly half a mile distant, most of the way up a steep
side-hill, and if the fox took the circuit indicated he would probably
be there in twelve or fifteen minutes. Running up an angle of 45
degrees seems quite easy work for a four-footed beast like a dog or a
fox, but for a two-legged animal like a man it is very heavy and
awkward. Before I got halfway up there seemed to be a vacuum all about
me, so labored was my breathing, and when I reached the summit my head
swam and my knees were about giving out; but pressing on, I had barely
time to reach a point in the road abreast of the orchard, when I heard
the hounds, and, looking under the trees, saw the fox, leaping high
above the weeds and grass, coming straight toward me. He evidently had
not got over the first scare, which our haphazard fusillade had given
him, and was making unusually quick time. I was armed with a rifle, and
said to myself that now was the time to win the laurels I had coveted.
For half a day previous I had been practicing on a pumpkin which a
patient youth had rolled down a hill for me, and had improved my shot
considerably. Now a yellow pumpkin was coming which was not a pumpkin,
and for the first time during the day opportunity favored me. I
expected the fox to cross the road a few yards below me, but just then
I heard him whisk through the grass, and he bounded upon the fence a
few yards above. He seemed to cringe as he saw his old enemy, and to
depress his fur to half his former dimensions. Three bounds and he had
cleared the road, when my bullet tore up the sod beside him, but to
this hour I do not know whether I looked at the fox without seeing my
gun, or whether I did sight him across its barrel. I only know that I
did not distinguish myself in the use of the rifle on that occasion,
and went home to wreak my revenge upon another pumpkin; but without
much improvement of my skill, for, a few days after, another fox ran
under my very nose with perfect impunity. There is something so
fascinating in the sudden appearance of the fox that the eye is quite
mastered, and, unless the instinct of the sportsman is very strong and
quick, the prey will slip through his grasp.

A still hunt rarely brings you in sight of a fox, as his ears are much
sharper than yours, and his tread much lighter. But if the fox is
mousing in the fields, and you discover him before he does you, you
may, the wind favoring, call him within a few paces of you. Secrete
yourself behind the fence, or some other object, and squeak as nearly
like a mouse as possible. Reynard will hear the sound at an incredible
distance. Pricking up his ears, he gets the direction, and comes
trotting along as unsuspiciously as can be. I have never had an
opportunity to try the experiment, but I know perfectly reliable
persons who have. One man, in the pasture getting his cows, called a
fox which was too busy mousing to get the first sight, till it jumped
upon the wall just over where he sat secreted. Giving a loud whoop and
jumping up at the same time, the fox came as near being frightened out
of his skin as I suspect a fox ever was.

In trapping for a fox, you get perhaps about as much "fun" and as
little fur as in any trapping amusement you can engage in. The one
feeling that ever seems present to the mind of Reynard is suspicion. He
does not need experience to teach him, but seems to know from the jump
that there is such a thing as a trap, and that a trap has a way of
grasping a fox's paw that is more frank than friendly. Cornered in a
hole or a den, a trap can be set so that the poor creature has the
desperate alternative of being caught or starving. He is generally
caught, though not till he has braved hunger for a good many days.

But to know all his cunning and shrewdness, bait him in the field, or
set your trap by some carcass where he is wont to come. In some cases
he will uncover the trap, and leave the marks of his contempt for it in
a way you cannot mistake, or else he will not approach within a rod of
it. Occasionally, however, he finds in a trapper more than his match,
and is fairly caught. When this happens, the trap, which must be of the
finest make, is never touched with the bare hand, but, after being
thoroughly smoked and greased, is set in a bed of dry ashes or chaff in
a remote field, where the fox has been emboldened to dig for several
successive nights for morsels of toasted cheese.

A light fall of snow aids the trapper's art and conspires to Reynard's
ruin. But how lightly he is caught, when caught at all! barely the end
of his toes, or at most a spike through the middle of his foot. I once
saw a large painting of a fox struggling with a trap which held him by
the hind leg, above the gambrel-joint! A painting alongside of it
represented a peasant driving an ox-team from the offside! A fox would
be as likely to be caught above the gambrel-joint as a farmer would to
drive his team from the off-side. I knew one that was caught by the tip
of the lower jaw. He came nightly, and took the morsel of cheese from
the pan of the trap without springing it. A piece was then secured to
the pan by a thread, with the result as above stated.

I have never been able to see clearly why the mother fox generally
selects a burrow or hole in the open field in which to have her young,
except it be, as some hunters maintain, for better security. The young
foxes are wont to come out on a warm day, and play like puppies in
front of the den. The view being unobstructed on all sides by trees or
bushes, in the cover of which danger might approach, they are less
liable to surprise and capture. On the slightest sound they disappear
in the hole. Those who have watched the gambols of young foxes speak of
them as very amusing, even more arch and playful than those of kittens,
while a spirit profoundly wise and cunning seems to look out of their
young eyes. The parent fox can never be caught in the den with them,
but is hovering near the woods, which are always at hand, and by her
warning cry or bark tells them when to be on their guard. She usually
has at least three, dens, at no great distance apart, and moves
stealthily in the night with her charge from one to the other, so as to
mislead her enemies. Many a party of boys, and of men, too, discovering
the whereabouts of a litter, have gone with shovels and picks, and,
after digging away vigorously for several hours, have found only an
empty hole for their pains. The old fox, finding her secret had been
found out, had waited for darkness, in the cover of which to transfer
her household to new quarters; or else some old fox-hunter, jealous of
the preservation of his game, and getting word of the intended
destruction of the litter, had gone at dusk the night before, and made
some disturbance about the den, perhaps flashed some powder in its
mouth,--a hint which the shrewd animal knew how to interpret.

The more scientific aspects of the question may not be without interest
to some of my readers. The fox belongs to the great order of
flesh-eating animals called Carnivora, and of the family called
Canidae, or dogs. The wolf is a kind of wild dog, and the fox is a kind
of wolf. Foxes, unlike wolves, however, never go in packs or companies,
but hunt singly. The fox has a kind of bark which suggests the dog, as
have all the members of this family. The kinship is further shown by
the fact that during certain periods, for the most part in the summer,
the dog cannot be made to attack or even to pursue the female fox, but
will run from her in the most shamefaced manner, which he will not do
in the case of any other animal except a wolf. Many of the ways and
manners of the fox, when tamed, are also like the dog's. I once saw a
young red fox exposed for sale in the market in Washington. A colored
man had him, and said he had caught him out in Virginia. He led him by
a small chain, as he would a puppy, and the innocent young rascal would
lie on his side and bask and sleep in the sunshine, amid all the noise
and chaffering around him, precisely like a dog. He was about the size
of a full-grown cat, and there was a bewitching beauty about him that I
could hardly resist. On another occasion, I saw a gray fox, about two
thirds grown, playing with a dog of about the same size, and by nothing
in the manners of either could you tell which was the dog and which the
fox.

Some naturalists think there are but two permanent species of the fox
in the United States, namely, the gray fox and the red fox, though
there are five or six varieties. The gray fox, which is much smaller
and less valuable than the red, is the Southern species, and is said to
be rarely found north of Maryland, though in certain rocky localities
along the Hudson it is common.

In the Southern States this fox is often hunted in the English fashion,
namely, on horseback, the riders tearing through the country in pursuit
till the animal is run down and caught. This is the only fox that will
tree. When too closely pressed, instead of taking to a den or a hole,
it climbs beyond the reach of the dogs in some small tree.

The red fox is the Northern species, and is rarely found farther south
than the mountainous districts of Virginia. In the Arctic regions it
gives place to the Arctic fox, which most of the season is white.

The prairie fox, the cross fox, and the black or silver-gray fox seem
only varieties of the red fox, as the black squirrel breeds from the
gray, and the black woodchuck is found with the brown. There is little
to distinguish them from the red, except the color, though the prairie
fox is said to be the larger of the two.

The cross fox is dark brown on its muzzle and extremities, with a cross
of red and black on its shoulders and breast, which peculiarity of
coloring, and not any trait in its character, gives it its name. It is
very rare, and few hunters have ever seen one. The American Fur Company
used to obtain annually from fifty to one hundred skins. The skins
formerly sold for twenty-five dollars, though I believe they now bring
only about five dollars.

The black or silver-gray fox is the rarest of all, and its skin the
most valuable. The Indians used to estimate it equal to forty beaver
skins. The great fur companies seldom collect in a single season more
than four or five skins at any one post. Most of those of the American
Fur Company come from the head-waters of the Mississippi. One of the
younger Audubons shot one in northern New York. The fox had been seen
and fired at many times by the hunters of the neighborhood, and had
come to have the reputation of leading a charmed life, and of being
invulnerable to anything but a silver bullet. But Audubon brought her
down (for it was a female) on the second trial. She had a litter of
young in the vicinity, which he also dug out, and found the nest to
hold three black and four red ones, which fact settled the question
with him that black and red often have the same parentage, and are in
truth the same species.

The color of this fox, in a point-blank view, is black, but viewed at
an angle it is a dark silvergray, whence has arisen the notion that the
black and the silver-gray are distinct varieties. The tip of the tail
is always white.

In almost every neighborhood there are traditions of this fox, and it
is the dream of young sportsmen; but I have yet to meet the person who
has seen one. I should go well to the north, into the British
Possessions, if I were bent on obtaining a specimen.

One more item from the books.  From the fact that in the bone caves in
this country skulls of the gray fox are found, but none of the red, it
is inferred by some naturalists that the red fox is a descendant from
the European species, which it resembles in form but surpasses in
beauty, and its appearance on this continent is of comparatively recent
date.



V. A MARCH CHRONICLE

ON THE POTOMAC

March 1.--The first day of spring and the first spring day!  I felt the
change the moment I put my head out of doors in the morning. A fitful,
gusty south wind was blowing, though the sky was clear. But the
sunlight was not the same. There was an interfusion of a new element.
Not ten days before there had been a day just as bright,--even brighter
and warmer,--a clear, crystalline day of February, with nothing vernal
in it; but this day was opaline; there was a film, a sentiment in it, a
nearer approach to life. Then there was that fresh, indescribable odor,
a breath from the Gulf, or from Florida and the Carolinas,--a subtle,
persuasive influence that thrilled the sense. Every root and rootlet
under ground must have felt it; the buds of the soft maple and silver
poplar felt it, and swelled perceptibly during the day. The robins knew
it, and were here that morning; so were the crow blackbirds. The shad
must have known it, down deep in their marine retreats, and leaped and
sported about the mouths of the rivers, ready to dart up them if the
genial influence continued. The bees in the hive also, or in the old
tree in the woods, no doubt awoke to new life; and the hibernating
animals, the bears and woodchucks, rolled up in their subterranean
dens,--I imagine the warmth reached even them, and quickened their
sluggish circulation.

Then in the afternoon there was the smell of smoke,--the first spring
fires in the open air. The Virginia farmer is raking together the
rubbish in his garden, or in the field he is preparing for the plow,
and burning it up. In imagination I am there to help him. I see the
children playing about, delighted with the sport and the resumption of
work; the smoke goes up through the shining haze; the farmhouse door
stands open, and lets in the afternoon sun; the cow lows for her calf,
or hides it in the woods; and in the morning the geese, sporting in the
spring-sun, answer the call of the wild flock steering northward above
them.

As I stroll through the market I see the signs here.  That old colored
woman has brought spring in her basket in those great green flakes of
moss, with arbutus showing the pink; and her old man is just in good
time with his fruit trees and gooseberry bushes. Various bulbs and
roots are also being brought out and offered, and the onions are
sprouting on the stands. I see bunches of robins and cedar-birds
also,--so much melody and beauty cut off from the supply going north.
The fish-market is beginning to be bright with perch and bass, and with
shad from the Southern rivers, and wild ducks are taking the place of
prairie hens and quails.

In the Carolinas, no doubt, the fruit trees are in bloom, and the rice
land is being prepared for the seed. In the mountains of Virginia and
in Ohio they are making maple sugar; in Kentucky and Tennessee they are
sowing oats; in Illinois they are, perchance, husking the corn which
has remained on the stalk in the field all winter. Wild geese and ducks
are streaming across the sky from the lower Mississippi toward the
great lakes, pausing awhile on the prairies, or alighting in the great
cornfields, making the air resound with the noise of their wings upon
the stalks and dry shucks as they resume their journey. About this
time, or a little later, in the still spring morning, the prairie hens
or prairie cocks set up that low, musical cooing or crowing that defies
the ear to trace or locate. The air is filled with that soft,
mysterious undertone; and, save that a bird is seen here and there
flitting low over the ground, the sportsman walks for hours without
coming any nearer the source of the elusivc sound.

All over a certain belt of the country the rivers and streams are
roily, and chafe their banks. There is a movement of the soils. The
capacity of the water to take up and hold in solution the salt and
earths seemed never so great before. The frost has relinquished its
hold, and turned everything over to the water. Mud is the mother now;
and out of it creep the frogs, the turtles, the crawfish.

In the North how goes the season?  The winter is perchance just
breaking up. The old frost king is just striking, or preparing to
strike, his tents. The ice is going out of the rivers, and the first
steamboat on the Hudson is picking its way through the blue lanes and
channels. The white gulls are making excursions up from the bay, to see
what the prospects are. In the lumber countries, along the upper
Kennebec and Penobscot, and along the northern Hudson, starters are at
work with their pikes and hooks starting out the pine logs on the first
spring freshet. All winter, through the deep snows, they have been
hauling them to the bank of the stream, or placing them where the tide
would reach them. Now, in countless, numbers, beaten and bruised, the
trunks of the noble trees come, borne by the angry flood. The snow that
furnishes the smooth bed over which they were drawn, now melted,
furnishes the power that carries them down to the mills. On the
Delaware the raftsmen are at work running out their rafts. Floating
islands of logs and lumber go down the swollen stream, bending over the
dams, shooting through the rapids, and bringing up at last in
Philadelphia or beyond.

In the inland farming districts what are the signs?  Few and faint, but
very suggestive. The sun has power to melt the snow; and in the meadows
all the knolls are bare, and the sheep are gnawing them industriously.
The drifts on the side-hills also begin to have a worn and dirty look,
and, where they cross the highway, to become soft, letting the teams in
up to their bellies. The oxen labor and grunt, or patiently wait for
the shovel to release them; but the spirited horse leaps and flounders,
and is determined not to give up. In the woods the snow is melted
around the trees, and the burrs and pieces of bark have absorbed the
heat till they have sunk halfway through to the ground. The snow is
melting on the under side; the frost is going out of the ground: now
comes the trial of your foundations.

About the farm buildings there awakens the old familiar chorus, the
bleating of calves and lambs, and the answering bass of their
distressed mothers; while the hens are cackling in the hay-loft, and
the geese are noisy in the spring run. But the most delightful of all
farm work, or of all rural occupations, is at hand, namely,
sugar-making. In New York and northern New England the beginning of
this season varies from the first to the middle of March, sometimes
even holding off till April. The moment the contest between the sun and
frost fairly begins, sugar weather begins; and the more even the
contest, the more the sweet. I do not know what the philosophy of it
is, but it seems a kind of see-saw, as if the sun drew the sap up and
the frost drew it down; and an excess of either stops the flow. Before
the sun has got power to unlock the frost, there is no sap; and after
the frost has lost its power to lock up again the work of the sun,
there is no sap. But when it freezes soundly at night, with a bright,
warm sun next day, wind in the west, and no signs of a storm, the veins
of the maples fairly thrill. Pierce the bark anywhere, and out gushes
the clear, sweet liquid. But let the wind change to the south and blow
moist and warm, destroying that crispness of the air, and the flow
slackens at once, unless there be a deep snow in the woods to
counteract or neutralize the warmth, in which case the run may continue
till the rain sets in. The rough-coated old trees,--one would not think
they could scent a change so quickly through that wrapper of dead, dry
bark an inch or more thick. I have to wait till I put my head out of
doors, and feel the air on my bare cheek, and sniff it with my nose;
but their nerves of taste and smell are no doubt under ground, imbedded
in the moisture, and if there is anything that responds quickly to
atmospheric changes, it is water. Do not the fish, think you, down deep
in the streams, feel every wind that blows, whether it be hot or cold?
Do not the frogs and newts and turtles under the mud feel the warmth,
though the water still seems like ice? As the springs begin to rise in
advance of the rain, so the intelligence of every change seems to
travel ahead under ground and forewarn things.

A "sap-run" seldom lasts more than two or three days.  By that time
there is a change in the weather, perhaps a rainstorm, which takes the
frost nearly all out of the ground. Then, before there can be another
run, the trees must be wound up again, the storm must have a white
tail, and "come off" cold. Presently the sun rises clear again, and
cuts the snow or softens the hard-frozen ground with his beams, and the
trees take a fresh start. The boys go through the wood, emptying out
the buckets or the pans, and reclaiming those that have blown away, and
the delightful work is resumed. But the first run, like first love, is
always the best, always the fullest, always the sweetest; while there
is a purity and delicacy of flavor about the sugar that far surpasses
any subsequent yield.

Trees differ much in the quantity as well as in the quality of sap
produced in a given season. Indeed, in a bush or orchard of fifty or
one hundred trees, as wide a difference may be observed in this respect
as among that number of cows in regard to the milk they yield. I have
in my mind now a "sugar-bush" nestled in the lap of a spur of the
Catskills, every tree of which is known to me, and assumes a distinct
individuality in my thought. I know the look and quality of the whole
two hundred; and when on my annual visit to the old homestead I find
one has perished, or fallen before the axe, I feel a personal loss.
They are all veterans, and have yielded up their life's blood for the
profit of two or three generations. They stand in little groups for
couples. One stands at the head of a spring-run, and lifts a large dry
branch high above the woods, where hawks and crows love to alight. Half
a dozen are climbing a little hill; while others stand far out in the
field, as if they had come out to get the sun. A file of five or six
worthies sentry the woods on the northwest, and confront a steep
side-hill where sheep and cattle graze. An equal number crowd up to the
line on the east; and their gray, stately trunks are seen across
meadows or fields of grain. Then there is a pair of Siamese twins, with
heavy, bushy tops; while in the forks of a wood-road stand the two
brothers, with their arms around each other's neck, and their bodies in
gentle contact for a distance of thirty feet.

One immense maple, known as the "old-creampan-tree," stands, or did
stand, quite alone among a thick growth of birches and beeches. But it
kept its end up, and did the work of two or three ordinary trees, as
its name denotes. Next to it, the best milcher in the lot was a
shaggy-barked tree in the edge of the field, that must have been badly
crushed or broken when it was little, for it had an ugly crook near the
ground, and seemed to struggle all the way up to get in an upright
attitude, but never quite succeeded; yet it could outrun all its
neighbors nevertheless. The poorest tree in the lot was a shortbodied,
heavy-topped tree that stood in the edge of a spring-run. It seldom
produced half a gallon of sap during the whole season; but this half
gallon was very sweet,--three or four times as sweet as the ordinary
article. In the production of sap, top seems far less important than
body. It is not length of limb that wins in this race, but length of
trunk. A heavy, bushy-topped tree in the open field, for instance, will
not, according to my observation, compare with a tall, long-trunked
tree in the woods, that has but a small top. Young, thrifty,
thin-skinned trees start up with great spirit, indeed, fairly on a run;
but they do not hold out, and their blood is very diluted. Cattle are
very fond of sap; so are sheep, and will drink enough to kill them. The
honey-bees get here their first sweet, and the earliest bug takes up
his permanent abode on the "spile." The squirrels also come timidly
down the trees, and sip the sweet flow; and occasionally an ugly
lizard, just out of its winter quarters and in quest Of novelties,
creeps up into the pan or bucket. Soft maple makes a very fine white
sugar, superior in quality, but far less in quantity.

I think any person who has tried it will agree with me about the charm
of sugar-making, though he have no tooth for the sweet itself. It is
enough that it is the first spring work, and takes one to the woods.
The robins are just arriving, and their merry calls ring through the
glades. The squirrels are now venturing out, and the woodpeckers and
nuthatches run briskly up the trees. The crow begins to caw, with his
accustomed heartiness and assurance; and one sees the white rump and
golden shafts of the high-hole as he flits about the open woods. Next
week, or the week after, it may be time to begin plowing, and other
sober work about the farm; but this week we will picnic among the
maples, and our camp-fire shall be an incense to spring. Ah, I am there
now! I see the woods flooded with sunlight; I smell the dry leaves, and
the mould under them just quickened by the warmth; the long-trunked
maples in their gray, rough liveries stand thickly about; I see the
brimming pans and buckets, always on the sunny side of the trees, and
hear the musical dropping of the sap; the "boiling-place," with its
delightful camp features, is just beyond the first line, with its great
arch looking to the southwest. The sound of its axe rings through the
woods. Its huge kettles or broad pans boil and foam; and I ask no other
delight than to watch and tend them all day, to dip the sap from the
great casks into them, and to replenish the fire with the newly-cut
birch and beech wood. A slight breeze is blowing from the west; I catch
the glint here and there in the afternoon sun of the little rills and
creeks coursing down the sides of the hills; the awakening sounds about
the farm and the woods reach my ear; and every rustle or movement of
the air or on the earth seems like a pulse of returning life in nature.
I sympathize with that verdant Hibernian who liked sugar-making so well
that he thought he should follow it the whole year. I should at least
be tempted to follow the season up the mountains, camping this week on
one terrace, next week on one farther up, keeping just on the hem of
Winter's garment, and just in advance of the swelling buds, until my
smoke went up through the last growth of maple that surrounds the
summit.

Maple sugar is peculiarly an American product, the discovery of it
dating back into the early history of New England. The first settlers
usually caught the sap in rude troughs, and boiled it down in kettles
slung to a pole by a chain, the fire being built around them. The first
step in the way of improvement was to use tin pans instead of troughs,
and a large stone arch in which the kettles or caldrons were set with
the fire beneath them. But of late years, as the question of fuel has
become a more important one, greater improvements have been made. The
arch has given place to an immense stove designed for that special
purpose; and the kettles to broad, shallow, sheet-iron pans, the object
being to economize all the heat, and to obtain the greatest possible
extent of evaporating surface.

March 15.--From the first to the middle of March the season made steady
progress. There were no checks, no drawbacks. Warm, copious rains from
the south and southwest, followed by days of unbroken sunshine. In the
moist places--and what places are not moist at this season?--the sod
buzzed like a hive. The absorption and filtration among the network of
roots was an audible process.

The clod fairly sang.  How the trees responded also!  The silver
poplars were masses of soft gray bloom, and the willows down toward the
river seemed to have slipped off their old bark and on their new in a
single night. The soft maples, too, when massed in the distance, their
tops deeply dyed in a bright maroon color,--how fair they looked!

The 15th of the month was "one of those charmed days when the genius of
God doth flow." The wind died away by mid-forenoon, and the day settled
down so softly and lovingly upon the earth, touching everything,
filling everything. The sky visibly came down. You could see it among
the trees and between the hills. The sun poured himself into the earth
as into a cup, and the atmosphere fairly swam with warmth and light. In
the afternoon I walked out over the country roads north of the city.
Innumerable columns of smoke were going up all around the horizon from
burning brush and weeds, fields being purified by fire. The farmers
were hauling out manure; and I am free to confess, the odor of it, with
its associations of the farm and the stable, of cattle and horses, was
good in my nostrils. In the woods the liverleaf and arbutus had just
opened doubtingly; and in the little pools great masses of frogs'
spawn, with a milky tinge, were deposited. The youth who accompanied me
brought some of it home in his handkerchief, to see it hatch in a
goblet.

The month came in like a lamb, and went out like a lamb, setting at
naught the old adage. The white fleecy clouds lay here and there, as if
at rest, on the blue sky. The fields were a perfect emerald; and the
lawns, with the new gold of the first dandelions sprinkled about, were
lush with grass. In the parks and groves there was a faint mist of
foliage, except among the willows, where there was not only a mist, but
a perfect fountain-fall of green. In the distance the river looked
blue; the spring freshets at last over, the ground settled, the jocund
season steps forth into April with a bright and confident look.


VI. AUTUMN TIDES

The season is always a little behind the sun in our climate, just as
the tide is always a little behind the moon. According to the calendar,
the summer ought to culminate about the 21st of June, but in reality it
is some weeks later; June is a maiden month all through. It is not high
noon in nature till about the first or second week in July. When the
chestnut-tree blooms, the meridian of the year is reached. By the first
of August it is fairly one o'clock. The lustre of the season begins to
dim, the foliage of the trees and woods to tarnish, the plumage of the
birds to fade, and their songs to cease. The hints of approaching fall
are on every hand. How suggestive this thistle-down, for instance,
which, as I sit by the open window, comes in and brushes softly across
my hand! The first snowflake tells of winter not more plainly than this
driving down heralds the approach of fall. Come here, my fairy, and
tell me whence you come and whither you go? What brings you to port
here, you gossamer ship sailing the great sea? How exquisitely frail
and delicate! One of the lightest things in nature; so light that in
the closed room here it will hardly rest in my open palm. A feather is
a clod beside it. Only a spider's web will hold it; coarser objects
have no power over it. Caught in the upper currents of the air and
rising above the clouds, it might sail perpetually. Indeed, one fancies
it might almost traverse the interstellar ether and drive against the
stars. And every thistle-head by the roadside holds hundreds of these
sky rovers,--imprisoned Ariels unable to set themselves free. Their
liberation may be by the shock of the wind, or the rude contact of
cattle, but it is oftener the work of the goldfinch with its
complaining brood. The seed of the thistle is the proper food of this
bird, and in obtaining it myriads of these winged creatures are
scattered to the breeze. Each one is fraught with a seed which it
exists to sow, but its wild careering and soaring does not fairly begin
till its burden is dropped, and its spheral form is complete. The seeds
of many plants and trees are disseminated through the agency of birds;
but the thistle furnishes its own birds,--flocks of them, with wings
more ethereal and tireless than were ever given to mortal creature.
From the pains Nature thus takes to sow the thistle broadcast over the
land, it might be expected to be one of the most troublesome and
abundant of weeds. But such is not the case; the more pernicious and
baffling weeds, like snapdragon or blind nettles, are more local and
restricted in their habits, and unable to fly at all.

In the fall, the battles of the spring are fought over again, beginning
at the other or little end of the series. There is the same advance and
retreat, with many feints and alarms, between the contending forces,
that was witnessed in April and May. The spring comes like a tide
running against a strong wind; it is ever beaten back, but ever gaining
ground, with now and then a mad "push upon the land" as if to overcome
its antagonist at one blow. The cold from the north encroaches upon us
in about the same fashion. In September or early in October it usually
makes a big stride forward and blackens all the more delicate plants,
and hastens the "mortal ripening" of the foliage of the trees, but it
is presently beaten back again, and the genial warmth repossesses the
land. Before long, however, the cold returns to the charge with
augmented forces and gains much ground.

The course of the seasons never does run smooth, owing to the unequal
distribution of land and water, mountain, wood, and plain.

An equilibrium, however, is usually reached in our climate in October,
sometimes the most marked in November, forming the delicious Indian
summer; a truce is declared, and both forces, heat and cold, meet and
mingle in friendly converse on the field. In the earlier season, this
poise of the temperature, this slack-water in nature, comes in May and
June; but the October calm is most marked. Day after day, and sometimes
week after week, you cannot tell which way the current is setting.
Indeed, there is no current, but the season seems to drift a little
this way or a little that, just as the breeze happens to freshen a
little in one quarter or the other. The fall of '74 was the most
remarkable in this respect I remember ever to have seen. The
equilibrium of the season lasted from the middle of October till near
December, with scarcely a break. There were six weeks of Indian summer,
all gold by day, and, when the moon came, all silver by night. The
river was so smooth at times as to be almost invisible, and in its
place was the indefinite continuation of the opposite shore down toward
the nether world. One seemed to be in an enchanted land, and to breathe
all day the atmosphere of fable and romance. Not a smoke, but a kind of
shining nimbus filled all the spaces. The vessels would drift by as if
in mid-air with all their sails set. The gypsy blood in one, as Lowell
calls it, could hardly stay between four walls and see such days go by.
Living in tents, in groves and on the hills, seemed the only natural
life.

Late in December we had glimpses of the same weather,--the earth had
not yet passed all the golden isles. On the 27th of that month, I find
I made this entry in my note-book: "A soft, hazy day, the year asleep
and dreaming of the Indian summer again. Not a breath of air and not a
ripple on the river. The sunshine is hot as it falls across my table."

But what a terrible winter followed! what a savage chief the fair
Indian maiden gave birth to!

This halcyon period of our autumn will always in some way be associated
with the Indian. It is red and yellow and dusky like him. The smoke of
his camp-fire seems again in the air. The memory of him pervades the
woods. His plumes and moccasins and blanket of skins form just the
costume the season demands. It was doubtless his chosen period. The
gods smiled upon him then if ever. The time of the chase, the season of
the buck and the doe, and of the ripening of all forest fruits; the
time when all men are incipient hunters, when the first frosts have
given pungency to the air, when to be abroad on the hills or in the
woods is a delight that both old and young feel,--if the red aborigine
ever had his summer of fullness and contentment, it must have been at
this season, and it fitly bears his name.

In how many respects fall imitates or parodies the spring!  It is
indeed, in some of its features, a sort of second youth of the year.
Things emerge and become conspicuous again. The trees attract all eyes
as in May. The birds come forth from their summer privacy and parody
their spring reunions and rivalries; some of them sing a little after a
silence of months. The robins, bluebirds, meadowlarks, sparrows, crows,
all sport, and call, and behave in a manner suggestive of spring. The
cock grouse drums in the woods as he did in April and May. The pigeons
reappear, and the wild geese and ducks. The witch-hazel blooms. The
trout spawns. The streams are again full. The air is humid, and the
moisture rises in the ground. Nature is breaking camp, as in spring she
was going into camp. The spring yearning and restlessness is
represented in one by the increased desire to travel.

Spring is the inspiration, fall the expiration.  Both seasons have
their equinoxes, both their filmy, hazy air, their ruddy forest tints,
their cold rains, their drenching fogs, their mystic moons; both have
the same solar light and warmth, the same rays of the sun; yet, after
all, how different the feelings which they inspire! One is the morning,
the other the evening; one is youth, the other is age.

The difference is not merely in us; there is a subtle difference in the
air, and in the influences that emanate upon us from the dumb forms of
nature. All the senses report a difference. The sun seems to have
burned out. One recalls the notion of Herodotus that he is grown
feeble, and retreats to the south because he can no longer face the
cold and the storms from the north. There is a growing potency about
his beams in spring, a waning splendor about them in fall. One is the
kindling fire, the other the subsiding flame.

It is rarely that an artist succeeds in painting unmistakably the
difference between sunrise and sunset; and it is equally a trial of his
skill to put upon canvas the difference between early spring and late
fall, say between April and November. It was long ago observed that the
shadows are more opaque in the morning than in the evening; the
struggle between the light and the darkness more marked, the gloom more
solid, the contrasts more sharp. The rays of the morning sun chisel out
and cut down the shadows in a way those of the setting sun do not. Then
the sunlight is whiter and newer in the morning,--not so yellow and
diffused. A difference akin to this is true of the two seasons I am
speaking of. The spring is the morning sunlight, clear and determined;
the autumn, the afternoon rays, pensive, lessening, golden.

Does not the human frame yield to and sympathize with the seasons?  Are
there not more births in the spring and more deaths in the fall? In the
spring one vegetates; his thoughts turn to sap; another kind of
activity seizes him; he makes new wood which does not harden till past
midsummer. For my part, I find all literary work irksome from April to
August; my sympathies run in other channels; the grass grows where
meditation walked. As fall approaches, the currents mount to the head
again. But my thoughts do not ripen well till after there has been a
frost. The burrs will not open much before that. A man's thinking, I
take it, is a kind of combustion, as is the ripening of fruits and
leaves, and he wants plenty of oxygen in the air.

Then the earth seems to have become a positive magnet in the fall; the
forge and anvil of the sun have had their effect. In the spring it is
negative to all intellectual conditions, and drains one of his
lightning.

To-day, October 21, I found the air in the bushy fields and lanes under
the woods loaded with the perfume of the witch-hazel,--a sweetish,
sickening odor. With the blooming of this bush, Nature says,
"Positively the last." It is a kind of birth in death, of spring in
fall, that impresses one as a little uncanny. All trees and shrubs form
their flower-buds in the fall, and keep the secret till spring. How
comes the witch-hazel to be the one exception, and to celebrate its
floral nuptials on the funeral day of its foliage? No doubt it will be
found that the spirit of some lovelorn squaw has passed into this bush,
and that this is why it blooms in the Indian summer rather than in the
white man's spring.

But it makes the floral series of the woods complete.  Between it and
the shad-blow of earliest spring lies the mountain of bloom; the latter
at the base on one side, this at the base on the other, with the
chestnut blossoms at the top in midsummer.

A peculiar feature of our fall may sometimes be seen of a clear
afternoon late in the season. Looking athwart the fields under the
sinking sun, the ground appears covered with a shining veil of
gossamer. A fairy net, invisible at midday and which the position of
the sun now reveals, rests upon the stubble and upon the spears of
grass, covering acres in extent,--the work of innumerable little
spiders. The cattle walk through it, but do not seem to break it.
Perhaps a fly would make his mark upon it. At the same time, stretching
from the tops of the trees, or from the top of a stake in the fence,
and leading off toward the sky, may be seen the cables of the flying
spider,--a fairy bridge from the visible to the invisible. Occasionally
seen against a deep mass of shadow, and perhaps enlarged by clinging
particles of dust, they show quite plainly and sag down like a
stretched rope, or sway and undulate like a hawser in the tide.

They recall a verse of our rugged poet, Walt Whitman:--

         "A noiseless patient spider,
   I mark'd where, in a little promontory, it stood isolated:
   Mark'd how, to explore the vacant, vast surrounding,
   It launch'd forth filament, filament, filament out of itself;
   Ever unreeling them--ever tireless spreading them.

   "And you, O my soul, where you stand,
   Surrounded, surrounded, in measureless oceans of space,
   Ceaselessly musing, venturing, throwing,--
   Seeking the spheres to connect them;
   Till the bridge you will need be formed--till the ductile
         anchor hold;
   Till the gossamer thread you fling, catch somewhere, O my
         soul."

To return a little, September may be described as the month of tall
weeds. Where they have been suffered to stand, along fences, by
roadsides, and in forgotten corners,--redroot, pigweed, ragweed,
vervain, goldenrod, burdock, elecampane, thistles, teasels, nettles,
asters, etc.,--how they lift themselves up as if not afraid to be seen
now! They are all outlaws; every man's hand is against them; yet how
surely they hold their own! They love the roadside, because here they
are comparatively safe; and ragged and dusty, like the common tramps
that they are, they form one of the characteristic features of early
fall.

I have often noticed in what haste certain weeds are at times to
produce their seeds. Redroot will grow three or four feet high when it
has the whole season before it; but let it get a late start, let it
come up in August, and it scarcely gets above the ground before it
heads out, and apparently goes to work with all its might and main to
mature its seed. In the growth of most plants or weeds, April and May
represent their root, June and July their stalk, and August and
September their flower and seed. Hence, when the stalk months are
stricken out, as in the present case, there is only time for a shallow
root and a foreshortened head. I think most weeds that get a late start
show this curtailment of stalk, and this solicitude to reproduce
themselves. But I have not observed that any of the cereals are so
worldly wise. They have not had to think and to shift for themselves as
the weeds have. It does indeed look like a kind of forethought in the
redroot. It is killed by the first frost, and hence knows the danger of
delay.

How rich in color, before the big show of the tree foliage has
commenced, our roadsides are in places in early autumn,--rich to the
eye that goes hurriedly by and does not look too closely,--with the
profusion of goldenrod and blue and purple asters dashed in upon here
and there with the crimson leaves of the dwarf sumac; and at intervals,
rising out of the fence corner or crowning a ledge of rocks, the dark
green of the cedar with the still fire of the woodbine at its heart. I
wonder if the waysides of other lands present any analogous spectacles
at this season.

Then, when the maples have burst out into color, showing like great
bonfires along the hills, there is indeed a feast for the eye. A maple
before your windows in October, when the sun shines upon it, will make
up for a good deal of the light it has excluded; it fills the room with
a soft goldenglow.

Thoreau, I believe, was the first to remark upon the individuality of
trees of the same species with respect to their foliage,--some maples
ripening their leaves early and some late, and some being of one tint
and some of another; and, moreover, that each tree held to the same
characteristics, year after year. There is, indeed, as great a variety
among the maples as among the trees of an apple orchard; some are
harvest apples, some are fall apples, and some are winter apples, each
with a tint of its own. Those late ripeners are the winter
varieties,--the Rhode Island greenings or swaars of their kind. The red
maple is the early astrachan. Then come the red-streak, the
yellow-sweet, and others. There are windfalls among them, too, as among
the apples, and one side or hemisphere of the leaf is usually brighter
than the other.

The ash has been less noticed for its autumnal foliage than it
deserves. The richest shades of plum-color to be seen--becoming by and
by, or in certain lights, a deep maroon--are afforded by this tree.
Then at a distance there seems to be a sort of bloom on it, as upon the
grape or plum. Amid a grove of yellow maple, it makes a most pleasing
contrast.

By mid-October, most of the Rip Van Winkles among our brute creatures
have lain down for their winter nap. The toads and turtles have buried
themselves in the earth. The woodchuck is in his hibernaculum, the
skunk in his, the mole in his; and the black bear has his selected, and
will go in when the snow comes. He does not like the looks of his big
tracks in the snow. They publish his goings and comings too plainly.
The coon retires about the same time. The provident wood-mice and the
chipmunk are laying by a winter supply of nuts or grain, the former
usually in decayed trees, the latter in the ground. I have observed
that any unusual disturbance in the woods, near where the chipmunk has
his den, will cause him to shift his quarters. One October, for many
successive days, I saw one carrying into his hole buckwheat which he
had stolen from a near field. The hole was only a few rods from where
we were getting out stone, and as our work progressed, and the racket
and uproar increased, the chipmunk became alarmed. He ceased carrying
in, and after much hesitating and darting about, and some prolonged
absences, he began to carry out; he had determined to move; if the
mountain fell, he, at least, would be away in time. So, by mouthfuls or
cheekfuls, the grain was transferred to a new place. He did not make a
"bee" to get it done, but carried it all himself, occupying several
days, and making a trip about every ten minutes.

The red and gray squirrels do not lay by winter stores; their cheeks
are made without pockets, and whatever they transport is carried in the
teeth. They are more or less active all winter, but October and
November are their festal months. Invade some butternut or hickory-nut
grove on a frosty October morning and hear the red squirrel beat the
"juba" on a horizontal branch. It is a most lively jig, what the boys
call a "regular break-down," interspersed with squeals and snickers and
derisive laughter. The most noticeable peculiarity about the vocal part
of it is the fact that it is a kind of duet. In other words, by some
ventriloquial tricks, he appears to accompany himself, as if his voice
split up, a part forming a low guttural sound, and a part a shrill
nasal sound.

The distant bark of the more wary gray squirrel may be heard about the
same time. There is a teasing and ironical tone in it also, but the
gray squirrel is not the Puck the red is

Insects also go into winter-quarters by or before this time; the
bumble-bee, hornet, and wasp. But here only royalty escapes; the
queen-mother alone foresees the night of winter coming and the morning
of spring beyond. The rest of the tribe try gypsying for a while, but
perish in the first frosts. The present October I surprised the queen
of the yellow-jackets in the woods looking out a suitable retreat. The
royal dame was house-hunting, and, on being disturbed by my inquisitive
poking among the leaves, she got up and flew away with a slow, deep
hum. Her body was unusually distended, whether with fat or eggs I am
unable to say. In September I took down the nest of the black hornet
and found several large queens in it, but the workers had all gone. The
queens were evidently weathering the first frosts and storms here, and
waiting for the Indian summer to go forth and seek a permanent winter
abode. If the covers could be taken off the fields and woods at this
season, how many interesting facts of natural history would be
revealed!--the crickets, ants, bees, reptiles, animals, and, for aught
I know, the spiders and flies asleep or getting ready to sleep in their
winter dormitories; the fires of life banked up, and burning just
enough to keep the spark over till spring.

The fish all run down the stream in the fall except the trout; it runs
up or stays up and spawns in November, the male becoming as brilliantly
tinted as the deepest-dyed maple leaf. I have often wondered why the
trout spawns in the fall, instead of in the spring like other fish. Is
it not because a full supply of clear spring water can be counted on at
that season more than at any other? The brooks are not so liable to be
suddenly muddied by heavy showers, and defiled with the whashings of
the roads and fields, as they are in spring and summer. The artificial
breeder finds that absolute purity of water is necessary to hatch the
spawn; also that shade and a low temperature are indispensable.

Our northern November day itself is like spring water.  It is melted
frost, dissolved snow. There is a chill in it and an exhilaration also.
The forenoon is all morning and the afternoon all evening. The shadows
seem to come forth and to revenge themselves upon the day. The sunlight
is diluted with darkness. The colors fade from the landscape, and only
the sheen of the river lights up the gray and brown distance.



VII. THE APPLE

      Lo! sweetened with the summer light,
      The full-juiced apple, waxing over-mellow,
      Drops in silent autumn night.
                                    TENNYSON.

Not a little of the sunshine of our northern winters is surely wrapped
up in the apple. How could we winter over without it! How is life
sweetened by its mild acids! A cellar well filled with apples is more
valuable than a chamber filled with flax and wool. So much sound, ruddy
life to draw upon, to strike one's roots down into, as it were.

Especially to those whose soil of life is inclined to be a little
clayey and heavy, is the apple a winter necessity. It is the natural
antidote of most of the ills the flesh is heir to. Full of vegetable
acids and aromatics, qualities which act as refrigerants and
antiseptics, what an enemy it is to jaundice, indigestion, torpidity of
liver, etc.! It is a gentle spur and tonic to the whole biliary system.
Then I have read that it has been found by analysis to contain more
phosphorus than any other vegetable. This makes it the proper food of
the scholar and the sedentary man; it feeds his brain and it stimulates
his liver. Nor is this all. Besides its hygienic properties, the apple
is full of sugar and mucilage, which make it highly nutritious. It is
said "the operators of Cornwall, England, consider ripe apples nearly
as nourishing as bread, and far more so than potatoes. In the year
1801--which was a year of much scarcity--apples, instead of being
converted into cider, were sold to the poor, and the laborers asserted
that they could 'stand their work' on baked apples without meat;
whereas a potato diet required either meat or some other substantial
nutriment. The French and Germans use apples extensively; so do the
inhabitants of all European nations. The laborers depend upon them as
an article of food, and frequently make a dinner of sliced apples and
bread."

Yet the English apple is a tame and insipid affair, compared with the
intense, sun-colored, and sunsteeped fruit our orchards yield. The
English have no sweet apple, I am told, the saccharine element
apparently being less abundant in vegetable nature in that sour and
chilly climate than in our own.

It is well known that the European maple yields no sugar, while both
our birch and hickory have sweet in their veins. Perhaps this fact
accounts for our excessive love of sweets, which may be said to be a
national trait.

The Russian apple has a lovely complexion, smooth and transparent, but
the Cossack is not yet all eliminated from it. The only one I have
seen--the Duchess of Oldenburg--is as beautiful as a Tartar princess,
with a distracting odor, but it is the least bit puckery to the taste.

The best thing I know about Chili is, not its guano beds, but this fact
which I learn from Darwin's "Voyage," namely, that the apple thrives
well there. Darwin saw a town there so completely buried in a wood of
apple-trees, that its streets were merely paths in an orchard. The
tree, indeed, thrives so well, that large branches cut off in the
spring and planted two or three feet deep in the ground send out roots
and develop into fine, fullbearing trees by the third year. The people
know the value of the apple, too. They make cider and wine of it, and
then from the refuse a white and finely flavored spirit; then, by
another process, a sweet treacle is obtained, called honey. The
children and the pigs eat little or no other food. He does not add that
the people are healthy and temperate, but I have no doubt they are. We
knew the apple had many virtues, but these Chilians have really opened
a deep beneath a deep. We had found out the cider and the spirits, but
who guessed the wine and the honey, unless it were the bees? There is a
variety in our orchards called the winesap, a doubly liquid name that
suggests what might be done with this fruit.

The apple is the commonest and yet the most varied and beautiful of
fruits. A dish of them is as becoming to the centre-table in winter as
was the vase of flowers in the summer,--a bouquet of spitzenburgs and
greenings and northern spies. A rose when it blooms, the apple is a
rose when it ripens. It pleases every sense to which it can be
addressed, the touch, the smell, the sight, the taste; and when it
falls, in the still October days, it pleases the ear. It is a call to a
banquet, it is a signal that the feast is ready. The bough would fain
hold it, but it can now assert its independence; it can now live a life
of its own.

Daily the stem relaxes its hold, till finally it lets go completely and
down comes the painted sphere with a mellow thump to the earth, toward
which it has been nodding so long. It bounds away to seek its bed, to
hide under a leaf, or in a tuft of grass. It will now take time to
meditate and ripen! What delicious thoughts it has there nestled with
its fellows under the fence, turning acid into sugar, and sugar into
wine!

How pleasing to the touch!  I love to stroke its polished rondure with
my hand, to carry it in my pocket on my tramp over the winter hills, or
through the early spring woods. You are company, you red-checked spitz,
or you salmon-fleshed greening! I toy with you; press your face to
mine, toss you in the air, roll you on the ground, see you shine out
where you lie amid the moss and dry leaves and sticks. You are so
alive! You glow like a ruddy flower. You look so animated I almost
expect to see you move! I postpone the eating of you, you are so
beautiful! How compact; how exquisitely tinted! Stained by the sun and
varnished against the rains. An independent vegetable existence, alive
and vascular as my own flesh; capable of being wounded, bleeding,
wasting away, or almost of repairing damages!

How it resists the cold! holding out almost as long as the red cheeks
of the boys do. A frost that destroys the potatoes and other roots only
makes the apple more crisp and vigorous; it peeps out from the chance
November snows unscathed. When I see the fruit-vender on the street
corner stamping his feet and beating his hands to keep them warm, and
his naked apples lying exposed to the blasts, I wonder if they do not
ache, too, to clap their hands and enliven their circulation. But they
can stand it nearly as long as the vender can.

Noble common fruit, best friend of man and most loved by him, following
him, like his dog or his cow, wherever he goes! His homestead is not
planted till you are planted, your roots intertwine with his; thriving
best where he thrives best, loving the limestone and the frost, the
plow and the pruning-knife: you are indeed suggestive of hardy,
cheerful industry, and a healthy life in the open air. Temperate,
chaste fruit! you mean neither luxury nor sloth, neither satiety nor
indolence, neither enervating heats nor the frigid zones. Uncloying
fruit,--fruit whose best sauce is the open air, whose finest flavors
only he whose taste is sharpened by brisk work or walking knows; winter
fruit, when the fire of life burns brightest; fruit always a little
hyperborean, leaning toward the cold; bracing, sub-acid, active fruit!
I think you must come from the north, you are so frank and honest, so
sturdy and appetizing. You are stocky and homely like the northern
races. Your quality is Saxon. Surely the fiery and impetuous south is
not akin to you. Not spices or olives, or the sumptuous liquid fruits,
but the grass, the snow, the grains, the coolness, is akin to you. I
think if I could subsist on you, or the like of you, I should never
have an intemperate or ignoble thought, never be feverish or
despondent. So far as I could absorb or transmute your quality, I
should be cheerful, continent, equitable, sweet-blooded, long-lived,
and should shed warmth and contentment around.

Is there any other fruit that has so much facial expression as the
apple? What boy does not more than half believe they can see with that
single eye of theirs? Do they not look and nod to him from the bough?
The swaar has one look, the rambo another, the spy another. The youth
recognizes the seek-no-further, buried beneath a dozen other varieties,
the moment he catches a glance of its eye, or the bonny-cheeked Newtown
pippin, or the gentle but sharp-nosed gillyflower. He goes to the great
bin in the cellar, and sinks his shafts here and there in the garnered
wealth of the orchards, mining for his favorites, sometimes coming
plump upon them, sometimes catching a glimpse of them to the right or
left, or uncovering them as keystones in an arch made up of many
varieties.

In the dark he can usually tell them by the sense of touch.  There is
not only the size and shape, but there is the texture and polish. Some
apples are coarse-grained and some are fine; some are thinskinned and
some are thick. One variety is quick and vigorous beneath the touch,
another gentle and yielding. The pinnock has a thick skin with a spongy
lining; a bruise in it becomes like a piece of cork. The tallow apple
has an unctuous feel, as its name suggests. It sheds water like a duck.
What apple is that with a fat curved stem that blends so prettily with
its own flesh,--the wine apple? Some varieties impress me as
masculine,--weatherstained, freckled, lasting, and rugged; others are
indeed lady apples, fair, delicate, shining, mildflavored,
white-meated, like the egg-drop and the lady-finger. The practiced hand
knows each kind by the touch.

Do you remember the apple hole in the garden or back of the house, Ben
Bolt? In the fall, after the bins in the cellar had been well stocked,
we excavated a circular pit in the warm mellow earth, and, covering the
bottom with clean rye straw, emptied in basketful after basketful of
hardy choice varieties, till there was a tent-shaped mound several feet
high of shining variegated fruit. Then, wrapping it about with a thick
layer of long rye straw, and tucking it up snug and warm, the mound was
covered with a thin coating of earth, a flat stone on the top holding
down the straw. As winter set in, another coating of earth was put upon
it, with perhaps an overcoat of coarse dry stable manure, and the
precious pile was left in silence and darkness till spring. No marmot,
hibernating under ground in his nest of leaves and dry grass, more cozy
and warm. No frost, no wet, but fragrant privacy and quiet. Then how
the earth tempers and flavors the apples! It draws out all the acrid
unripe qualities, and infuses into them a subtle refreshing taste of
the soil. Some varieties perish, but the ranker, hardier kinds, like
the northern spy, the greening, or the black apple, or the russet, or
the pinnock, how they ripen and grow in grace, how the green becomes
gold, and the bitter becomes sweet!

As the supply in the bins and barrels gets low and spring approaches,
the buried treasures in the garden are remembered. With spade and axe
we go out and penetrate through the snow and frozen earth till the
inner dressing of straw is laid bare. It is not quite as clear and
bright as when we placed it there last fall, but the fruit beneath,
which the hand soon exposes, is just as bright and far more luscious.
Then, as day after day you resort to the hole, and, removing the straw
and earth from the opening, thrust your arm into the fragrant pit, you
have a better chance than ever before to become acquainted with your
favorites by the sense of touch. How you feel for them, reaching to the
right and left! Now you have got a Talman sweet; you imagine you can
feel that single meridian line that divides it into two hemispheres.
Now a greening fills your hand; you feel its fine quality beneath its
rough coat. Now you have hooked a swaar, you recognize its full face;
now a Vandevere or a King rolls down from the apex above and you bag it
at once. When you were a schoolboy, you stowed these away in your
pockets, and ate them along the road and at recess, and again at
noontime; and they, in a measure, corrected the effects of the cake and
pie with which your indulgent mother filled your lunchbasket.

The boy is indeed the true apple-eater, and is not to be questioned how
he came by the fruit with which his pockets are filled. It belongs to
him, and he may steal it if it cannot be had in any other way. His own
juicy flesh craves the juicy flesh of the apple. Sap draws sap. His
fruit-eating has little reference to the state of his appetite. Whether
he be full of meat or empty of meat, he wants the apple just the same.
Before meal or after meal it never comes amiss. The farm-boy munches
apples all day long. He has nests of them in the haymow, mellowing, to
which he makes frequent visits. Sometimes old Brindle, having access
through the open door, smells them out and makes short work of them.

In some countries the custom remains of placing a rosy apple in the
hand of the dead, that they may find it when they enter paradise. In
northern mythology the giants eat apples to keep off old age.

The apple is indeed the fruit of youth.  As we grow old we crave apples
less. It is an ominous sign. When you are ashamed to be seen eating
them on the street; when you can carry them in your pocket and your
hand not constantly find its way to them; when your neighbor has aples
and you have none, and you make no nocturnal visits to his orchard;
when you lunch-basket is without them, and you can pass a winter's
night by the fireside with not thought of the fruit at your
elbow,--then be assured you are no longer a boy, either in heart or in
years.

The genuine apple-eater comforts himself with an apple in its season,
as others do with a pipe or a cigar. When he has nothing else to do, or
is bored, he eats an apple. While he is waiting for the train he eats
an apple, sometimes several of them. Whe he takes a walk he arms
himself with apples. His traveling-bag is full of apples. He offers an
apple to his companion, and takes one himself. They are his chief
solace when on the road. He sows their seed all along the route. He
tosses the core from the car winedow and from the top of the
stage-coach. He would, in time, make the land one vast orchard. He
dispenses with a knife. He prefers that his teeth shall have the first
taste. Then he knows that the best flavor is immediately beneath the
skin, and that in a pared apple this is lost. If you will stew the
apple, he says, instead of baking it, by all means leave the skin on.
It improves the color and vastly heightens the flavor of the dish.

The apple is a masculine fruit; hence women are poor apple-eaters.  It
belongs to the open air, and requires an open-air taste and relish.

I instantly sympathized with that clergyman I read of, who on pulling
out his pocket-handkerchief in the midst of his discourse, pulled out
two bouncing apples with it that went rolling across the pulpit floor
and down the pulpit stairs. These apples were, do doubt, to be eaten
after the sermon, on his way home, or to his next appointment. They
would take the taste of it out of his mouth. Then, would a minister be
apt to grow tiresome with tow big apples in his coat-tail pockets?
Would he not naturally hasten along to "lastly" and the big apples? If
they were the dominie apples, and it was April or May, he certainly
would.

How the early settlers prized the apple!  When their trees broke down
or were split asunder by the storms, the neighbors turned out, the
divided tree was put together again and fastened with iron bolts. In
some of the oldest orchards one may still occasionally see a large
dilapidated tree with the rusty iron bolt yet visible. Poor, sour
fruit, too, but sweet in those early pioneer days. My grandfather, who
was one of these heroes of the stump, used every fall to make a journey
of forty miles for a few apples, which he brought home in a bag on
horseback. He frequently started from home by two or three o'clock in
the morning, and at one time both he and his horse were much frightened
by the screaming of panthers in a narrow pass in the mountains through
which the road led.

Emerson, I believe, has spoken of the apple as the social fruit of New
England. Indeed, what a promoter or abettor of social intercourse among
our rural population the apple has been, the company growing more merry
and unrestrained as soon as the basket of apples was passed round! When
the cider followed, the introduction and good understanding were
complete. Then those rural gatherings that enlivened the autumn in the
country, known as "apple-cuts," now, alas! nearly obsolete, where so
many things were cut and dried besides apples! The larger and more
loaded the orchard, the more frequently the invitations went round and
the higher the social and convivial spirit ran. Ours is eminently a
country of the orchard. Horace Greeley said he had seen no land in
which the orchard formed such a prominent feature in the rural and
agricultural districts. Nearly every farmhouse in the Eastern and
Northern States has its setting or its background of apple-trees, which
generally date back to the first settlement of the farm. Indeed, the
orchard, more than almost any other thing, tends to soften and humanize
the country, and to give the place of which it is an adjunct a settled,
domestic look. The apple-tree takes the rawness and wildness off any
scene. On the top of a mountain, or in remote pastures, it sheds the
sentiment of home. It never loses its domestic air, or lapses into a
wild state. And in planting a homestead, or in choosing a building-site
for the new house, what a help it is to have a few old, maternal
apple-trees near by,--regular old grandmothers, who have seen trouble,
who have been sad and glad through so many winters and summers, who
have blossomed till the air about them is sweeter than elsewhere, and
borne fruit till the grass beneath them has become thick and soft from
human contact, and who have nourisbed robins and finches in their
branches till they have a tender, brooding look! The ground, the turf,
the atmosphere of an old orchard, seem several stages nearer to man
than that of the adjoining field, as if the trees had given back to the
soil more than they had taken from it; as if they had tempered the
elements, and attracted all the genial and beneficent influences in the
landscape around.

An apple orchard is sure to bear you several crops beside the apple.
There is the crop of sweet and tender reminiscences, dating from
childhood and spanning the seasons from May to October, and making the
orchard a sort of outlying part of the household. You have played there
as a child, mused there as a youth or lover, strolled there as a
thoughtful, sad-eyed man. Your father, perhaps, planted the trees, or
reared them from the seed, and you yourself have pruned and grafted
them, and worked among them, till every separate tree has a peculiar
history and meaning in your mind. Then there is the never-failing crop
of birds,--robins, goldfinches, kingbirds, cedar-birds, hairbirds,
orioles, starlings,--all nesting and breeding in its branches, and
fitly described by Wilson Flagg as "Birds of the Garden and Orchard."
Whether the pippin and sweet bough bear or not, the "punctual birds"
can always be depended on. Indeed, there are few better places to study
ornithology than in the orchard. Besides its regular occupants, many of
the birds of the deeper forest find occasion to visit it during the
season. The cuckoo comes for the tent-caterpillar, the jay for frozen
apples, the ruffed grouse for buds, the crow foraging for birds' eggs,
the woodpecker and chickadees for their food, and the high-hole for
ants. The redbird comes, too, if only to see what a friendly covert its
branches form; and the wood thrush now and then comes out of the grove
near by, and nests alongside of its cousin, the robin. The smaller
hawks know that this is a most likely spot for their prey, and in
spring the shy northern warblers may be studied as they pause to feed
on the fine insects amid its branches. The mice love to dwell here
also, and hither come from the near woods the squirrel and the rabbit.
The latter will put his head through the boy's slipper-noose any time
for a taste of the sweet apple, and the red squirrel and chipmunk
esteem its seeds a great rarity.

All the domestic animals love the apple, but none so much as the cow.
The taste of it wakes her up as few other things do, and bars and
fences must be well looked after. No need to assort them or to pick out
the ripe ones for her. An apple is an apple, and there is no best about
it. I heard of a quick-witted old cow that learned to shake them down
from the tree. While rubbing herself she had observed that an apple
sometimes fell. This stimulated her to rub a little harder, when more
apples fell. She then took the hint, and rubbed her shoulder with such
vigor that the farmer had to check her and keep an eye on her, to save
his fruit.

But the cow is the friend of the apple.  How many trees she has planted
about the farm, in the edge of the woods, and in remote fields and
pastures! The wild apples, celebrated by Thoreau, are mostly of her
planting. She browses them down, to be sure, but they are hers, and why
should she not?

What an individuality the apple-tree has, each variety being nearly as
marked by its form as by its fruit. What a vigorous grower, for
instance, is the Ribston pippin, an English apple,--wide-branching like
the oak; its large ridgy fruit, in late fall or early winter, is one of
my favorites. Or the thick and more pendent top of the bellflower, with
its equally rich, sprightly, uncloying fruit.

Sweet apples are perhaps the most nutritious, and when baked are a
feast in themselves. With a tree of the Jersey sweet or of the Talman
sweet in bearing, no man's table need be devoid of luxuries and one of
the most wholesome of all desserts. Or the red astrachan, an August
apple,--what a gap may be filled in the culinary department of a
household at this season by a single tree of this fruit! And what a
feast is its shining crimson coat to the eye before its snow-white
flesh has reached the tongue! But the apple of apples for the household
is the spitzenburg. In this casket Pomona has put her highest flavors.
It can stand the ordeal of cooking, and still remain a spitz. I
recently saw a barrel of these apples from the orchard of a
fruit-grower in the northern part of New York, who has devoted especial
attention to this variety. They were perfect gems. Not large,--that had
not been the aim,--but small, fair, uniform, and red to the core. How
intense, how spicy and aromatic!

But all the excellences of the apple are not confined to the cultivated
fruit. Occasionally a seedling springs up about the farm that produces
fruit of rare beauty and worth. In sections peculiarly adapted to the
apple, like a certain belt along the Hudson River, I have noticed that
most of the wild, unbidden trees bear good, edible fruit. In cold and
ungenial districts the seedlings are mostly sour and crabbed, but in
more favorable soils they are oftener mild and sweet. I know wild
apples that ripen in August, and that do not need, if it could be had,
Thoreau's sauce of sharp, November air to be eaten with. At the foot of
a hill near me, and striking its roots deep in the shale, is a giant
specimen of native tree that bears an apple that has about the
clearest, waxiest, most transparent complexion I ever saw. It is of
good size, and the color of a tea rose. Its quality is best appreciated
in the kitchen. I know another seedling of excellent quality, and so
remarkable for its firmness and density that it is known on the farm
where it grows as the "heavy apple."

I have alluded to Thoreau, to whom all lovers of the apple and its tree
are under obligation. His chapter on Wild Apples is a most delicious
piece of writing. It has a "tang and smack" like the fruit it
celebrates, and is dashed and streaked with color in the same manner.
It has the hue and perfume of the crab, and the richness and raciness
of the pippin. But Thoreau loved other apples than the wild sorts, and
was obliged to confess that his favorites could not be eaten indoors.
Late in November he found a blue-pearmain tree growing within the edge
of a swamp, almost as good as wild. "You would not suppose," he says,
"that there was any fruit left there on the first survey, but you must
look according to system. Those which lie exposed are quite brown and
rotten now, or perchance a few still show one blooming cheek here and
there amid the wet leaves. Nevertheless, with experienced eyes I
explore amid the bare alders, and the huckleberry bushes, and the
withered sedge, and in the crevices of the rocks, which are full of
leaves, and pry under the fallen and decaying ferns which, with apple
and alder leaves, thickly strew the ground. For I know that they lie
concealed, fallen into hollows long since, and covered up by the leaves
of the tree itself,--a proper kind of packing. From these
lurkingplaces, anywhere within the circumference of the tree, I draw
forth the fruit all wet and glossy, maybe nibbled by rabbits and
hollowed out by crickets, and perhaps with a leaf or two cemented to it
(as Curzon an old manuscript from a monastery's mouldy cellar), but
still with a rich bloom on it, and at least as ripe and well kept, if
not better than those in barrels, more crisp and lively than they. If
these resources fail to yield anything, I have learned to look between
the bases of the suckers which spring thickly from some horizontal
limb, for now and then one lodges there, or in the very midst of an
alderclump, where they are covered by leaves, safe from cows which may
have smelled them out. If I am sharp-set,--for I do not refuse the
blue-pearmain,--I fill my pockets on each side; and as I retrace my
steps in the frosty eve, being perhaps four or five miles from home, I
eat one first from this side, and then from that, to keep my balance."



VIII. AN OCTOBER ABROAD

       I. MELLOW ENGLAND

I will say at the outset, as I believe some one else has said on a like
occasion, that in this narrative I shall probably describe myself more
than the objects I look upon. The facts and particulars of the case
have already been set down in the guidebooks and in innumerable books
of travel. I shall only attempt to give an account of the pleasure and
satisfaction I had in coming face to face with things in the mother
country, seeing them as I did with kindred and sympathizing eyes.

The ocean was a dread fascination to me,--a world whose dominion I had
never entered; but I proved to be such a wretched sailor that I am
obliged to confess, Hibernian fashion, that the happiest moment I spent
upon the sea was when I set my foot upon the land.

It is a wide and fearful gulf that separates the two worlds.  The
landsman can know little of the wildness, savageness, and mercilessness
of nature till he has been upon the sea. It is as if he had taken a
leap off into the interstellar spaces. In voyaging to Mars or Jupiter,
he might cross such a desert,--might confront such awful purity and
coldness. An astronomic solitariness and remoteness encompass the sea.
The earth and all remembrance of it is blotted out; there is no hint of
it anywhere. This is not water, this cold, blue-black, vitreous liquid.
It suggests, not life, but death. Indeed, the regions of everlasting
ice and snow are not more cold and inhuman than is the sea.

Almost the only thing about my first sea voyage that I remember with
pleasure is the circumstance of the little birds that, during the first
few days out, took refuge on the steamer. The first afternoon, just as
we were losing sight of land, a delicate little wood-bird, the black
and white creeping warbler,--having lost its reckoning in making
perhaps its first southern voyage,--came aboard. It was much fatigued,
and had a disheartened, demoralized look. After an hour or two it
disappeared, having, I fear, a hard pull to reach the land in the face
of the wind that was blowing, if indeed it reached it at all.

The next day, just at night, I observed a small hawk sailing about
conveniently near the vessel, but with a very lofty, independent mien,
as if he had just happened that way on his travels, and was only
lingering to take a good view of us. It was amusing to observe his
coolness and haughty unconcern in that sad plight he was in; by nothing
in his manner betraying that he was several hundred miles at sea, and
did not know how he was going to get back to land. But presently I
noticed he found it not inconsistent with his dignity to alight on the
rigging under friendly cover of the tops'l, where I saw his feathers
rudely ruffled by the wind, till darkness set in. If the sailors did
not disturb him during the night, he certainly needed all his fortitude
in the morning to put a cheerful face on his situation.

The third day, when we were perhaps off Nova Scotia or Newfoundland,
the American pipit or titlark, from the far north, a brown bird about
the size of a sparrow, dropped upon the deck of the ship, so nearly
exhausted that one of the sailors was on the point of covering it with
his hat. It stayed about the vessel nearly all day, flitting from point
to point, or hopping along a few feet in front of the promenaders, and
prying into every crack and crevice for food. Time after time I saw it
start off with a reassuring chirp, as if determined to seek the land;
but before it had got many rods from the ship its heart would seem to
fail it, and, after circling about for a few moments, back it would
come, more discouraged than ever.

These little waifs from the shore!  I gazed upon them with a strange,
sad interest. They were friends in distress; but the sea-birds,
skimming along indifferent to us, or darting in and out among those
watery hills, I seemed to look upon as my natural enemies. They were
the nurslings and favorites of the sea, and I had no sympathy with
them.

No doubt the number of our land-birds that actually perish in the sea
during their autumn migration, being carried far out of their course by
the prevailing westerly winds of this season, is very great.
Occasionally one makes the passage to Great Britain by following the
ships, and finding them at convenient distances along the route; and I
have been told that over fifty different species of our more common
birds, such as robins, starlings, grosbeaks, thrushes, etc., have been
found in Ireland, having, of course, crossed in this way. What numbers
of these little navigators of the air are misled and wrecked, during
those dark and stormy nights, on the lighthouses alone that line the
Atlantic coast! Is it Celia Thaxter who tells of having picked up her
apron full of sparrows, warblers, flycatchers, etc., at the foot of the
lighthouse on the Isles of Shoals, one morning after a storm, the
ground being still strewn with birds of all kinds that had dashed
themselves against the beacon, bewildered and fascinated by its
tremendous light?

If a land-bird perishes at sea, a sea-bird is equally cast away upon
the land; and I have known the sooty tern, with its almost omnipotent
wing, to fall down, utterly famished and exhausted, two hundred miles
from salt water.

But my interest in these things did not last beyond the third day.
About this time we entered what the sailors call the "devil's hole,"
and a very respectably sized hole it is, extending from the banks of
Newfoundland to Ireland, and in all seasons and weathers it seems to be
well stirred up.

Amidst the tossing and rolling, the groaning of penitent travelers, and
the laboring of the vessel as she climbed those dark unstable
mountains, my mind reverted feebly to Huxley's statement, that the
bottom of this sea, for over a thousand miles, presents to the eye of
science a vast chalk plain, over which one might drive as over a floor,
and I tried to solace myself by dwelling upon the spectacle of a
solitary traveler whipping up his steed across it. The imaginary rattle
of his wagon was like the sound of lutes and harps, and I would rather
have clung to his axletree than have been rocked in the best berth in
the ship.


LAND

On the tenth day, about four o'clock in the afternoon, we sighted
Ireland. The ship came up from behind the horizon, where for so many
days she had been buffeting with the winds and the waves, but had never
lost the clew, bearing straight as an arrow for the mark. I think, if
she had been aimed at a fair-sized artillery target, she would have
crossed the ocean and struck the bull's-eye.

In Ireland, instead of an emerald isle rising out of the sea, I beheld
a succession of cold, purplish mountains, stretching along the
northeastern horizon, but I am bound to say that no tints of bloom or
verdure were ever half so welcome to me as were those dark,
heather-clad ranges. It is a feeling which a man can have but once in
his life, when he first sets eyes upon a foreign land; and in my case,
to this feeling was added the delightful thought that the "devil's
hole" would soon be cleared and my long fast over.

Presently, after the darkness had set in, signal rockets were let off
from the stern of the vessel, writing their burning messages upon the
night; and when answering rockets rose slowly up far ahead, I suppose
we all felt that the voyage was essentially done, and no doubt a
message flashed back under the ocean that the Scotia had arrived.

The sight of the land had been such medicine to me that I could now
hold up my head and walk about, and so went down for the first time and
took a look at the engines,--those twin monsters that had not stopped
once, or apparently varied their stroke at all, since leaving Sandy
Hook; I felt like patting their enormous cranks and shafts with my
hand,--then at the coal bunks, vast cavernous recesses in the belly of
the ship, like the chambers of the original mine in the mountains, and
saw the men and firemen at work in a sort of purgatory of heat and
dust. When it is remembered that one of these ocean steamers consumes
about one hundred tons of coal per day, it is easy to imagine what a
burden the coal for a voyage alone must be, and one is not at all
disposed to laugh at Dr. Lardner, who proved so convincingly that no
steamship could ever cross the ocean, because it could not carry coal
enough to enable it to make the passage.

On the morrow, a calm, lustrous day, we steamed at our leisure up the
Channel and across the Irish Sea, the coast of Wales, and her groups of
lofty mountains, in full view nearly all day. The mountains were in
profile like the Catskills viewed from the Hudson below, only it was
evident there were no trees or shrubbery upon them, and their summits,
on this last day of September, were white with snow.


ASHORE

The first day or half day ashore is, of course, the most novel and
exciting; but who, as Mr. Higginson says, can describe his sensations
and emotions this first half day? It is a page of travel that has not
yet been written. Paradoxical as it may seem, one generally comes out
of pickle much fresher than he went in. The sea has given him an
enormous appetite for the land. Every one of his senses is like a
hungry wolf clamorous to be fed. For my part, I had suddenly emerged
from a condition bordering on that of the hibernating animals--a
condition in which I had neither eaten, nor slept, nor thought, nor
moved, when I could help it--into not only a full, but a keen and
joyous, possession of my health and faculties. It was almost a
metamorphosis. I was no longer the clod I had been, but a bird exulting
in the earth and air, and in the liberty of motion. Then to remember it
was a new earth and a new sky that I was beholding,--that it was
England, the old mother at last, no longer a faith or a fable, but an
actual fact there before my eyes and under my feet,--why should I not
exult? Go to! I will be indulged. Those trees, those fields, that bird
darting along the hedge-rows, those men and boys picking blackberries
in October, those English flowers by the roadside (stop the carriage
while I leap out and pluck them), the homely, domestic looks of things,
those houses, those queer vehicles, those thick-coated horses, those
big-footed, coarsely clad, clear-skinned men and women, this massive,
homely, compact architecture,--let me have a good look, for this is my
first hour in England, and I am drunk with the joy of seeing! This
house-fly even, let me inspect it [Footnote: The English house-fly
actually seemed coarser and more hairy than ours.]; and that swallow
skimming along so familiarly,--is he the same I saw trying to cling to
the sails of the vessel the third day out? or is the swallow the
swallow the world over? This grass I certainly have seen before, and
this red and white clover, but this daisy and dandelion are not the
same; and I have come three thousand miles to see the mullein
cultivated in a garden, and christened the velvet plant.

As we sped through the land, the heart of England, toward London, I
thought my eyes would never get their fill of the landscape, and that I
would lose them out of my head by their eagerness to catch every object
as we rushed along! How they reveled, how they followed the birds and
the game, how they glanced ahead on the track--that marvelous
track!--or shot off over the fields and downs, finding their delight in
the streams, the roads, the bridges, the splendid breeds of cattle and
sheep in the fields, the superb husbandry, the rich mellow soil, the
drainage, the hedges,--in the inconspicuousness of any given feature,
and the mellow tone and homely sincerity of all; now dwelling fondly
upon the groups of neatly modeled stacks, then upon the field
occupations, the gathering of turnips and cabbages, or the digging of
potatoes,--how I longed to turn up the historic soil, into which had
passed the sweat and virtue of so many generations, with my own
spade,--then upon the quaint, old, thatched houses, or the cluster of
tiled roofs, then catching at a church spire across a meadow (and it is
all meadow), or at the remains of tower or wall overrun with ivy.

Here, something almost human looks out at you from the landscape;
Nature here has been so long under the dominion of man, has been taken
up and laid down by him so many times, worked over and over with his
hands, fed and fattened by his toil and industry, and, on the whole,
has proved herself so willing and tractable, that she has taken on
something of his image, and seems to radiate his presence. She is
completely domesticated, and no doubt loves the titillation of the
harrow and plow. The fields look half conscious; and if ever the cattle
have "great and tranquil thoughts," as Emerson suggests they do, it
must be when lying upon these lawns and meadows. I noticed that the
trees, the oaks and elms, looked like fruit trees, or as if they had
felt the humanizing influences of so many generations of men, and were
betaking themselves from the woods to the orchard. The game is more
than half tame, and one could easily understand that it had a keeper.

But the look of those fields and parks went straight to my heart.  It
is not merely that they were so smooth and cultivated, but that they
were so benign and maternal, so redolent of cattle and sheep and of
patient, homely farm labor. One gets only here and there a glimpse of
such in this country. I see occasionally about our farms a patch of an
acre or half acre upon which has settled this atmosphere of ripe and
loving husbandry; a choice bit of meadow about the barn or orchard, or
near the house, which has had some special fattening, perhaps been the
site of some former garden, or barn, or homestead, or which has had the
wash of some building, where the feet of children have played for
generations, and the flocks and herds have been fed in winter, and
where they love to lie and ruminate at night,--a piece of sward thick
and smooth, and full of warmth and nutriment, where the grass is
greenest and freshest in spring, and the hay finest and thickest in
summer.

This is the character of the whole of England that I saw.  I had been
told I should see a garden, but I did not know before to what an extent
the earth could become a living repository of the virtues of so many
generations of gardeners. The tendency to run to weeds and wild growths
seems to have been utterly eradicated from the soil; and if anything
were to spring upspontaneously, I think it would be cabbage and
turnips, or grass and grain.

And yet, to American eyes, the country seems quite uninhabited, there
are so few dwellings and so, few people. Such a landscape at home would
be dotted all over with thrifty farmhouses, each with its group of
painted outbuildings, and along every road and highway would be seen
the well-to-do turnouts of the independent freeholders. But in England
the dwellings of the people, the farmers, are so humble and
inconspicuous and are really so far apart, and the halls and the
country-seats of the aristocracy are so hidden in the midst of vast
estates, that the landscape seems almost deserted, and it is not till
you see the towns and great cities that you can understand where so
vast a population keeps itself.

Another thing that would be quite sure to strike my eye on this my
first ride across British soil, and on all subsequent rides, was the
enormous number of birds and fowls of various kinds that swarmed in the
air or covered the ground. It was truly amazing It seemed as if the
feathered life of a whole continent must have been concentrated on this
island. Indeed, I doubt if a sweeping together of all the birds of the
United States into any two of the largest States would people the earth
and air more fully. There appeared to be a plover, a crow, a rook, a
blackbird, and a sparrow to every square yard of ground. They know the
value of birds in Britain,--that they are the friends, not the enemies,
of the farmer. It must be the paradise of crows and rooks. It did me
good to see them so much at home about the fields and even in the
towns. I was glad also to see that the British crow was not a stranger
to me, and that he differed from his brother on the American side of
the Atlantic only in being less alert and cautious, having less use for
these qualities.

Now and then the train would start up some more tempting game.  A brace
or two of partridges or a covey of quails would settle down in the
stubble, or a cock pheasant drop head and tail and slide into the
copse. Rabbits also would scamper back from the borders of the fields
into the thickets or peep slyly out, making my sportsman's fingers
tingle.

I have no doubt I should be a notorious poacher in England.  How could
an American see so much game and not wish to exterminate it entirely as
he does at home? But sporting is an expensive luxury here. In the first
place a man pays a heavy tax on his gun, nearly or quite half its
value; then he has to have a license to hunt, for which he pays
smartly; then permission from the owner of the land upon which he
wishes to hunt; so that the game is hedged about by a triple safeguard.

An American, also, will be at once struck with the look of greater
substantiality and completeness in everything he sees here. No
temporizing, no makeshifts, no evidence of hurry, or failure, or
contract work; no wood and little paint, but plenty of iron and brick
and stone. This people have taken plenty of time, and have built broad
and deep, and placed the cap-stone on. All this I had been told, but it
pleased me so in the seeing that I must tell it again. It is worth a
voyage across the Atlantic to see the bridges alone. I believe I had
seen little other than wooden bridges before, and in England I saw not
one such, but everywhere solid arches of masonry, that were refreshing
and reassuring to behold. Even the lanes and byways about the farm, I
noticed, crossed the little creeks with a span upon which an elephant
would not hesitate to tread, or artillery trains to pass. There is no
form so pleasing to look upon as the arch, or that affords so much food
and suggestion to the mind. It seems to stimulate the volition, the
will-power, and for my part I cannot look upon a noble span without a
feeling of envy, for I know the hearts of heroes are thus keyed and
fortified. The arch is the symbol of strength and activity, and of
rectitude.

In Europe I took a new lease of this feeling, this partiality for the
span, and had daily opportunities to indulge and confirm it. In London
I had immense satisfaction in observing the bridges there, and in
walking over them, firm as the geological strata and as enduring.
London Bridge, Waterloo Bridge, Blackfriars, clearing the river in a
few gigantic leaps, like things of life and motion,--to pass over one
of these bridges, or to sail under it, awakens the emotion of the
sublime. I think the moral value of such a bridge as the Waterloo must
be inestimable. It seems to me the British Empire itself is stronger
for such a bridge, and that all public and private virtues are
stronger. In Paris, too, those superb monuments over the Seine,--I
think they alone ought to inspire the citizens with a love of
permanence, and help hold them to stricter notions of law and
dependence. No doubt kings and tyrants know the value of these things,
and as yet they certainly have the monopoly of them.


LONDON

I am too good a countryman to feel much at home in cities, and usually
value them only as conveniences, but for London I conceived quite an
affection; perhaps because it is so much like a natural formation
itself, and strikes less loudly, or perhaps sharply, upon the senses
than our great cities do. It is a forest of brick and stone of the most
stupendous dimensions, and one traverses it in the same adventurous
kind of way that he does woods and mountains. The maze and tangle of
streets is something fearful, and any generalization of them a step not
to be hastily taken. My experience heretofore had been that cities
generally were fractions that could be greatly reduced, but London I
found I could not simplify, and every morning for weeks, when I came
out of my hotel, it was a question whether my course lay in this, or in
exactly the opposite direction. It has no unit of structure, but is a
vast aggregation of streets and houses, or in fact of towns and cities,
which have to be mastered in detail. I tried the third or fourth day to
get a bird's-eye view from the top of St. Paul's, but saw through the
rifts in the smoke only a waste,--literally a waste of red tiles and
chimney pots. The confusion and desolation were complete.

But I finally mastered the city, in a measure, by the aid of a shilling
map, which I carried with me wherever I went, and upon which, when I
was lost, I would hunt myself up, thus making in the end a very
suggestive and entertaining map. Indeed, every inch of this piece of
colored paper is alive to me. If I did not make the map itself, I at
least verified it, which is nearly as good, and the verification, on
street corner by day and under lamp or by shop window at night, was
often a matter of so much concern that I doubt if the original surveyor
himself put more heart into certain parts of his work than I did in the
proof of them.

London has less metropolitan splendor than New York, and less of the
full-blown pride of the shopman. Its stores are not nearly so big, and
it has no signboards that contain over one thousand feet of lumber;
neither did I see any names painted on the gable ends of the buildings
that the man in the moon could read without his opera-glass. I went out
one day to look up one of the great, publishing houses, and passed it
and repassed it several times trying to find the sign. Finally, having
made sure of the building, I found the name of the firm cut into the
door jamb.

London seems to have been built and peopled by countrymen, who have
preserved all the rural reminiscences possible. All its great streets
or avenues are called roads, as King's Road, City Road, Edgware Road,
Tottenham Court Road, with innumerable lesser roads. Then there are
lanes and walks, and such rural names among the streets as Long Acre,
Snowhill, Poultry, Bush-lane, Hill-road, Houndsditch, and not one grand
street or imperial avenue.

My visit fell at a most favorable juncture as to weather, there being
but few rainy days and but little fog. I had imagined that they had
barely enough fair weather in London, at any season, to keep alive the
tradition of sunshine and of blue sky, but the October days I spent
there were not so very far behind what we have at home at this season.
London often puts on a nightcap of smoke and fog, which it pulls down
over its ears pretty close at times; and the sun has a habit of lying
abed very late in the morning, which all the people imitate; but I
remember some very pleasant weather there, and some bright moonlight
nights.

I saw but one full-blown characteristic London fog.  I was in the
National Gallery one day, trying to make up my mind about Turner, when
this chimney-pot meteor came down. It was like a great yellow dog
taking possession of the world. The light faded from the room, the
pictures ran together in confused masses of shadow on the walls, and in
the street only a dim yellowish twilight prevailed, through which
faintly twinkled the lights in the shop windows. Vehicles came slowly
out of the dirty obscurity on one side and plunged into it on the
other. Waterloo Bridge gave one or two leaps and disappeared, and the
Nelson Column in Trafalgar Square was obliterated for half its length.
Travel was impeded, boats stopped on the river, trains stood still on
the track, and for an hour and a half London lay buried beneath this
sickening eruption. I say eruption, because a London fog is only a
London smoke tempered by a moist atmosphere. It is called "fog" by
courtesy, but lampblack is its chief ingredient. It is not wet like our
fogs, but quite dry, and makes the eyes smart and the nose tingle.
Whenever the sun can be seen through it, his face is red and dirty;
seen through a bona fide fog, his face is clean and white. English
coal--or "coals," as they say here--in burning gives out an enormous
quantity of thick, yellowish smoke, which is at no time absorbed or
dissipated as it would be in our hard, dry atmosphere, and which at
certain times is not absorbed at all, but falls down swollen and
augmented by the prevailing moisture. The atmosphere of the whole
island is more or less impregnated with smoke, even on the fairest
days, and it becomes more and more dense as you approach the great
towns. Yet this compound of smut, fog, and common air is an elixir of
youth; and this is one of the surprises of London, to see amid so much
soot and dinginess such fresh, blooming complexions, and in general
such a fine physical tone and full-bloodedness among the people,--such
as one has come to associate only with the best air and the purest,
wholesomest country influences. What the secret of it may be, I am at a
loss to know, unless it is that the moist atmosphere does not dry up
the blood as our air does, and that the carbon and creosote have some
rare antiseptic and preservative qualities, as doubtless they have,
that are efficacious in the human physiology. It is no doubt true,
also, that the people do not tan in this climate, as in ours, and that
the delicate flesh tints show more on that account.

I speak thus of these things with reference to our standards at home,
because I found that these standards were ever present in my mind, and
that I was unconsciously applying them to whatever I saw and wherever I
went, and often, as I shall have occasion to show, to their discredit.

Climate is a great matter, and no doubt many of the differences between
the English stock at home and its offshoot in our country are traceable
to this source. Our climate is more heady and less stomachic than the
English; sharpens the wit, but dries up the fluids and viscera; favors
an irregular, nervous energy, but exhausts the animal spirits. It is,
perhaps, on this account that I have felt since my return how much
easier it is to be a dyspeptic here than in Great Britain. One's
appetite is keener and more ravenous, and the temptation to bolt one's
food greater. The American is not so hearty an eater as the Englishman,
but the forces of his body are constantly leaving his stomach in the
lurch, and running off into his hands and feet and head. His eyes are
bigger than his belly, but an Englishman's belly is a deal bigger than
his eyes, and the number of plum puddings and the amount of Welsh
rarebit he devours annually would send the best of us to his grave in
half that time. We have not enough constitutional inertia and
stolidity; our climate gives us no rest, but goads us day and night;
and the consequent wear and tear of life is no doubt greater in this
country than in any other on the globe. We are playing the game more
rapidly, and I fear less thoroughly and sincerely, than the mother
country.

The more uniform good health of English women is thought to be a matter
of exercise in the open air, as walking, riding, driving, but the prime
reason is mainly a climatic one, uniform habits of exercise being more
easily kept up in that climate than in this, and being less exhaustive,
one day with another. You can walk there every day in the year without
much discomfort, and the stimulus is about the same. Here it is too hot
in summer and too cold in winter, or else it keys you up too tight one
day and unstrings you the next; all fire and motion in the morning, and
all listlessness and ennui in the afternoon; a spur one hour and a
sedative the next.

A watch will not keep as steady time here as in Britain, and the human
clock-work is more liable to get out of repair for the same reason. Our
women, especially, break down prematurely, and the decay of maternity
in this country is no doubt greater than in any of the oldest civilized
communities. One reason, doubtless, is that our women are the greatest
slaves of fashion in the whole world, and, in following the whims of
that famous courtesan, have the most fickle and destructive climate to
contend with.

English women all have good-sized feet, and Englishmen, too, and wear
large, comfortable shoes. This was a noticeable feature at once:
coarse, loosefitting clothes of both sexes, and large boots and shoes
with low heels. They evidently knew the use of their feet, and had none
of the French, or American, or Chinese fastidiousness about this part
of their anatomy. I notice that, when a family begins to run out, it
turns out its toes, drops off at the heel, shortens its jaw, and dotes
on small feet and hands.

Another promoter of health in England is woolen clothes, which are worn
the year round, the summer driving people into no such extremities as
here. And the good, honest woolen stuffs of one kind and another that
fill the shops attest the need and the taste that prevail. They had a
garment when I was in London called the Ulster overcoat,--a coarse,
shaggy, bungling coat, with a skirt reaching nearly to the feet, very
ugly, tried by the fashion plates, but very comfortable, and quite the
fashion. This very sensible garment has since become well known in
America.

The Americans in London were put out with the tailors, and could rarely
get suited, on account of the loose cutting and the want of "style."
But "style" is the hiatus that threatens to swallow us all one of these
days. About the only monstrosity I saw in the British man's dress was
the stove-pipe hat, which everybody wears. At first I feared it might
be a police regulation, or a requirement of the British Constitution,
for I seemed to be about the only man in the kingdom with a soft hat
on, and I had noticed that before leaving the steamer every man brought
out from its hiding-place one of these polished brain-squeezers. Even
the boys wear them,--youths of nine and ten years with little stovepipe
hats on; and at Eton School I saw black swarms of them: even the boys
in the field were playing football in stove-pipe bats.

What we call beauty in woman is so much a matter of youth and health
that the average of female beauty in London is, I believe, higher than
in this country. English women are comely and good-looking. It is an
extremely fresh and pleasant face that you see everywhere,--softer,
less clearly and sharply cut than the typical female face in this
country,--less spirituelle, less perfect in form, but stronger and
sweeter. There is more blood, and heart, and substance back of it. The
American race of the present generation is doubtless the most shapely,
both in face and figure, that has yet appeared. American children are
far less crude, and lumpy, and awkward-looking than the European
children. One generation in this country suffices vastly to improve the
looks of the offspring of the Irish or German or Norwegian emigrant.
There is surely something in our climate or conditions that speedily
refines and sharpens--and, shall I add, hardens?--the human features.
The face loses something, but it comes into shape; and of such beauty
as is the product of this tendency we can undoubtedly show more,
especially in our women, than the parent stock in Europe; while
American schoolgirls, I believe, have the most bewitching beauty in the
world.

The English plainness of speech is observable even in the signs or
notices along the streets. Instead of "Lodging," "Lodging," as with us,
one sees "Beds," "Beds," which has a very homely sound; and in place of
"gentlemen's" this, that, or the other, about public places, the word
"men's" is used.

I suppose, if it were not for the bond of a written language and
perpetual intercourse, the two nations would not be able to understand
each other in the course of a hundred years, the inflection and
accentuation are so different. I recently heard an English lady say,
referring to the American speech, that she could hardly believe her own
language could be spoken so strangely.


ARCHITECTURE

One sees right away that the English are a home people, a domestic
people; and he does not need to go into their houses or homes to find
this out. It is in the air and in the general aspect of things.
Everywhere you see the virtue and quality that we ascribe to home-made
articles. It seems as if things had been made by hand, and with care
and affection, as they have been. The land of caste and kings, there is
yet less glitter and display than in this country, less publicity, and,
of course, less rivalry and emulation also, for which we pay very
dearly. You have got to where the word homely preserves its true
signification, and is no longer a term of disparagement, but expressive
of a cardinal virtue.

I liked the English habit of naming their houses; it shows the
importance they attach to their homes. All about the suburbs of London
and in the outlying villages I noticed nearly every house and cottage
had some appropriate designation, as Terrace House, Oaktree House, Ivy
Cottage, or some Villa, usually cut into the stone gate-post, and this
name is put on the address of the letters. How much better to be known
by your name than by your number! I believe the same custom prevails in
the country, and is common to the middle classes as well as to the
aristocracy. It is a good feature. A house or a farm with an
appropriate name, which everybody recognizes, must have an added value
and importance.

Modern English houses are less showy than ours, and have more weight
and permanence,--no flat roofs and no painted outside shutters. Indeed,
that pride of American country people, and that abomination in the
landscape, a white house with green blinds, I did not see a specimen of
in England. They do not aim to make their houses conspicuous, but the
contrary. They make a large, yellowish brick that has a pleasing effect
in the wall. Then a very short space of time in that climate suffices
to take off the effect of newness, and give a mellow, sober hue to the
building. Another advantage of the climate is that it permits outside
plastering. Thus almost any stone may be imitated, and the work endure
for ages; while our sudden changes, and extremes of heat and cold, of
dampness and dryness, will cause the best work of this kind to peel off
in a few years.

Then this people have better taste in building than we have, perhaps
because they have the noblest samples and specimens of architecture
constantly before them,--those old feudal castles and royal residences,
for instance. I was astonished to see how homely and good they looked,
how little they challenged admiration, and how much they emulated rocks
and trees. They were surely built in a simpler and more poetic age than
this. It was like meeting some plain, natural nobleman after contact
with one of the bedizened, artificial sort. The Tower of London, for
instance, is as pleasing to the eye, has the same fitness and harmony,
as a hut in the woods; and I should think an artist might have the same
pleasure in copying it into his picture as he would in copying a
pioneer's log cabin. So with Windsor Castle, which has the beauty of a
ledge of rocks, and crowns the hill like a vast natural formation. The
warm, simple interior, too, of these castles and palaces, the honest
oak without paint or varnish, the rich wood carvings, the ripe human
tone and atmosphere,--how it all contrasts, for instance, with the
showy, gilded, cast-iron interior of our commercial or political
palaces, where everything that smacks of life or nature is studiously
excluded under the necessity of making the building fire-proof.

I was not less pleased with the higher ornamental architecture,--the
old churches and cathedrals,--which appealed to me in a way
architecture had never before done. In fact, I found that I had never
seen architecture before,--a building with genius and power in it, and
that one could look at with the eye of the imagination. Not mechanics
merely, but poets, had wrought and planned here, and the granite was
tender with human qualities. The plants and weeds growing in the niches
and hollows of the walls, the rooks and martins and jackdaws inhabiting
the towers and breeding about the eaves, are but types of the feelings
and emotions of the human heart that flit and hover over these old
piles, and find affectionate lodgment in them.

Time, of course, has done a great deal for this old architecture.
Nature has taken it lovingly to herself, has set her seal upon it, and
adopted it into her system. Just the foil which beauty--especially the
crystallic beauty of architecture--needs has been given by this hazy,
mellowing atmosphere. As the grace and suggestiveness of all objects
are enhanced by a fall of snow,--forest, fence, hive, shed, knoll,
rock, tree, all being laid under the same white enchantment,--so time
has wrought in softening and toning down this old religious
architecture, and bringing it into harmony with nature.

Our climate has a much keener edge, both of frost and fire, and touches
nothing so gently or creatively; yet time would, no doubt, do much for
our architecture, if we would give it a chance,--for that apotheosis of
prose, the National Capitol at Washington, upon which, I notice, a
returned traveler bases our claim to be considered "ahead" of the Old
World, even in architecture; but the reigning gods interfere, and each
spring or fall give the building a clean shirt in the shape of a coat
of white paint. In like manner, other public buildings never become
acclimated, but are. annually scoured with soap and sand, the national
passion for the brightness of newness interfering to defeat any benison
which the gods might be disposed to pronounce upon them. Spotlessness,
I know, is not a characteristic of our politics, though it is said that
whitewashing is, which may account for this ceaseless paint-pot
renovation of our public buildings. In a world lit only by the moon,
our Capitol would be a paragon of beauty, and the spring whitewashing
could also be endured; but under our blazing sun and merciless sky it
parches the vision, and makes it turn with a feeling of relief to rocks
and trees, or to some weather-stained, dilapidated shed or hovel.

How winningly and picturesquely in comparison the old architecture of
London addresses itself to the eye,--St. Paul's Cathedral, for
instance, with its vast blotches and stains, as if it had been dipped
in some black Lethe of oblivion, and then left to be restored by the
rains and the elements! This black Lethe is the London smoke and fog,
which has left a dark deposit over all the building, except the upper
and more exposed parts, where the original silvery whiteness of the
stone shows through, the effect of the whole thus being like one of
those graphic Rembrandt photographs or carbons, the prominences in a
strong light, and the rest in deepest shadow. I was never tired of
looking at this noble building, and of going out of my way to walk
around it; but I am at a loss to know whether the pleasure I had in it
arose from my love of nature, or from a susceptibility to art for which
I had never given myself credit. Perhaps from both, for I seemed to
behold Art turning toward and reverently acknowledging Nature,-indeed,
in a manner already become Nature.

I believe the critics of such things find plenty of fault with St.
Paul's; and even I could see that its bigness was a little prosy, that
it suggested the historic rather than the poetic muse; yet, for all
that, I could never look at it without a profound emotion. Viewed
coolly and critically, it might seem like a vast specimen of
Episcopalianism in architecture. Miltonic in its grandeur and
proportions, and Miltonic in its prosiness and mongrel classicism also,
yet its power and effectiveness are unmistakable. The beholder has no
vantage-ground from which to view it, or to take in its total effect,
on account of its being so closely beset by such a mob of shops and
buildings; yet the glimpses he does get here and there through the
opening made by some street, when passing in its vicinity, are very
striking and suggestive; the thin veil of smoke, which is here as
constant and uniform as the atmosphere itself, wrapping it about with
the enchantment of time and distance.

The interior I found even more impressive than the exterior, perhaps
because I was unprepared for it. I had become used to imposing
exteriors at home, and did not reflect that in a structure like this I
should see an interior also, and that here alone the soul of the
building would be fully revealed. It was Miltonic in the best sense; it
was like the mightiest organ music put into form. Such depths, such
solemn vastness, such gulfs and abysses of architectural space, the
rich, mellow light, the haze outside becoming a mysterious, hallowing
presence within, quite mastered me, and I sat down upon a seat, feeling
my first genuine cathedral intoxication. As it was really an
intoxication, a sense of majesty and power quite overwhelming in my
then uncloyed condition, I speak of it the more freely. My companions
rushed about as if each one had had a searchwarrant in his pocket; but
I was content to uncover my head and drop into a seat, and busy my mind
with some simple object near at hand, while the sublimity that soared
about me stole into my soul and possessed it. My sensation was like
that imparted by suddenly reaching a great altitude: there was a sort
of relaxation of the muscles, followed by a sense of physical weakness;
and after half an hour or so I felt compelled to go out into the open
air, and leave till another day the final survey of the building. Next
day I came back, but there can be only one first time, and I could not
again surprise myself with the same feeling of wonder and intoxication.
But St. Paul's will bear many visits. I came again and again, and never
grew tired of it. Crossing its threshold was entering another world,
where the silence and solitude were so profound and overpowering that
the noise of the streets outside, or of the stream of visitors, or of
the workmen engaged on the statuary, made no impression. They were all
belittled, lost, like the humming of flies. Even the afternoon
services, the chanting, and the tremendous organ, were no interruption,
and left me just as much alone as ever. They only served to set off the
silence, to fathom its depth.

The dome of St. Paul's is the original of our dome at Washington; but
externally I think ours is the more graceful, though the effect inside
is tame and flat in comparison. This is owing partly to its lesser size
and height, and partly to our hard, transparent atmosphere, which lends
no charm or illusion, but mainly to the stupid, unimaginative plan of
it. Our dome shuts down like an inverted iron pot; there is no vista,
no outlook, no relation, and hence no proportion. You open a door and
are in a circular pen, and can look in only one direction,--up. If the
iron pot were slashed through here and there, or if it rested on a row
of tall columns or piers, and were shown to be a legitimate part of the
building, it would not appear the exhausted receiver it does now.

The dome of St. Paul's is the culmination of the whole interior of the
building. Rising over the central area, it seems to gather up the power
and majesty of the nave, the aisles, the transepts, the choir, and give
them expression and expansion in its lofty firmament.

Then those colossal piers, forty feet broad some of them, and nearly
one hundred feet high,--they easily eclipsed what I had recently seen
in a mine, and which I at the time imagined shamed all the architecture
of the world,--where the mountain was upheld over a vast space by
massive piers left by the miners, with a ceiling unrolled over your
head, and apparently descending upon you, that looked like a petrified
thunder-cloud.

The view from the upper gallery, or top of the dome, looking down
inside, is most impressive. The public are not admitted to this
gallery, for fear, the keeper told me, it would become the scene of
suicides; people unable to withstand the terrible fascination would
leap into the yawning gulf. But, with the privilege usually accorded to
Americans, I stepped down into the narrow circle, and, leaning over the
balustrade, coolly looked the horrible temptation in the face.

On the whole, St. Paul's is so vast and imposing that one wonders what
occasion or what ceremony can rise to the importance of not being
utterly dwarfed within its walls. The annual gathering of the charity
children, ten or twelve thousand in number, must make a ripple or two
upon its solitude, or an exhibition like the thanksgiving of the Queen,
when sixteen or eighteen thousand persons were assembled beneath its
roof. But one cannot forget that it is, for the most part, a great
toy,--a mammoth shell, whose bigness bears no proportion to the living
(if, indeed, it is living), indwelling necessity. It is a tenement so
large that the tenant looks cold and forlorn, and in danger of being
lost within it.

No such objection can be made to Westminster Abbey, which is a mellow,
picturesque old place, the interior arrangement and architecture of
which affects one like some ancient, dilapidated forest. Even the
sunlight streaming through the dim windows, and falling athwart the
misty air, was like the sunlight of a long-gone age. The very
atmosphere was pensive, and filled the tall spaces like a memory and a
dream. I sat down and listened to the choral service and to the organ,
which blended perfectly with the spirit and sentiment of the place.


ON THE SOUTH DOWNS

One of my best days in England was spent amid the singing of skylarks
on the South Down Hills, near an old town at the mouth of the Little
Ouse, where I paused on my way to France. The prospect of hearing one
or two of the classical birds of the Old World had not been the least
of the attractions of my visit, though I knew the chances were against
me so late in the season, and I have to thank my good genius for
guiding me to the right place at the right time. To get out of London
was delight enough, and then to find myself quite unexpectedly on these
soft rolling hills, of a mild October day, in full sight of the sea,
with the larks pouring out their gladness overhead, was to me good
fortune indeed.

The South Downs form a very remarkable feature of this part of England,
and are totally unlike any other landscape I ever saw. I believe it is
Huxley who applies to them the epithet of muttony, which they certainly
deserve, for they are like the backs of immense sheep, smooth, and
round, and fat,--so smooth, indeed, that the eye can hardly find a
place to take hold of, not a tree, or bush, or fence, or house, or
rock, or stone, or other object, for miles and miles, save here and
there a group of strawcapped stacks, or a flock of sheep crawling
slowly over them, attended by a shepherd and dog, and the only lines
visible those which bound the squares where different crops had been
gathered. The soil was rich and mellow, like a garden,--hills of chalk
with a pellicle of black loam.

These hills stretch a great distance along the coast, and are cut
squarely off by the sea, presenting on this side a chain of white chalk
cliffs suggesting the old Latin name of this land, Albion.

Before I had got fifty yards from the station I began to hear the
larks, and being unprepared for them I was a little puzzled at first,
but was not long discovering what luck I was in. The song disappointed
me at first, being less sweet and melodious than I had expected to
hear; indeed, I thought it a little sharp and harsh,--a little
stubbly,--but in other respects, in strength and gladness and
continuity, it was wonderful. And the more I heard it the better I
liked it, until I would gladly have given any of my songsters at home
for a bird that could shower down such notes, even in autumn. Up, up,
went the bird, describing a large easy spiral till he attained an
altitude of three or four hundred feet, when, spread out against the
sky for a space of ten or fifteen minutes or more, he poured out his
delight, filling all the vault with sound. The song is of the sparrow
kind, and, in its best parts, perpetually suggested the notes of our
vesper sparrow; but the wonder of it is its copiousness and sustained
strength. There is no theme, no beginning, middle, or end, like most of
our best birdsongs, but a perfect swarm of notes pouring out like bees
from a hive, and resembling each other nearly as closely, and only
ceasing as the bird nears the earth again. We have many more melodious
songsters; the bobolink in the meadows for instance, the vesper sparrow
in the pastures, the purple finch in the groves, the winter wren, or
any of the thrushes in the woods, or the wood-wagtail, whose air song
is of a similar character to that of the skylark, and is even more
rapid and ringing, and is delivered in nearly the same manner; but our
birds all stop when the skylark has only just begun. Away he goes on
quivering wing, inflating his throat fuller and fuller, mounting and
mounting, and turning to all points of the compass as if to embrace the
whole landscape in his song, the notes still raining upon you, as
distinct as ever, after you have left him far behind. You feel that you
need be in no hurry to observe the song lest the bird finish; you walk
along, your mind reverts to other things, you examine the grass and
weeds, or search for a curious stone, still there goes the bird; you
sit down and study the landscape, or send your thoughts out toward
France or Spain, or across the sea to your own land, and yet, when you
get them back, there is that song above you, almost as unceasing as the
light of a star. This strain indeed suggests some rare pyrotechnic
display, musical sounds being substituted for the many-colored sparks
and lights. And yet I will add, what perhaps the best readers do not
need to be told, that neither the lark-song, nor any other bird-song in
the open air and under the sky, is as noticeable a feature as my
description of it might imply, or as the poets would have us believe;
and that most persons, not especially interested in birds or their
notes, and intent upon the general beauty of the landscape, would
probably pass it by unremarked.

I suspect that it is a little higher flight than the facts will bear
out when the writers make the birds go out of sight into the sky. I
could easily follow them on this occasion, though, if I took my eye
away for a moment, it was very difficult to get it back again. I had to
search for them as the astronomer searches for a star. It may be that
in the spring, when the atmosphere is less clear and the heart of the
bird full of a more mad and reckless love, that the climax is not
reached until the eye loses sight of the singer.

Several attempts have been made to introduce the lark into this
country, but for some reason or other the experiment has never
succeeded. The birds have been liberated in Virginia and on Long
Island, but do not seem ever to have been heard of afterwards. I see no
reason why they should not thrive anywhere along our Atlantic seaboard,
and I think the question of introducing them worthy of more thorough
and serious attention than has yet been given it, for the lark is
really an institution; and as he sings long after the other birds are
silent,--as if he had perpetual spring in his heart,--he would be a
great acquisition to our fields and meadows. It may be that he cannot
stand the extremes of our climate, though the English sparrow thrives
well enough. The Smithsonian Institution has received specimens of the
skylark from Alaska, where, no doubt, they find a climate more like the
English.

They have another prominent singer in England, namely, the robin,--the
original robin redbreast,--a slight, quick, active bird with an orange
front and an olive back, and a bright, musical warble that I caught by
every garden, lane, and hedge-row. It suggests our bluebird, and has
similar habits and manners, though it is a much better musician.

The European bird that corresponds to our robin is the blackbird, of
which Tennyson sings:--

       "O Blackbird, sing me something well;
       While all the neighbors shoot thee round
       I keep smooth plats of fruitful ground
       Where thou may'st warble, eat, and dwell."

It quite startled me to see such a resemblance,--to see, indeed, a
black robin. In size, form, flight, manners, note, call, there is
hardly an appreciable difference. The bird starts up with the same
flirt of the wings, and calls out in the same jocund, salutatory way,
as he hastens off. The nest, of coarse mortar in the fork of a tree, or
in an outbuilding, or in the side of a wall, is also the same.

The bird I wished most to hear, namely, the nightingale, had already
departed on its southern journey. I saw one in the Zoological Gardens
in London, and took a good look at him. He struck me as bearing a close
resemblance to our hermit thrush, with something in his manners that
suggested the water-thrush also. Carlyle said he first recognized its
song from the description of it in "Wilhelm Meister," and that it was a
"sudden burst," which is like the song of our water-thrush.

I have little doubt our songsters excel in melody, while the European
birds excel in profuseness and volubility. I heard many bright,
animated notes and many harsh ones, but few that were melodious. This
fact did not harmonize with the general drift of the rest of my
observations, for one of the first things that strikes an American in
Europe is the mellowness and rich tone of things. The European is
softer-voiced than the American and milder-mannered, but the bird
voices seem an exception to this rule.


PARKS

While in London I had much pleasure in strolling through the great
parks, Hyde Park, Regent's Park, St. James Park, Victoria Park, and in
making Sunday excursions to Richmond Park, Hampden Court Parks, and the
great parks at Windsor Castle. The magnitude of all these parks was
something I was entirely unprepared for, and their freedom also; one
could roam where he pleased. Not once did I see a signboard, "Keep off
the grass," or go here or go there. There was grass enough, and one
could launch out in every direction without fear of trespassing on
forbidden ground. One gets used, at least I do, to such petty parks at
home, and walks amid them so cautiously and circumspectly, every shrub
and tree and grass plat saying "Hands off," that it is a new sensation
to enter a city pleasure ground like Hyde Park,--a vast natural
landscape, nearly two miles long and a mile wide, with broad, rolling
plains, with herds of sheep grazing, and forests and lakes, and all as
free as the air. He have some quite sizable parks and reservations in
Washington, and the citizen has the right of way over their tortuous
gravel walks, but he puts his foot upon the grass at the risk of being
insolently hailed by the local police. I have even been called to order
for reclining upon a seat under a tree in the Smithsonian grounds. I
must sit upright as in church. But in Hyde Park or Regent's Park I
could not only walk upon the grass, but lie upon it, or roll upon it,
or play "one catch all" with children, boys, dogs, or sheep upon it;
and I took my revenge for once for being so long confined to gravel
walks, and gave the grass an opportunity to grow under my foot whenever
I entered one of these parks.

This free-and-easy rural character of the London parks is quite in
keeping with the tone and atmosphere of the great metropolis itself,
which in so many respects has a country homeliness and sincerity, and
shows the essentially bucolic taste of the people; contrasting in this
respect with the parks and gardens of Paris, which show as unmistakably
the citizen and the taste for art and the beauty of design and
ornamentation. Hyde Park seems to me the perfection of a city pleasure
ground of this kind, because it is so free and so thoroughly a piece of
the country, and so exempt from any petty artistic displays.

In walking over Richmond Park I found I had quite a day's work before
me, as it was like traversing a township; while the great park at
Windsor Castle, being upwards of fifty miles around, might well make
the boldest pedestrian hesitate. My first excursion was to Hampton
Court, an old royal residence, where I spent a delicious October day
wandering through Bushy Park, and looking with covetous, though
admiring eyes upon the vast herds of deer that dotted the plains, or
gave way before me as I entered the woods. There seemed literally to be
many thousands of these beautiful animals in this park, and the loud,
hankering sounds of the bucks, as they pursued or circled around the
does, was a new sound to my ears. The rabbits and pheasants also were
objects of the liveliest interest to me, and I found that after all a
good shot at them with the eye, especially when I could credit myself
with alertness or stealthiness, was satisfaction enough.

I thought it worthy of note that, though these great parks in and about
London were so free, and apparently without any police regulations
whatever, yet I never saw prowling about them any of those vicious,
ruffianly looking characters that generally infest the neighborhood of
our great cities, especially of a Sunday. There were troops of boys,
but they were astonishingly quiet and innoxious, very unlike American
boys, white or black, a band of whom making excursions into the country
are always a band of outlaws. Ruffianism with us is no doubt much more
brazen and pronounced, not merely because the law is lax, but because
such is the genius of the people.


       II. ENGLISH CHARACTERISTICS

England is a mellow country, and the English people are a mellow
people. They have hung on the tree of nations a long time, and will, no
doubt, hang as much longer; for windfalls, I reckon, are not the order
in this island. We are pitched several degrees higher in this country.
By contrast, things here are loud, sharp, and garish. Our geography is
loud; the manners of the people are loud; our climate is loud, very
loud, so dry and sharp, and full of violent changes and contrasts; and
our goings-out and comings-in as a nation are anything but silent. Do
we not occasionally give the door an extra slam just for effect?

In England everything is on a lower key, slower, steadier, gentler.
Life is, no doubt, as full, or fuller, in its material forms and
measures, but less violent and aggressive. The buffers the English have
between their cars to break the shock are typical of much one sees
there.

All sounds are softer in England; the surface of things is less hard.
The eye of day and the face of Nature are less bright. Everything has a
mellow, subdued cast. There is no abruptness in the landscape, no sharp
and violent contrasts, no brilliant and striking tints in the foliage.
A soft, pale yellow is all one sees in the way of tints along the
borders of the autumn woods. English apples (very small and inferior,
by the way) are not so highly colored as ours. The blackberries, just
ripening in October, are less pungent and acid; and the garden
vegetables, such as cabbage, celery, cauliflower, beet, and other root
crops, are less rank and fibrous; and I am very sure that the meats
also are tenderer and sweeter. There can be no doubt about the
superiority of English mutton; and the tender and succulent grass, and
the moist and agreeable climate, must tell upon the beef also.

English coal is all soft coal, and the stone is soft stone.  The
foundations of the hills are chalk instead of granite. The stone with
which most of the old churches and cathedrals are built would not
endure in our climate half a century; but in Britain the tooth of Time
is much blunter, and the hunger of the old man less ravenous, and the
ancient architecture stands half a millennium, or until it is slowly
worn away by the gentle attrition of the wind and rain.

At Chester, the old Roman wall that surrounds the town, built in the
first century and repaired in the ninth, is still standing without a
break or a swerve, though in some places the outer face of the wall is
worn through. The Cathedral, and St. John's Church, in the same town,
present to the beholder outlines as jagged and broken as rocks and
cliffs; and yet it is only chip by chip, or grain by grain, that ruin
approaches. The timber also lasts an incredibly long time. Beneath one
of the arched ways, in the Chester wall above referred to, I saw
timbers that must have been in place five or six hundred years. The
beams in the old houses, also fully exposed to the weather, seem
incapable of decay; those dating from Shakespeare's time being
apparently as firm as ever.

I noticed that the characteristic aspect of the clouds in England was
different from ours,--soft, fleecy, vapory, indistinguishable,--never
the firm, compact, sharply, defined, deeply dyed masses and fragments
so common in our own sky. It rains easily but slowly. The average
rainfall of London is less than that of New York, and yet it doubtless
rains ten days in the former to one in the latter. Storms accompanied
with thunder are rare; while the crashing, wrenching, explosive
thunder-gusts so common with us, deluging the earth and convulsing the
heavens, are seldom known.

In keeping with this elemental control and moderation, I found the
character and manners of the people gentler and sweeter than I had been
led to believe they were. No loudness, brazenness, impertinence; no
oaths, no swaggering, no leering at women, no irreverence, no
flippancy, no bullying, no insolence of porters or clerks or
conductors, no importunity of bootblacks or newsboys, no
omnivorousness, of hackmen,--at least, comparatively none,--all of
which an American is apt to notice, and, I hope, appreciate. In London
the bootblack salutes you with a respectful bow and touches his cap,
and would no more think of pursuing you or answering your refusal than
he would of jumping into the Thames. The same is true of the newsboys.
If they were to scream and bellow in London as they do in New York or
Washington, they would be suppressed by the police, as they ought to
be. The vender of papers stands at the comer of the street, with his
goods in his arms, and a large placard spread out at his feet, giving
in big letters the principal news-headings.

Street-cries of all kinds are less noticeable, less aggressive, than in
this country, and the manners of the shopmen make you feel you are
conferring a benefit instead of receiving one. Even their locomotives
are less noisy than ours, having a shrill, infantile whistle that
contrasts strongly with the loud, demoniac yell that makes a residence
near a railway or a depot, in this country, so unbearable. The trains
themselves move with wonderful smoothness and celerity, making a mere
fraction of the racket made by our flying palaces as they go swaying
and jolting over our hasty, ill-ballasted roads.

It is characteristic of the English prudence and plain dealing, that
they put so little on the cars and so much on the road, while the
reverse process is equally characteristic of American enterprise. Our
railway system no doubt has certain advantages, or rather conveniences,
over the English, but, for my part, I had rather ride smoothly,
swiftly, and safely in a luggage van than be jerked and jolted to
destruction in the velvet and veneering of our palace cars. Upholster
the road first, and let us ride on bare boards until a cushion can be
afforded; not till after the bridges are of granite and iron, and the
rails of steel, do we want this more than aristocratic splendor and
luxury of palace and drawingroom cars. To me there is no more marked
sign of essential vulgarity of the national manners than these princely
cars and beggarly, clap-trap roads. It is like a man wearing a ruffled
and jeweled shirtfront, but too poor to afford a shirt itself.

I have said the English are a sweet and mellow people.  There is,
indeed, a charm about these ancestral races that goes to the heart. And
herein was one of the profoundest surprises of my visit, namely, that,
in coming from the New World to the Old, from a people the most
recently out of the woods of any, to one of the ripest and venerablest
of the European nationalities, I should find a race more simple,
youthful, and less sophisticated than the one I had left behind me. Yet
this was my impression. We have lost immensely in some things, and what
we have gained is not yet so obvious or so definable. We have lost in
reverence, in homeliness, in heart and conscience,--in virtue, using
the word in its proper sense. To some, the difference which I note may
appear a difference in favor of the great cuteness, wideawakeness, and
enterprise of the American, but it is simply a difference expressive of
our greater forwardness. We are a forward people, and the god we
worship is Smartness. In one of the worst tendencies of the age,
namely, an impudent, superficial, journalistic intellectuality and
glibness, America, in her polite and literary circles, no doubt leads
all other nations. English books and newspapers show more homely
veracity, more singleness of purpose, in short more character, than
ours. The great charm of such a man as Darwin, for instance, is his
simple manliness and transparent good faith, and the absence in him of
that finical, self-complacent smartness which is the bane of our
literature.

The poet Clough thought the New England man more simple than the man of
Old England. Hawthorne, on the other hand, seemed reluctant to admit
that the English were a "franker and simpler people, from peer to
peasant," than we are; and that they had not yet wandered so far from
that "healthful and primitive simplicity in which man was created" as
have their descendants in America. My own impression accords with
Hawthorne's. We are a more alert and curious people, but not so
simple,--not so easily angered, nor so easily amused. We have partaken
more largely of the fruit of the forbidden tree. The English have more
of the stay-at-home virtues, which, on the other hand, they no doubt
pay pretty well for by their more insular tendencies.

The youths and maidens seemed more simple, with their softer and less
intellectual faces. When I returned from Paris, the only person in the
second-class compartment of the car with me, for a long distance, was
an English youth eighteen or twenty years old, returning home to London
after an absence of nearly a year, which he had spent as waiter in a
Parisian hotel. He was born in London and had spent nearly his whole
life there, where his mother, a widow, then lived. He talked very
freely with me, and told me his troubles, and plans, and hopes, as if
we had long known each other. What especially struck me in the youth
was a kind of sweetness and innocence--perhaps what some would call
"greenness"--that at home I had associated only with country boys, and
not even with them latterly. The smartness and knowingness and a
certain hardness or keenness of our city youths,--there was no trace of
it at all in this young Cockney. But he liked American travelers better
than those from his own country. They were more friendly and
communicative,--were not so afraid to speak to "a fellow," and at the
hotel were more easily pleased.

The American is certainly not the grumbler the Englishman is; he is
more cosmopolitan and conciliatory. The Englishman will not adapt
himself to his surroundings; he is not the least bit an imitative
animal; he will be nothing but an Englishman, and is out of place--an
anomaly--in any country but his own. To understand him, you must see
him at home in the British island where he grew, where he belongs,
where he has expressed himself and justified himself, and where his
interior, unconscious characteristics are revealed. There he is quite a
different creature from what he is abroad. There he is "sweet," but he
sours the moment he steps off the island. In this country he is too
generally arrogant, fault-finding, and supercilious. The very traits of
loudness, sharpness, and unleavenedness, which I complain of in our
national manners, he very frequently exemplifies in an exaggerated
form.

The Scotch or German element no doubt fuses and mixes with ours much
more readily than the purely British.

The traveler feels the past in England as of course he cannot feel it
here; and, along with impressions of the present, one gets the flavor
and influence of earlier, simpler times, which, no doubt, is a potent
charm, and one source of the "rose-color" which some readers have found
in my sketches, as the absence of it is one cause of the raw, acrid,
unlovely character of much that there is in this country. If the
English are the old wine, we are the new. We are not yet thoroughly
leavened as a people, nor have we more than begun to transmute and
humanize our surroundings; and as the digestive and assimilative powers
of the American are clearly less than those of the Englishman, to say
nothing of our harsher, more violent climate, I have no idea that ours
can ever become the mellow land that Britain is.

As for the charge of brutality that is often brought against the
English, and which is so successfully depicted by Dickens and
Thackeray, there is doubtless good ground for it, though I actually saw
very little of it during five weeks' residence in London, and I poked
about into all the dens and comers I could find, and perambulated the
streets at nearly all hours of the night and day. Yet I am persuaded
there is a kind of brutality among the lower orders in England that
does not exist in the same measure in this country,--an ignorant animal
coarseness, an insensibility, which gives rise to wife-beating and
kindred offenses. But the brutality of ignorance and stolidity is not
the worst form of the evil. It is good material to make something
better of. It is an excess and not a perversion. It is not man fallen,
but man undeveloped. Beware, rather, that refined, subsidized
brutality; that thin, depleted, moral consciousness; or that
contemptuous, cankerous, euphemistic brutality, of which, I believe, we
can show vastly more samples than Great Britain. Indeed, I believe, for
the most part, that the brutality of the English people is only the
excess and plethora of that healthful, muscular robustness and
full-bloodedness for which the nation has always been famous, and which
it should prize beyond almost anything else. But for our brutality, our
recklessness of life and property, the brazen ruffianism in our great
cities, the hellish greed and robbery and plunder in high places, I
should have to look a long time to find so plausible an excuse.

[But I notice with pleasure that English travelers are beginning to
find more to admire than to condemn in this country, and that they
accredit us with some virtues they do not find at home in the same
measure. They are charmed with the independence, the self-respect, the
good-nature, and the obliging dispositions shown by the mass of our
people; while American travelers seem to be more and more ready to
acknowledge the charm and the substantial qualities of the mother
country. It is a good omen. One principal source of the pleasure which
each takes in the other is no doubt to be found in the novelty of the
impressions. It is like a change of cookery. The flavor of the dish is
fresh and uncloying to each. The English probably tire of their own
snobbishness and flunkeyism, and we of our own smartness and puppyism.
After the American has got done bragging about his independence, and
his "free and equal" prerogatives, he begins to see how these things
run into impertinence and forwardness; and the Englishman, in visiting
us, escapes from his social bonds and prejudices, to see for a moment
how absurd they all are.]

A London crowd I thought the most normal and unsophisticated I had ever
seen, with the least admixture of rowdyism and ruffianism. No doubt it
is there, but this scum is not upon the surface, as with us. I went
about very freely in the hundred and one places of amusement where the
average working classes assemble, with their wives and daughters and
sweethearts, and smoke villainous cigars and drink ale and stout. There
was to me something notably fresh and canny about them, as if they had
only yesterday ceased to be shepherds and shepherdesses. They certainly
were less developed in certain directions, or shall I say less
depraved, than similar crowds in our great cities. They are easily
pleased, and laugh at the simple and childlike, but there is little
that hints of an impure taste, or of abnormal appetites. I often smiled
at the tameness and simplicity of the amusements, but my sense of
fitness, or proportion, or decency was never once outraged. They always
stop short of a certain point,--the point where wit degenerates into
mockery, and liberty into license: nature is never put to shame, and
will commonly bear much more. Especially to the American sense did
their humorous and comic strokes, their negro-minstrelsy and attempts
at Yankee comedy, seem in a minor key. There was not enough irreverence
and slang and coarse ribaldry, in the whole evening's entertainment, to
have seasoned one line of some of our most popular comic poetry. But
the music, and the gymnastic, acrobatic, and other feats, were of a
very high order. And I will say here that the characteristic flavor of
the humor and fun-making of the average English people, as it impressed
my sense, is what one gets in Sterne,--very human and stomachic, and
entirely free from the contempt and superciliousness of most current
writers. I did not get one whiff of Dickens anywhere. No doubt it is
there in some form or other, but it is not patent, or even appreciable,
to the sense of such an observer as I am.

I was not less pleased by the simple good-will and bonhomie that
pervaded the crowd. There is in all these gatherings an indiscriminate
mingling of the sexes, a mingling without jar or noise or rudeness of
any kind, and marked by a mutual respect on all sides that is novel and
refreshing. Indeed, so uniform is the courtesy, and so human and
considerate the interest, that I was often at a loss to discriminate
the wife or the sister from the mistress or the acquaintance of the
hour, and had many times to check my American curiosity and cold,
criticising stare. For it was curious to see young men and women from
the lowest social strata meet and mingle in a public hall without
lewdness or badinage, but even with gentleness and consideration. The
truth is, however, that the class of women known as victims of the
social evil do not sink within many degrees as low in Europe as they do
in this country, either in their own opinion or in that of the public;
and there can be but little doubt that gatherings of the kind referred
to, if permitted in our great cities, would be tenfold more scandalous
and disgraceful than they are in London or Paris. There is something so
reckless and desperate in the career of man or woman in this country,
when they begin to go down, that the only feeling they too often excite
is one of loathsomeness and disgust. The lowest depth must be reached,
and it is reached quickly. But in London the same characters seem to
keep a sweet side from corruption to the last, and you will see good
manners everywhere.

We boast of our deference to woman, but if the Old World made her a
tool, we are fast making her a toy; and the latter is the more hopeless
condition. But among the better classes in England I am convinced that
woman is regarded more as a sister and an equal than in this country,
and is less subject to insult, and to leering, brutal comment, there
than here. We are her slave or her tyrant; so seldom her brother and
friend. I thought it a significant fact that I found no place of
amusement set apart for the men; where one sex went the other went;
what was sauce for the gander was sauce for the goose; and the spirit
that prevailed was soft and human accordingly. The hotels had no
"ladies' entrance," but all passed in and out the same door, and met
and mingled commonly in the same room, and the place was as much for
one as for the other. It was no more a masculine monopoly than it was a
feminine. Indeed, in the country towns and villages the character of
the inns is unmistakably given by woman; hence the sweet, domestic
atmosphere that pervades and fills them is balm to the spirit. Even the
larger hotels of Liverpool and London have a private, cozy, home
character that is most delightful. On entering them, instead of finding
yourself in a sort of public thoroughfare or political caucus, amid
crowds of men talking and smoking and spitting, with stalls on either
side where cigars and tobacco and books and papers are sold, you
perceive you are in something like a larger hall of a private house,
with perhaps a parlor and coffee-room on one side, and the office, and
smoking-room, and stairway on the other. You may leave your coat and
hat on the rack in the hall, and stand your umbrella there also, with
full assurance that you will find them there when you want them, if it
be the next morning or the next week. Instead of that petty tyrant the
hotel clerk, a young woman sits in the office with her sewing or other
needlework, and quietly receives you. She gives you your number on a
card, rings for a chambermaid to show you to your room, and directs
your luggage to be sent up; and there is something in the look of
things, and the way they are done, that goes to the right spot at once.

At the hotel in London where I stayed, the daughters of the landlord,
three fresh, comely young women, did the duties of the office; and
their presence, so quiet and domestic, gave the prevailing hue and tone
to the whole house. I wonder how long a young woman could preserve her
self-respect and sensibility in such a position in New York or
Washington?

The English regard us as a wonderfully patient people, and there can be
no doubt that we put up with abuses unknown elsewhere. If we have no
big tyrant, we have ten thousand little ones, who tread upon our toes
at every turn. The tyranny of corporations, and of public servants of
one kind and another, as the ticket-man, the railroad conductor, or
even of the country stage-driver, seem to be features peculiar to
American democracy. In England the traveler is never snubbed, or made
to feel that it is by somebody's sufferance that he is allowed aboard
or to pass on his way.

If you get into an omnibus or a railroad or tramway carriage in London,
you are sure of a seat. Not another person can get aboard after the
seats are all full. Or, if you enter a public hall, you know you will
not be required to stand up unless you pay the standing-up price. There
is everywhere that system, and order, and fair dealing, which all men
love. The science of living has been reduced to a fine point. You pay a
sixpence and get a sixpence worth of whatever you buy. There are all
grades and prices, and the robbery and extortion so current at home
appear to be unknown.

I am not contending for the superiority of everything English, but
would not disguise from myself or my readers the fact of the greater
humanity and consideration that prevail in the mother country. Things
here are yet in the green, but I trust there is no good reason to doubt
that our fruit will mellow and ripen in time like the rest.


       III. A GLIMPSE OF FRANCE

In coming over to France, I noticed that the chalk-hills, which were
stopped so abruptly by the sea on the British side of the Channel,
began again on the French side, only they had lost their smooth,
pastoral character, and were more broken and rocky, and that they
continued all the way to Paris, walling in the Seine, and giving the
prevailing tone and hue to the country,--scrape away the green and
brown epidermis of the hills anywhere, and out shines their white
framework,--and that Paris itself was built of stone evidently quarried
from this formation,--a light, cream-colored stone, so soft that
rifle-bullets bury themselves in it nearly their own depth, thus
pitting some of the more exposed fronts during the recent strife in a
very noticeable manner, and which, in building, is put up in the rough,
all the carving, sculpturing, and finishing being done after the blocks
are in position in the wall.

Disregarding the counsel of friends, I braved the Channel at one of its
wider points, taking the vixen by the waist instead of by the neck, and
found her as placid as a lake, as I did also on my return a week later.

It was a bright October morning as we steamed into the little harbor at
Dieppe, and the first scene that met my eye was, I suppose, a
characteristic one,--four or five old men and women towing a vessel
into a dock. They bent beneath the rope that passed from shoulder to
shoulder, and tugged away doggedly at it, the women apparently more
than able to do their part. There is no equalizer of the sexes like
poverty and misery, and then it very often happens that the gray mare
proves the better horse. Throughout the agricultural regions, as we
passed along, the men apparently all wore petticoats; at least, the
petticoats were the most active and prominent in the field occupations.
Then wearers were digging potatoes, pulling beets, following the harrow
(in one instance a thorn-bush drawn by a cow), and stirring the wet,
new-mown grass. I believe the pantaloons were doing the mowing. But I
looked in vain for any Maud Mullers in the meadows, and have concluded
that these can be found only in New England hay-fields! And herein is
one of the first surprises that await one on visiting the Old World
countries,--the absence of graceful, girlish figures, and bright
girlish faces, among the peasantry or rural population. In France I
certainly expected to see female beauty everywhere, but did not get one
gleam all that sunny day till I got to Paris. Is it a plant that
flourishes only in cities on this side of the Atlantic, or do all the
pretty girls, as soon as they are grown, pack their trunks, and leave
for the gay metropolis?

At Dieppe I first saw the wooden shoe, and heard its dry, senseless
clatter upon the pavement. How suggestive of the cramped and inflexible
conditions with which human nature has borne so long in these lands!

A small paved square near the wharf was the scene of an early market,
and afforded my first glimpse of the neatness and good taste that
characterize nearly everything in France. Twenty or thirty peasant
women, coarse and masculine, but very tidy, with their snow-white caps
and short petticoats, and perhaps half as many men, were chattering and
chaffering over little heaps of fresh country produce. The onions and
potatoes and cauliflowers were prettily arranged on the clean pavement,
or on white linen cloths, and the scene was altogether animated and
agreeable.

La belle France is the woman's country clearly, and it seems a mistake
or an anomaly that woman is not at the top and leading in all
departments, compelling the other sex to play second fiddle, as she so
frequently has done for a brief time in isolated cases in the past; not
that the man is effeminate, but that the woman seems so nearly his
match and equal, and so often proves even his superior. In no other
nation, during times of popular excitement and insurrection or
revolution, do women emerge so conspicuously, often in the front ranks,
the most furious and ungovernable of any. I think even a female
conscription might be advisable in the present condition of France, if
I may judge of her soldiers from the specimens I saw. Small,
spiritless, inferior-looking men, all of them. They were like Number
Three mackerel or the last run of shad, as doubtless they were,--the
last pickings and resiftings of the population.

I don't know how far it may be a national custom, but I observed that
the women of the humbler classes, in meeting or parting with friends at
the stations, saluted each other on both cheeks, never upon the mouth,
as our dear creatures do, and I commended their good taste, though I
certainly approve the American custom, too.

Among the male population I was struck with the frequent recurrence of
the Louis Napoleon type of face. "Has this man," I said, "succeeded in
impressing himself even upon the physiognomy of the people? Has he
taken such a hold of their imaginations that they have grown to look
like him?" The guard that took our train down to Paris might easily
play the double to the ex-emperor; and many times in Paris and among
different classes I saw the same countenance.

Coming from England, the traveling seems very slow in this part of
France, taking eight or nine hours to go from Dieppe to Paris, with an
hour's delay at Rouen. The valley of the Seine, which the road follows
or skirts more than half the way, is very winding, with immense flats
or plains shut in by a wall of steep, uniform hills, and, in the
progress of the journey, is from time to time laid open to the traveler
in a way that is full of novelty and surprise. The day was bright and
lovely, and I found my eyes running riot the same as they had done
during my first ride on British soil. The contrast between the two
countries is quite marked, France in this region being much more broken
and picturesque, with some waste or sterile land,--a thing I did not
see at all in England. Had I awaked from a long sleep just before
reaching Paris, I should have guessed I was riding through Maryland,
and should soon see the dome of the Capitol at Washington rising above
the trees. So much wild and bushy or barren and half-cultivated land,
almost under the walls of the French capital, was a surprise.

Then there are few or none of those immense home-parks which one sees
in England, the land being mostly held by a great number of small
proprietors, and cultivated in strips, or long, narrow parallelograms,
making the landscape look like many-colored patchwork. Everywhere along
the Seine, stretching over the flats, or tilted up against the sides of
the hills, in some places seeming almost to stand on end, were these
acre or half-acre rectangular farms, without any dividing lines or
fences, and of a great variety of shades and colors, according to the
crop and the tillage.

I was glad to see my old friend, the beech-tree, all along the route.
His bole wore the same gray and patched appearance it does at home, and
no doubt Thoreau would have found his instep even fairer; for the beech
on this side of the Atlantic is a more fluent and graceful tree than
the American species, resembling, in its branchings and general form,
our elm, though never developing such an immense green dome as our elm
when standing alone, and I saw no European tree that does. The European
elm is not unlike our beech in form and outline.

Going from London to Paris is, in some respects, like getting out of
the chimney on to the housetop,--the latter city is, by contrast, so
light and airy, and so American in its roominess. I had come to Paris
for my dessert after my feast of London joints, and I suspect I was a
little dainty in that most dainty of cities. In fact, I had become
quite sated with sight-seeing, and the prospect of having to go on and
"do" the rest of Europe after the usual manner of tourists, and as my
companions did, would have been quite appalling. Said companions
steered off like a pack of foxhounds in full blast. The game they were
in quest of led them a wild chase up the Rhine, off through Germany and
Italy, taking a turn back through Switzerland, giving them no rest, and
apparently eluding them at last. I had felt obliged to cut loose from
them at the outset, my capacity to digest kingdoms and empires at short
notice being far below that of the average of my countrymen. My
interest and delight had been too intense at the outset; I had partaken
too heartily of the first courses; and now, where other travelers begin
to warm to the subject, and to have the keenest relish, I began to wish
the whole thing well through with. So that Paris was no paradise to one
American at least. Yet the mere change of air and sky, and the escape
from that sooty, all-pervasive, chimney-flue smell of London, was so
sudden and complete, that the first hour of Paris was like a refreshing
bath, and gave rise to satisfaction in which every pore of the skin
participated. My room at the hotel was a gem of neatness and order, and
the bed a marvel of art, comfort, and ease, three feet deep at least.

Then the uniform imperial grace and eclat of the city was a new
experience. Here was the city of cities, the capital of taste and
fashion, the pride and flower of a great race and a great history, the
city of kings and emperors, and of a people which, after all, loves
kings and emperors, and will not long, I fear, be happy without
them,--a gregarious, urbane people, a people of genius and destiny,
whose God is Art and whose devil is Communism. London has long ago
outgrown itself, has spread, and multiplied, and accumulated, without a
corresponding inward expansion and unification; but in Paris they have
pulled down and built larger, and the spirit of centralization has had
full play. Hence the French capital is superb, but soon grows
monotonous. See one street and boulevard, and you have seen it all. It
has the unity and consecutiveness of a thing deliberately planned and
built to order, from beginning to end. Its stone is all from one
quarry, and its designs are all the work of one architect. London has
infinite variety, and quaintness, and picturesqueness, and is of all
possible shades of dinginess and weather-stains. It shows its age,
shows the work of innumerable generations, and is more an aggregation,
a conglomeration, than is Paris. Paris shows the citizen, and is modern
and democratic in its uniformity. On the whole, I liked London best,
because I am so much of a countryman, I suppose, and affect so little
the metropolitan spirit. In London there are a few grand things to be
seen, and the pulse of the great city itself is like the throb of the
ocean; but in Paris, owing either to my jaded senses or to some other
cause, I saw nothing that was grand, but enough that was beautiful and
pleasing. The more pretentious and elaborate specimens of architecture,
like the Palace of the Tuileries or the Palais Royal, are truly superb,
but they as truly do not touch that deeper chord whose awakening we
call the emotion of the sublime.

But the fitness and good taste everywhere displayed in the French
capital may well offset any considerations of this kind, and cannot
fail to be refreshing to a traveler of any other land,--in the dress
and manners of the people, in the shops and bazaars and show-windows,
in the markets, the equipages, the furniture, the hotels. It is
entirely a new sensation to an American to look into a Parisian
theatre, and see the acting and hear the music. The chances are that,
for the first time, he sees the interior of a theatre that does not
have a hard, businesslike, matter-of-fact air. The auditors look
comfortable and cozy, and quite at home, and do not, shoulder to
shoulder and in solid lines, make a dead set at the play and the music.
The theatre has warm hangings, warm colors, cozy boxes and stalls, and
is in no sense the public, away-from-home place we are so familiar with
in this country. Again, one might know it was Paris by the character of
the prints and pictures in the shop windows; they are so clever as art
that one becomes reprehensibly indifferent to their license. Whatever
sins the French may be guilty of, they never sin against art and good
taste (except when in the frenzy of revolution), and, if Propriety is
sometimes obliged to cry out "For shame!" in the French capital, she
must do so with ill-concealed admiration, like a fond mother chiding
with word and gesture while she approves with tone and look. It is a
foolish charge, often made, that the French make vice attractive: they
make it provocative of laughter; the spark of wit is always evolved,
and what is a better antidote to this kind of poison than mirth?

They carry their wit even into their cuisine.  Every dish set before
you at the table is a picture, and tickles your eye before it does your
palate. When I ordered fried eggs, they were brought on a snow-white
napkin, which was artistically folded upon a piece of ornamented
tissue-paper that covered a china plate; if I asked for cold ham, it
came in flakes, arrayed like great rose-leaves, with a green sprig or
two of parsley dropped upon it, and surrounded by a border of
calfs'-foot jelly, like a setting of crystals. The bread revealed new
qualities in the wheat, it was so sweet and nutty; and the fried
potatoes, with which your beefsteak comes snowed under, are the very
flower of the culinary art, and I believe impossible in any other
country.

Even the ruins are in excellent taste, and are by far the best-behaved
ruins I ever saw for so recent ones. I came near passing some of the
most noted, during my first walk, without observing them. The main
walls were all standing, and the fronts were as imposing as ever. No
litter or rubbish, no charred timbers or blackened walls; only vacant
windows and wrecked interiors, which do not very much mar the general
outside effect.

My first genuine surprise was the morning after my arrival, which,
according to my reckoning, was Sunday; and when I heard the usual
week-day sounds, and, sallying forth, saw the usual weekday occupations
going on,--painters painting, glaziers glazing, masons on their
scaffolds, and heavy drays and market-wagons going through the streets,
and many shops and bazaars open,--I must have presented to a
scrutinizing beholder the air and manner of a man in a dream, so
absorbed was I in running over the events of the week to find where the
mistake had occurred, where I had failed to turn a leaf, or else had
turned over two leaves for one. But each day had a distinct record, and
every count resulted the same. It must be Sunday. Then it all dawned
upon me that this was Paris, and that the Parisians did not have the
reputation of being very strict Sabbatarians.

The French give a touch of art to whatever they do.  Even the drivers
of drays and carts and trucks about the streets are not content with a
plain, matter-of-fact whip, as an English or American laborer would be,
but it must be a finely modeled stalk, with a long, tapering lash
tipped with the best silk snapper. Always the inevitable snapper. I
doubt if there is a whip in Paris without a snapper. Here is where the
fine art, the rhetoric of driving, comes in. This converts a vulgar,
prosy "gad" into a delicate instrument, to be wielded with pride and
skill, and never literally to be applied to the backs of the animals,
but to be launched to right and left into the air with a professional
flourish, and a sharp, ringing report. Crack! crack! crack! all day
long go these ten thousand whips, like the boys' Fourth of July
fusillade. It was invariably the first sound I heard when I opened my
eyes in the morning, and generally the last one at night. Occasionally
some belated drayman would come hurrying along just as I was going to
sleep, or some early bird before I was fully awake in the morning, and
let off in rapid succession, in front of my hotel, a volley from the
tip of his lash that would make the street echo again, and that might
well have been the envy of any ring-master that ever trod the tanbark.
Now and then, during my ramblings, I would suddenly hear some
master-whip, perhaps that of an old omnibus-driver, that would crack
like a rifle, and, as it passed along, all the lesser whips, all the
amateur snappers, would strike up with a jealous and envious emulation,
making every foot-passenger wink, and one (myself) at least almost to
shade his eyes from the imaginary missiles.

I record this fact because it "points a moral and adorns a 'tail.'" The
French always give this extra touch. Everything has its silk snapper.
Are not the literary whips of Paris famous for their rhetorical tips
and the sting there is in them? What French writer ever goaded his
adversary with the belly of his lash, like the Germans and the English,
when he could blister him with its silken end, and the percussion of
wit be heard at every stroke?

In the shops, and windows, and public halls, this passion takes the
form of mirrors,--mirrors, mirrors everywhere, on the walls, in the
panels, in the cases, on the pillars, extending, multiplying, opening
up vistas this way and that, and converting the smallest shop, with a
solitary girl and a solitary customer, into an immense enchanted
bazaar, across whose endless counters customers lean and pretty girls
display goods. The French are always before the looking-glass, even
when they eat and drink. I never went into a restaurant without seeing
four or five facsimiles of myself approaching from as many
different`directions, giving the order to the waiter and sitting down
at the table. Hence I always had plenty of company at dinner, though we
were none of us very social, and I was the only one who entered or
passed out at the door. The show windows are the greatest cheat. What
an expanse, how crowded, and how brilliant! You see, for instance, an
immense array of jewelry, and pause to have a look. You begin at the
end nearest you, and, after gazing a moment, take a step to run your
eye along the dazzling display, when, presto! the trays of watches and
diamonds vanish in a twinkling, and you find yourself looking into the
door, or your delighted eyes suddenly bring up against a brick wall,
disenchanted so quickly that you almost stagger.

I went into a popular music and dancing hall one night, and found
myself in a perfect enchantment of mirrors. Not an inch of wall was
anywhere visible. I was suddenly caught up into the seventh heaven of
looking-glasses, from which I came down with a shock the moment I
emerged into the street again. I observed that this mirror contagion
had broken out in spots in London, and, in the narrow and crowded
condition of the shops there, even this illusory enlargement would be a
relief. It might not improve the air, or add to the available storage
capacity of the establishment, but it would certainly give a wider
range to the eye.

The American no sooner sets foot on the soil of France than he
perceives he has entered a nation of drinkers as he has left a nation
of eaters. Men do not live by bread here, but by wine. Drink, drink,
drink everywhere,--along all the boulevards, and streets, and quays,
and byways; in the restaurants and under awnings, and seated on the
open sidewalk; social and convivial wine-bibbing,--not hastily and in
large quantities, but leisurely and reposingly, and with much
conversation and enjoyment.

Drink, drink, drink, and, with equal frequency and nearly as much
openness, the reverse or diuretic side of the fact. (How our
self-consciousness would writhe! We should all turn to stone!) Indeed,
the ceaseless deglutition of mankind in this part of the world is
equaled only by the answering and enormous activity of the human male
kidneys. This latter was too astonishing and too public a fact to go
unmentioned. At Dieppe, by the reeking tubs standing about, I suspected
some local distemper; but when I got to Paris, and saw how fully and
openly the wants of the male citizen in this respect were recognized by
the sanitary and municipal regulations, and that the urinals were
thicker than the lamp-posts, I concluded it must be a national trait;
and at once abandoned the theory that had begun to take possession of
my mind, namely, that diabetes was no doubt the cause of the decadence
of France. Yet I suspect it is no more a peculiarity of French manners
than of European manners generally, and in its light I relished
immensely the history of a well-known statue which stands in a public
square in one of the German cities. The statue commemorates the
unblushing audacity of a peasant going to market with a goose under
each arm, who ignored even the presence of the king, and it is at
certain times dressed up and made the centre of holiday festivities. It
is a public fountain, and its living streams of water make it one of
the most appropriate and suggestive monuments in Europe. I would only
suggest that they canonize the Little Man, and that the Parisians
recognize a tutelar deity in the goddess Urea, who should have an
appropriate monument somewhere in the Place de la Concorde!

One of the loveliest features of Paris is the Seine.  I was never tired
of walking along its course. Its granite embankments; its numberless
superb bridges, throwing their graceful spans across it; its clear,
limpid water; its paved bed; the women washing; the lively little
boats; and the many noble buildings that look down upon it,--make it
the most charming citizen-river I ever beheld. Rivers generally get
badly soiled when they come to the city, like some other rural
travelers; but the Seine is as pure as a meadow brook wherever I saw
it, though I dare say it does not escape without some contamination. I
believe it receives the sewerage discharges farther down, and is no
doubt turbid and pitchy enough there, like its brother, the Thames,
which comes into London with the sky and the clouds in its bosom, and
leaves it reeking with filth and slime.

After I had tired of the city, I took a day to visit St. Cloud, and
refresh myself by a glimpse of the imperial park there, and a little of
Nature's privacy, if such could be had, which proved to be the case,
for a more agreeable day I have rarely passed. The park, toward which I
at once made my way, is an immense natural forest, sweeping up over
gentle hills from the banks of the Seine, and brought into order and
perspective by a system of carriage-ways and avenues, which radiate
from numerous centres like the boulevards of Paris. At these centres
were fountains and statues, with sunlight falling upon them; and,
looking along the cool, dusky avenues, as they opened, this way and
that, upon these marble tableaux, the effect was very striking, and was
not at all marred to my eye by the neglect into which the place had
evidently fallen. The woods were just mellowing into October; the
large, shining horse-chestnuts dropped at my feet as I walked along;
the jay screamed over the trees; and occasionally a red
squirrel--larger and softer-looking than ours, not so sleek, nor so
noisy and vivacious--skipped among the branches. Soldiers passed, here
and there, to and from some encampment on the farther side of the park;
and, hidden from view somewhere in the forest-glades, a band of buglers
filled the woods with wild musical strains.

English royal parks and pleasure grounds are quite different.  There
the prevailing character is pastoral,--immense stretches of lawn,
dotted with the royal oak, and alive with deer. But the Frenchman loves
forests evidently, and nearly all his pleasure grounds about Paris are
immense woods. The Bois de Boulogne, the forests of Vincennes, of St.
Germain, of Bondy, and I don't know how many others, are near at hand,
and are much prized. What the animus of this love may be is not so
clear. It cannot be a love of solitude, for the French are
characteristically a social and gregarious people. It cannot be the
English poetical or Wordsworthian feeling for Nature, because French
literature does not show this sense or this kind of perception. I am
inclined to think the forest is congenial to their love of form and
their sharp perceptions, but more especially to that kind of fear and
wildness which they at times exhibit; for civilization has not quenched
the primitive ardor and fierceness of the Frenchman yet, and it is to
be hoped it never will. He is still more than half a wild man, and, if
turned loose in the woods, I think would develop, in tooth and nail,
and in all the savage, brute instincts, more rapidly than the men of
any other race, except possibly the Slavic. Have not his descendants in
this country--the Canadian French--turned and lived with the Indians,
and taken to wild, savage customs with more relish and genius than have
any other people? How hairy and vehement and pantomimic he is! How his
eyes glance from under his heavy brows! His type among the animals is
the wolf, and one readily recalls how largely the wolf figures in the
traditions and legends and folklore of Continental Europe, and how
closely his remains are associated with those of man in the bone-caves
of the geologists. He has not stalked through their forests and
fascinated their imaginations so long for nothing. The she-wolf suckled
other founders beside those of Rome. Especially when I read of the
adventures of Russian and Polish exiles in Siberia--men of aristocratic
lineage wandering amid snow and arctic cold, sleeping on rocks or in
hollow trees, and holding their own, empty-handed, against hunger and
frost and their fiercer brute embodiments do I recognize a hardihood
and a ferity whose wet-nurse, ages back, may well have been this gray
slut of the woods.

It is this fierce, untamable core that gives the point and the splendid
audacity to French literature and art,--its vehemence and impatience of
restraint. It is the salt of their speech, the nitre of their wit. When
morbid, it gives that rabid and epileptic tendency which sometimes
shows itself in Victor Hugo. In this great writer, however, it more
frequently takes the form of an aboriginal fierceness and hunger that
glares and bristles, and is insatiable and omnivorous.

And how many times has Paris, that boudoir of beauty and fashion,
proved to be a wolf's lair, swarming with jaws athirst for human
throats!--the lust for blood and the greed for plunder, sleeping,
biding their time, never extinguished.

I do not contemn it.  To the natural historian it is good.  It is a
return to first principles again after so much art, and culture, and
lying, and chauvinisme, and shows these old civilizations in no danger
of, becoming effete yet. It is like the hell of fire beneath our feet,
which the geologists tell us is the life of the globe. Were it not for
it, who would not at times despair of the French character? As long as
this fiery core remains, I shall believe France capable of recovering
from any disaster to her arms. The "mortal ripening" of the nation is
stayed.

The English and Germans, on the other hand, are saved by great breadth
and heartiness, and a constitutional tendency to coarseness of fibre
which art and civilization abate very little. What is to save us in
this country, I wonder, who have not the French regency and fire, nor
the Teutonic heartiness and vis inertiae, and who are already in danger
of refining or attenuating into a high-heeled, shortjawed, genteel
race, with more brains than stomach, and more address than character?


       IV. FROM LONDON TO NEW YORK

I had imagined that the next best thing to seeing England would be to
see Scotland; but, as this latter pleasure was denied me, certainly the
next best thing was seeing Scotland's greatest son. Carlyle has been so
constantly and perhaps justly represented as a stormy and wrathful
person, brewing bitter denunciation for America and Americans, that I
cannot forbear to mention the sweet and genial mood in which we found
him,--a gentle and affectionate grandfather, with his delicious Scotch
brogue and rich, melodious talk, overflowing with reminiscences of his
earlier life, of Scott and Goethe and Edinburgh, and other men and
places he had known. Learning that I was especially interested in
birds, he discoursed of the lark and the nightingale and the mavis,
framing his remarks about them in some episode of his personal
experience, and investing their songs with the double charm of his
description and his adventure.

"It is only geese who get plucked there," said my companion after we
had left,--a man who had known Carlyle intimately for many years;
"silly persons who have no veneration for the great man, and come to
convert him or to change his convictions upon subjects to which he has
devoted a lifetime of profound thought and meditation. With such
persons he has no patience."

Carlyle had just returned from Scotland, where he had spent the summer.
The Scotch hills and mountains, he said, had an ancient, mournful look,
as if the weight of immeasurable time had settled down upon them. Their
look was in Ossian,--his spirit reflected theirs; and as I gazed upon
the venerable man before me, and noted his homely and rugged yet
profound and melancholy expression, I knew that their look was upon him
also, and that a greater than Ossian had been nursed amid those lonely
hills. Few men in literature have felt the burden of the world, the
weight of the inexorable conscience, as has Carlyle, or drawn such
fresh inspiration from that source. However we may differ from him (and
almost in self-defense one must differ from a man of such intense and
overweening personality), it must yet be admitted that he habitually
speaks out of that primitive silence and solitude in which only the
heroic soul dwells. Certainly not in contemporary British literature is
there another writer whose bowstring has such a twang.

I left London in the early part of November, and turned my face
westward, going leisurely through England and Wales, and stringing upon
my thread a few of the famous places, as Oxford, Stratford, Warwick,
Birmingham, Chester, and taking a last look at the benign land. The
weather was fair; I was yoked to no companion, and was apparently the
only tourist on that route. The field occupations drew my eye as usual.
They were very simple, and consisted mainly of the gathering of root
crops. I saw no building of fences, or of houses or barns, and no
draining or improving of any kind worth mentioning, these things having
all been done long ago. Speaking of barns reminds me that I do not
remember to have seen a building of this kind while in England, much
less a group or cluster of them as at home; hay and grain being always
stacked, and the mildness of the climate rendering a protection of this
kind unnecessary for the cattle and sheep. In contrast, America may be
called the country of barns and outbuildings:--

       "Thou lucky Mistress of the tranquil barns,"

as Walt Whitman apostrophizes the Union.

I missed also many familiar features in the autumn fields,--those given
to our landscape by Indian corn, for instance, the tent-like stouts,
the shucks, the rustling blades, the ripe pumpkins strewing the field;
for, notwithstanding England is such a garden, our corn does not
flourish there. I saw no buckwheat either, the red stubble and little
squat figures of the upright sheaves of which are so noticeable in our
farming districts at this season. Neither did I see, any gathering of
apples, or orchards from which to gather them. "As sure as there are
apples in Herefordshire" seems to be a proverb in England; yet it is
very certain that the orchard is not the institution anywhere in
Britain that it is in this country, or so prominent a feature in the
landscape. The native apples are inferior in size and quality, and are
sold by the pound. Pears were more abundant at the fruit stands, and
were of superior excellence and very cheap.

I hope it will not be set down to any egotism of mine, but rather to
the effect upon an ardent pilgrim of the associations of the place and
its renown in literature, that all my experience at Stratford seems
worthy of recording, and to be invested with a sort of poetical
interest,--even the fact that I walked up from the station with a
handsome young countrywoman who had chanced to occupy a seat in the
same compartment of the car with me from Warwick, and who, learning the
nature of my visit, volunteered to show me the Red Horse Inn, as her
course led her that way. We walked mostly in the middle of the street,
with our umbrellas hoisted, for it was raining slightly, while a boy
whom we found lying in wait for such a chance trudged along in advance
of us with my luggage.

At the Red Horse the pilgrim is in no danger of having the charm and
the poetical atmosphere with which he has surrounded himself dispelled,
but rather enhanced and deepened, especially if he has the luck I had,
to find few other guests, and to fall into the hands of one of those
simple, strawberry-like English housemaids, who gives him a cozy, snug
little parlor all to himself, as was the luck of Irving also; who
answers his every summons, and looks into his eyes with the simplicity
and directness of a child; who could step from no page but that of
Scott or the divine William himself; who puts the "coals" on your grate
with her own hands, and, when you ask for a lunch, spreads the cloth on
one end of the table while you sit reading or writing at the other, and
places before you a whole haunch of delicious cold mutton, with bread
and homebrewed ale, and requests you to help yourself; who, when
bedtime arrives, lights you up to a clean, sweet chamber, with a
high-canopied bed hung with snow-white curtains; who calls you in the
morning, and makes ready your breakfast while you sit with your feet on
the fender before the blazing grate; and to whom you pay your reckoning
on leaving, having escaped entirely all the barrenness and publicity of
hotel life, and had all the privacy and quiet of home without any of
its cares or interruptions. And this, let me say here, is the great
charm of the characteristic English inn; it has a domestic, homelike
air. "Taking mine ease at mine inn" has a real significance in England.
You can take your ease and more; you can take real solid comfort. In
the first place, there is no bar-room, and consequently no loafers or
pimps, or fumes of tobacco or whiskey; then there is no landlord or
proprietor or hotel clerk to lord it over you. The host, if there is
such a person, has a way of keeping himself in the background, or
absolutely out of sight, that is entirely admirable. You are monarch of
all you survey. You are not made to feel that it is in some one else's
house you are staying, and that you must court the master for his
favor. It is your house, you are the master, and you have only to enjoy
your own.

In the gray, misty afternoon, I walked out over the Avon, like all
English streams full to its grassy brim, and its current betrayed only
by a floating leaf or feather, and along English fields and roads, and
noted the familiar sights and sounds and smells of autumn. The spire of
the church where Shakespeare lies buried shot up stately and tall from
the banks of the Avon, a little removed from the village; and the
church itself, more like a cathedral in size and beauty, was also
visible above the trees. Thitherward I soon bent my steps, and while I
was lingering among the graves*, reading the names and dates so many
centuries old, and surveying the gray and weather-worn exterior of the
church, the slow tolling of the bell announced a funeral. Upon such a
stage, and amid such surroundings, with all this past for a background,
the shadowy figure of the peerless bard towering over all, the incident
of the moment had a strange interest to me, and I looked about for the
funeral cortege. Presently a group of three or four figures appeared at
the head of the avenue of limes, the foremost of them a woman, bearing
an infant's coffin under her arm, wrapped in a white sheet. The clerk
and sexton, with their robes on, went out to meet them, and conducted
them into the church, where the service proper to such occasions was
read, after which the coffin was taken out as it was brought in, and
lowered into the grave. It was the smallest funeral I ever saw, and my
effort to play the part of a sympathizing public by hovering in the
background, I fear, was only an intrusion after all.

[* Footnote: In England the church always stands in the midst of the
graveyard, and hence can be approached only on foot. People it seems,
never go to church in carriages or wagons, but on foot, along paths and
lanes.]

Having loitered to my heart's content amid the stillness of the old
church, and paced to and fro above the illustrious dead, I set out,
with the sun about an hour high, to see the house of Anne Hathaway at
Shottery, shunning the highway and following a path that followed
hedge-rows, crossed meadows and pastures, skirted turnip-fields and
cabbage-patches, to a quaint gathering of low thatched houses,--a
little village of farmers and laborers, about a mile from Stratford. At
the gate in front of the house a boy was hitching a little gray donkey,
almost hidden beneath two immense panniers filled with coarse hay.

"Whose house is this?" inquired I, not being quite able to make out the
name.

"Hann' Ataway's 'ouse," said he.

So I took a good look at Anne's house,--a homely, human-looking
habitation, with its old oak beams and thatched roof,--but did not go
in, as Mrs. Baker, who was eying me from the door, evidently hoped I
would, but chose rather to walk past it and up the slight rise of
ground beyond, where I paused and looked out over the fields, just lit
up by the setting sun. Returning, I stepped into the Shakespeare
Tavern, a little, homely wayside place on a street, or more like a
path, apart from the main road, and the good dame brought me some
"home-brewed," which I drank sitting by a rude table on a rude bench in
a small, low room, with a stone floor and an immense chimney. The coals
burned cheerily, and the crane and hooks in the fireplace called up
visions of my earliest childhood. Apparently the house and the
surroundings, and the atmosphere of the place and the ways of the
people, were what they were three hundred years ago. It was all sweet
and good, and I enjoyed it hugely, and was much refreshed.

Crossing the fields in the gloaming, I came up with some children, each
with a tin bucket of milk, threading their way toward Stratford. The
little girl, a child ten years old, having a larger bucket than the
rest, was obliged to set down her burden every few rods and rest; so I
lent her a helping hand. I thought her prattle, in that broad but
musical patois, and along these old hedge-rows, the most delicious I
ever heard. She said they came to Shottery for milk because it was much
better than they got at Stratford. In America they had a cow of their
own. Had she lived in America, then? "Oh, yes, four years," and the
stream of her talk was fuller at once. But I hardly recognized even the
name of my own country in her innocent prattle; it seemed like a land
of fable,--all had a remote mythological air, and I pressed my
inquiries as if I was hearing of this strange land for the first time.
She had an uncle still living in the "States of Hoio," but exactly
where her father had lived was not so clear. In the States somewhere,
and in "Ogden's Valley." There was a lake there that had salt in it,
and not far off was the sea. "In America," she said, and she gave such
a sweet and novel twang to her words, "we had a cow of our own, and two
horses and a wagon and a dog." "Yes," joined in her little brother,
"and nice chickens and a goose." "But," continued the sister, "we owns
none o' them here. In America 'most everybody owned their houses, and
we could 'a' owned a house if we had stayid."

"What made you leave America?" I inquired.

"'Cause me father wanted to see his friends."

"Did your mother want to come back?"

"No, me mother wanted to stay in America."

"Is food as plenty here,--do you have as much to eat as in the
States?"

"Oh, yes, and more.  The first year we were in America we could not get
enough to eat."

"But you do not get meat very often here, do you?"

"Quite often,"--not so confidently.

"How often?"

"Well, sometimes we has pig's liver in the week time, and we allers has
meat of a Sunday; we likes meat."

Here we emerged from the fields into the highway, and the happy
children went their way and I mine.

In the evening, as I was strolling about the town, a poor, crippled,
half-witted fellow came jerking himself across the street after me and
offered himself as a guide.

"I'm the Teller what showed Artemus Ward around when he was here.
You've heerd on me, I expect? Not? Why, he characterized me in
'Punch,' he did. He asked me if Shakespeare took all the wit out of
Stratford? And this is what I said to him: `No, he left some for me.'"

But not wishing to be guided just then, I bought the poor fellow off
with a few pence, and kept on my way.

Stratford is a quiet old place, and seems mainly the abode of simple
common folk. One sees no marked signs of either poverty or riches. It
is situated in a beautiful expanse of rich, rolling farming country,
but bears little resemblance to a rural town in America: not a tree,
not a spear of grass; the houses packed close together and crowded up
on the street, the older ones presenting their gables and showing their
structure of oak beams. English oak seems incapable of decay even when
exposed to the weather, while indoors it takes three or four centuries
to give it its best polish and hue.

I took my last view of Stratford quite early of a bright Sunday
morning, when the ground was white with a dense hoar-frost. The great
church, as I approached it, loomed up under the sun through a bank of
blue mist. The Avon was like glass, with little wraiths of vapor
clinging here and there to its surface. Two white swans stood on its
banks in front of the church, and, without regarding the mirror that so
drew my eye, preened their plumage; while, farther up, a piebald cow
reached down for some grass under the brink where the frost had not
settled, and a piebald cow in the river reached up for the same morsel.
Rooks and crows and jackdaws were noisy in the trees overhead and about
the church spire. I stood a long while musing upon the scene.

At the birthplace of the poet, the keeper, an elderly woman, shivered
with cold as she showed me about. The primitive, home-made appearance
of things, the stone floor much worn and broken, the rude oak beams and
doors, the leaden sash with the little window-panes scratched full of
names, among others that of Walter Scott, the great chimneys where
quite a family could literally sit in the chimney corner, were what I
expected to see, and looked very human and good. It is impossible to
associate anything but sterling qualities and simple, healthful
characters with these early English birthplaces. They are nests built
with faithfulness and affection, and through them one seems to get a
glimpse of devouter, sturdier times.

From Stratford I went back to Warwick, thence to Birmingham, thence to
Shrewsbury, thence to Chester, the old Roman camp, thence to Holyhead,
being intent on getting a glimpse of Wales and the Welsh, and maybe
taking a tramp up Snowdon or some of his congeners, for my legs
literally ached for a mountain climb, a certain set of muscles being so
long unused. In the course of my journeyings, I tried each class or
compartment of the cars, first, second, and third, and found but little
choice. The difference is simply in the upholstering, and, if you are
provided with a good shawl or wrap-up, you need not be particular about
that. In the first, the floor is carpeted and the seats substantially
upholstered, usually in blue woolen cloth; in the second, the seat
alone is cushioned; and in the third, you sit on a bare bench. But all
classes go by the same train, and often in the same car, or carriage,
as they say here. In the first class travel the real and the shoddy
nobility and Americans; in the second, commercial and professional men;
and in the third, the same, with such of the peasantry and humbler
classes as travel by rail. The only annoyance I experienced in the
third class arose from the freedom with which the smokers, always
largely in the majority, indulged in their favorite pastime. (I
perceive there is one advantage in being a smoker: you are never at a
loss for something to do,--you can smoke.)

At Chester I stopped overnight, selecting my hotel for its name, the
"Green Dragon." It was Sunday night, and the only street scene my
rambles afforded was quite a large gathering of persons on a corner,
listening, apparently with indifference or curiosity, to an ignorant,
hot-headed street preacher. "Now I am going to tell you something you
will not like to hear, something that will make you angry. I know it
will. It is this: I expect to go to heaven. I am perfectly confident I
shall go there. I know you do not like that." But why his hearers
should not like that did not appear. For my part, I thought, for the
good of all concerned, the sooner he went the better.

In the morning, I mounted the wall in front of the cathedral, and, with
a very lively feeling of wonder and astonishment, walked completely
around the town on top of it, a distance of about two miles. The wall,
being in places as high as the houses, afforded some interesting views
into attics, chambers, and back yards. I envied the citizens such a
delightful promenade ground, full of variety and interest. Just the
right distance, too, for a brisk turn to get up an appetite, or for a
leisurely stroll to tone down a dinner; while as a place for chance
meetings of happy lovers, or to get away from one's companions if the
flame must burn in secret and in silence, it is unsurpassed. I
occasionally met or passed other pedestrians, but noticed that it
required a brisk pace to lessen the distance between myself and an
attractive girlish figure a few hundred feet in advance of me. The
railroad cuts across one corner of the town, piercing the walls with
two very carefully constructed archways. Indeed, the people are very
choice of the wall, and one sees posted notices of the city authorities
offering a reward for any one detected in injuring it. It has stood now
some seven or eight centuries, and from appearances is good for one or
two more. There are several towers on the wall, from one of which some
English king, over two hundred years ago, witnessed the defeat of his
army on Rowton Moor. But when I was there, though the sun was shining,
the atmosphere was so loaded with smoke that I could not catch even a
glimpse of the moor where the battle took place. There is a gateway
through the wall on each of the four sides, and this slender and
beautiful but blackened and worn span, as if to afford a transit from
the chamber windows on one side of the street to those of the other, is
the first glimpse the traveler gets of the wall. The gates beneath the
arches have entirely disappeared. The ancient and carved oak fronts of
the buildings on the main street, and the inclosed sidewalk that ran
through the second stories of the shops and stores, were not less
strange and novel to me. The sidewalk was like a gentle upheaval in its
swervings and undulations, or like a walk through the woods, the oaken
posts and braces on the outside answering for the trees, and the
prospect ahead for the vista.

The ride along the coast of Wales was crowded with novelty and
interest,--the sea on one side and the mountains on the other,--the
latter bleak and heathery in the foreground, but cloud-capped and
snow-white in the distance. The afternoon was dark and lowering, and
just before entering Conway we had a very striking view. A turn in the
road suddenly brought us to where we looked through a black framework
of heathery hills, and beheld Snowdon and his chiefs apparently with
the full rigors of winter upon them. It was so satisfying that I lost
at once my desire to tramp up them. I barely had time to turn from the
mountains to get a view of Conway Castle, one of the largest and most
impressive ruins I saw. The train cuts close to the great round tower,
and plunges through the wall of gray, shelving stone into the bluff
beyond, giving the traveler only time to glance and marvel.

About the only glimpse I got of the Welsh character was on this route.
At one of the stations, Abergele I think, a fresh, blooming young woman
got into our compartment, occupied by myself and two commercial
travelers (bag-men, or, as we say, "drummers"), and, before she could
take her seat, was complimented by one of them on her good looks.
Feeling in a measure responsible for the honor and good-breeding of the
compartment, I could hardly conceal my embarrassment; but the young
Abergeless herself did not seem to take it amiss, and when presently
the jolly bag-man addressed his conversation to her, replied
beseemingly and good-naturedly. As she arose to leave the car at her
destination, a few stations beyond, he said "he thought it a pity that
such a sweet, pretty girl should leave us so soon," and seizing her
hand the audacious rascal actually solicited a kiss. I expected this
would be the one drop too much, and that we should have a scene, and
began to regard myself in the light of an avenger of an insulted Welsh
beauty, when my heroine paused, and I believe actually deliberated
whether or not to comply before two spectators! Certain it is that she
yielded the highwayman her hand, and, bidding him a gentle good-night
in Welsh, smilingly and blushingly left the car. "Ah," said the
villain, "these Welsh girls are capital; I know them like a book, and
have had many a lark with them."

At Holyhead I got another glimpse of the Welsh.  I had booked for
Dublin, and having several hours on my hands of a dark, threatening
night before the departure of the steamer, I sallied out in the old
town tilted up against the side of the hill, in the most adventurous
spirit I could summon, threading my way through the dark, deserted
streets, pausing for a moment in front of a small house with closed
doors and closely, shuttered windows, where I heard suppressed voices,
the monotonous scraping of a fiddle, and a lively shuffling of feet,
and passing on finally entered, drawn by the musical strains, a quaint
old place, where a blind harper, seated in the corner of a rude kind of
coffee and sitting room, was playing on a harp. I liked the atmosphere
of the place, so primitive and wholesome, and was quite willing to have
my attention drawn off from the increasing storm without, and from the
bitter cup which I knew the Irish sea was preparing for me. The harper
presently struck up a livelier strain, when two Welsh girls, who were
chatting before the grate, one of them as dumpy as a bag of meal and
the other slender and tall, stepped into the middle of the floor and
began to dance to the delicious music, a Welsh mechanic and myself
drinking our ale and looking on approvingly. After a while the
pleasant, modest-looking bar-maid, whom I had seen behind the
beer-levers as I entered, came in, and, after looking on for a moment,
was persuaded to lay down her sewing and join in the dance. Then there
came in a sandy-haired Welshman, who could speak and understand only
his native dialect, and finding his neighbors affiliating with an
Englishman, as he supposed, and trying to speak the hateful tongue,
proceeded to berate them sharply (for it appears the Welsh are still
jealous of the English); but when they explained to him that I was not
an Englishman, but an American, and had already twice stood the beer
all around (at an outlay of sixpence), he subsided into a sulky
silence, and regarded me intently.

About eleven o'clock a policeman paused at the door, and intimated that
it was time the house was shut up and the music stopped, and to outward
appearances his friendly warning was complied with; but the harp still
discoursed in a minor key, and a light tripping and shuffling of
responsive feet might occasionally have been heard for an hour later.
When I arose to go, it was with a feeling of regret that I could not
see more of this simple and social people, with whom I at once felt
that "touch of nature" which "makes the whole world kin," and my
leave-taking was warm and hearty accordingly.

Through the wind and the darkness I threaded my way to the wharf, and
in less than two hours afterward was a most penitent voyager, and
fitfully joining in that doleful gastriloquial chorus that so often
goes up from the cabins of those Channel steamers.

I hardly know why I went to Ireland, except it was to indulge the few
drops of Irish blood in my veins, and maybe also with a view to shorten
my sea voyage by a day. I also felt a desire to see one or two literary
men there, and in this sense my journey was eminently gratifying; but
so far from shortening my voyage by a day, it lengthened it by three
days, that being the time it took me to recover from the effects of it;
and as to the tie of blood, I think it must nearly all have run out,
for I felt but few congenital throbs while in Ireland.

The Englishman at home is a much more lovable animal than the
Englishman abroad, but Pat in Ireland is even more of a pig than in
this country. Indeed, the squalor and poverty, and cold, skinny
wretchedness one sees in Ireland, and (what freezes our sympathies) the
groveling, swiny shiftlessness that pervades these hovels, no traveler
can be prepared for. It is the bare prose of misery, the unheroic of
tragedy. There is not one redeeming or mitigating feature.

Railway traveling in Ireland is not so rapid or so cheap as in England.
Neither are the hotels so good or so clean, nor the fields so well
kept, nor the look of the country so thrifty and peaceful. The
dissatisfaction of the people is in the very air. Ireland looks sour
and sad. She looks old, too, as do all those countries beyond
seas,--old in a way that the American is a stranger to. It is not the
age of nature, the unshaken permanence of the hills through long
periods of time, but the weight of human years and human sorrows, as if
the earth sympathized with man and took on his attributes and
infirmities.

I did not go much about Dublin, and the most characteristic things I
saw there were those queer, uncomfortable dog-carts,--a sort of Irish
bull on wheels, with the driver on one side balancing the passenger on
the other, and the luggage occupying the seat of safety between. It
comes the nearest to riding on horseback, and on a side-saddle at that,
of any vehicle-traveling I ever did.

I stopped part of a day at Mallow, an old town on the Blackwater, in
one of the most fertile agricultural districts of Ireland. The
situation is fine, and an American naturally expects to see a charming
rural town, planted with trees and filled with clean, comfortable
homes; but he finds instead a wretched place, smitten with a plague of
filth and mud, and offering but one object upon which the eye can dwell
with pleasure, and that is the ruins of an old castle, "Mallow Castle
over Blackwater," which dates back to the time of Queen Elizabeth. It
stands amid noble trees on the banks of the river, and its walls, some
of them thirty or forty feet high, are completely overrun with ivy. The
Blackwater, a rapid, ambercolored stream, is spanned at this point by a
superb granite bridge.

And I will say here that anything like a rural town in our sense,--a
town with trees and grass and large spaces about the houses, gardens,
yards, shrubbery, coolness, fragrance,--seems unknown in England or
Ireland. The towns and villages are all remnants of feudal times, and
seem to have been built with an eye to safety and compactness, or else
men were more social, and loved to get closer together, then than now.
Perhaps the damp, chilly climate made them draw nearer together. At any
rate, the country towns are little cities; or rather it is as if
another London had been cut up in little and big pieces and distributed
over the land.

In the afternoon, to take the kinks out of my legs, and to quicken, if
possible, my circulation a little, which since the passage over the
Channel had felt as if it was thick and green, I walked rapidly to the
top of the Knockmeledown Mountains, getting a good view of Irish fields
and roads and fences as I went up, and a very wide and extensive view
of the country after I had reached the summit, and improving the
atmosphere of my physical tenement amazingly. These mountains have no
trees or bushes or other growth than a harsh prickly heather, about a
foot high, which begins exactly at the foot of the mountain. You are
walking on smooth, fine meadow land, when you leap a fence and there is
the heather. On the highest point of this mountain, and on the highest
point of all the mountains around, was a low stone mound, which I was
puzzled to know the meaning of. Standing there, the country rolled away
beneath me under a cold, gray November sky, and, as was the case with
the English landscape, looked singularly desolate,--the desolation of a
dearth of human homes, industrial centres, families, workers, and
owners of the soil. Few roads, scarce ever a vehicle, no barns, no
groups of bright, well-ordered buildings, indeed no farms and
neighborhoods and schoolhouses, but a wide spread of rich, highly
cultivated country, with here and there, visible to close scrutiny,
small gray stone houses with thatched roofs, the abodes of poverty and
wretchedness. A recent English writer says the first thing that struck
him in American landscape-painting was the absence of man and the
domestic animals from the pictures, and the preponderance of rude, wild
nature; and his first view of this country seems to have made the same
impression. But it is certainly true that the traveler through any of
our older States will see ten houses, rural habitations, to one in
England or Ireland, though, as a matter of course, nature here looks
much less domesticated, and much less expressive of human occupancy and
contact. The Old World people have clung to the soil closer and more
lovingly than we do. The ground has been more precious. They have had
none to waste, and have made the most of every inch of it. Wherever
they have touched they have taken root and thriven as best they could.
Then the American is more cosmopolitan and less domestic. He is not so
local in his feelings and attachments. He does not bestow himself upon
the earth or upon his home as his ancestors did. He feathers his nest
very little. Why should he? He may migrate tomorrow and build another.
He is like the passenger pigeon that lays its eggs and rears its young
upon a little platform of bare twigs. Our poverty and nakedness is in
this respect, I think, beyond dispute. There is nothing nest-like about
our homes, either in their interiors or exteriors. Even wealth and
taste and foreign aids rarely attain that cozy, mellowing atmosphere
that pervades not only the lowly birthplaces but the halls and manor
houses of older lands. And what do our farms represent but so much real
estate, so much cash value?

Only where man loves the soil, and nestles to it closely and long, will
it take on this beneficent and human look which foreign travelers miss
in our landscape; and only where homes are built with fondness and
emotion, and in obedience to the social, paternal, and domestic
instincts, will they hold the charm and radiate and be warm with the
feeling I have described.

And, while I am upon the subject, I will add that European cities
differ from ours in this same particular. They have a homelier
character,--more the air of dwelling-places, the abodes of men drawn
together for other purposes than traffic. People actually live in them,
and find life sweet and festal. But what does our greatest city, New
York, express besides commerce or politics, or what other reason has it
for its existence? This is, of course, in a measure the result of the
modern worldly and practical business spirit which more and more
animates all nations, and which led Carlyle to say of his own
countrymen that they were becoming daily more "flat, stupid, and
mammonish." Yet I am persuaded that in our case it is traceable also to
the leanness and depletion of our social and convivial instincts, and
to the fact that the material cares of life are more serious and
engrossing with us than with any other people.

I spent part of a day at Cork, wandering about the town, threading my
way through the back streets and alleys, and seeing life reduced to
fewer makeshifts than I had ever before dreamed of. I went through, or
rather skirted, a kind of secondhand market, where the most sorry and
dilapidated articles of clothing and household utensils were offered
for sale, and where the cobblers were cobbling up old shoes that would
hardly hold together. Then the wretched old women one sees, without any
sprinkling of young ones,--youth and age alike bloomless and unlovely.

In a meadow on the hills that encompass the city, I found the American
dandelion in bloom, and some large red clover, and started up some
skylarks as I might start up the field sparrows in our own uplying
fields.

Is the magpie a Celt and a Catholic?  I saw not one in England, but
plenty of them in France, and again when I reached Ireland.

At Queenstown I awaited the steamer from Liverpool, and about nine
o'clock in the morning was delighted to see her long black form moving
up the bay. She came to anchor about a mile or two out, and a little
tug was in readiness to take us off. A score or more of emigrants, each
with a bag and a box, had been waiting all the morning at the wharf.
When the time of embarkation arrived, the agent stepped aboard the tug
and called out their names one by one, when Bridget and Catherine and
Patrick and Michael, and the rest, came aboard, received their tickets,
and passed "forward," with a half-frightened, half-bewildered look. But
not much emotion was displayed until the boat began to move off, when
the tears fell freely, and they continued to fall faster and faster,
and the sobs to come thicker and thicker, until, as the faces of
friends began to fade on the wharf, both men and women burst out into a
loud, unrestrained bawl. This sudden demonstration of grief seemed to
frighten the children and smaller fry, who up to this time had been
very jovial; but now, suspecting something was wrong, they all broke
out in a most pitiful chorus, forming an anti-climax to the wail of
their parents that was quite amusing, and that seemed to have its
effect upon the "children of a larger growth," for they instantly
hushed their lamentations and turned their attention toward the great
steamer. There was a rugged but bewildered old granny among them, on
her way to join her daughter somewhere in the interior of New York, who
seemed to regard me with a kindred eye, and toward whom, I confess, I
felt some family affinity. Before we had got halfway to the vessel, the
dear old creature missed a sheet from her precious bundle of worldly
effects, and very confidentially told me that her suspicions pointed to
the stoker, a bristling, sooty "wild Irishman." The stoker resented the
insinuation, and I overheard him berating the old lady in Irish so
sharply and threateningly (I had no doubt of his guilt) that she was
quite frightened, and ready to retract the charge to hush the man up.
She seemed to think her troubles had just begun. If they behaved thus
to her on the little tug, what would they not do on board the great
black steamer itself? So when she got separated from her luggage in
getting aboard the vessel, her excitement was great, and I met her
following about the man whom she had accused of filching her bed linen,
as if he must have the clew to the lost bed itself. Her face brightened
when she saw me, and, giving me a terribly hard wink and a most
expressive nudge, she said she wished I would keep near her a little.
This I did, and soon had the pleasure of leaving her happy and
reassured beside her box and bundle.

The passage home, though a rough one, was cheerfully and patiently
borne. I found a compound motion,--the motion of a screw steamer, a
roll and a plunge--less trying to my head than the simple rocking or
pitching of the side-wheeled Scotia. One motion was in a measure a foil
to the other. My brain, acted upon by two forces, was compelled to take
the hypothenuse, and I think the concussion was considerably diminished
thereby. The vessel was forever trembling upon the verge of immense
watery chasms that opened now under her port bow, now under her
starboard, and that almost made one catch his breath as he looked into
them; yet the noble ship had a way of skirting them or striding across
them that was quite wonderful. Only five days was, I compelled to "hole
up" in my stateroom, hibernating, weathering the final rude shock of
the Atlantic. Part of this time I was capable of feeling a languid
interest in the oscillations of my coat suspended from a hook in the
door. Back and forth, back and forth, all day long, vibrated this black
pendulum, at long intervals touching the sides of the room, indicating
great lateral or diagonal motion of the ship. The great waves, I
observed, go in packs like wolves. Now one would pounce upon her, then
another, then another, in quick succession, making the ship strain
every nerve to shake them off. Then she would glide along quietly for
some minutes, and my coat would register but a few degrees in its
imaginary arc, when another band of the careering demons would cross
our path and harass us as before. Sometimes they would pound and thump
on the sides of the vessel like immense sledge-hammers, beginning away
up toward the bows and quickly running down her whole length, jarring,
raking, and venting their wrath in a very audible manner; or a wave
would rake along the side with a sharp, ringing, metallic sound, like a
huge spear-point seeking a vulnerable place; or some hard-backed
monster would rise up from the deep and grate and bump the whole length
of the keel, forcibly suggesting hidden rocks and consequent wreck and
ruin.

Then it seems there is always some biggest wave to be met somewhere on
the voyage,--a monster billow that engulfs disabled vessels, and
sometimes carries away parts of the rigging of the stanchest. This big
wave struck us the third day out about midnight, and nearly threw us
all out of our berths, and careened the ship over so far that it seemed
to take her last pound of strength to right herself up again. There was
a slamming of doors, a rush of crockery, and a screaming of women,
heard above the general din and confusion, while the steerage
passengers thought their last hour had come. The vessel before us
encountered this giant wave during a storm in mid-ocean, and was
completely buried beneath it; one of the officers was swept over board,
the engines suddenly stopped, and there was a terrible moment during
which it seemed uncertain whether the vessel would shake off the sea or
go to the bottom.

Besides observing the oscillations of my coat, I had at times a stupid
satisfaction in seeing my two new London trunks belabor each other
about my stateroom floor. Nearly every day they would break from their
fastenings under my berth and start on a wild race for the opposite
side of the room. Naturally enough, the little trunk would always get
the start of the big one, but the big one followed close, and sometimes
caught the little one in a very, uncomfortable manner. Once a knife and
fork and a breakfast plate slipped off the sofa and joined in, the
race; but, if not distanced, they got sadly the worst of it, especially
the plate. But the carpet had the most reason to complain. Two or three
turns sufficed to loosen it from the floor, when, shoved to one side,
the two trunks took turns in butting it. I used to allow this sport to
go on till it grew monotonous, when I would alternately shout and ring
until "Robert" appeared and restored order.

The condition of certain picture-frames and vases and other frail
articles among my effects, when I reached home, called to mind not very
pleasantly this trunken frolic.

It is impossible not to sympathize with the ship in her struggles with
the waves. You are lying there wedged into your berth, and she seems
indeed a thing of life and conscious power. She is built entirely of
iron, is 500 feet long, and, besides other freight, carries 2500 tons
of railroad iron, which lies down there flat in her bottom, a dead,
indigestible weight, so unlike a cargo in bulk; yet she is a quickened
spirit for all that. You feel every wave that strikes her; you feel the
sea bearing her down; she has run her nose into one of those huge
swells, and a solid blue wall of water tons in weight comes over her
bows and floods her forward deck; she braces herself, every rod and
rivet and timber seems to lend its support; you almost expect to see
the wooden walls of your room grow rigid with muscular contraction; she
trembles from stem to stern, she recovers, she breaks the gripe of her
antagonist, and, rising up, shakes the sea from her with a kind of
gleeful wrath; I hear the torrents of water rush along the lower decks,
and, finding a means of escape, pour back into the sea, glad to get
away on any terms, and I say, "Noble ship! you are indeed a god!"

I wanted to see a first-class storm at sea, and perhaps ought to be
satisfied with the heavy blow or hurricane we had when off Sable
Island, but I confess I was not, though, by the lying to of the vessel
and the frequent soundings, it was evident there was danger about. A
dense fog uprose, which did not drift like a land fog, but was as
immovable as iron; it was like a spell, a misty enchantment; and out of
this fog came the wind, a steady, booming blast, that smote the ship
over on her side and held her there, and howled in the rigging like a
chorus of fiends. The waves did not know which way to flee; they were
heaped up and then scattered in a twinkling. I thought of the terrible
line of one of our poets:--

       "The spasm of the sky and the shatter of the sea."

The sea looked wrinkled and old and oh, so pitiless!  I had stood long
before Turner's "Shipwreck" in the National Gallery in London, and this
sea recalled his, and I appreciated more than ever the artist's great
powers.

These storms, it appears, are rotary in their wild dance and promenade
up and down the seas. "Look the wind squarely in the teeth," said an
ex-sea-captain among the passengers, "and eight points to the right in
the northern hemisphere will be the centre of the storm, and eight
points to the left in the southern hemisphere." I remembered that, in
Victor Hugo's terrible dynamics, storms revolved in the other direction
in the northern hemisphere, or followed the hands of a watch, while
south of the equator they no doubt have ways equally original.

Late in the afternoon the storm abated, the fog was suddenly laid, and,
looking toward the setting sun, I saw him athwart the wildest, most
desolate scene in which it was ever my fortune to behold the face of
that god. The sea was terribly agitated, and the endless succession of
leaping, frothing waves between me and the glowing west formed a
picture I shall not soon forget.

I think the excuse that is often made in behalf of American literature,
namely, that our people are too busy with other things yet, and will
show the proper aptitude in this field, too, as soon as leisure is
afforded, is fully justified by events of daily occurrence. Throw a
number of them together without anything else to do, and they at once
communicate to each other the itch of authorship. Confine them on board
an ocean steamer, and by the third or fourth day a large number of them
will break out all over with a sort of literary rash that nothing will
assuage but some newspaper or journalistic enterprise which will give
the poems and essays and jokes with which they are surcharged a chance
to be seen and heard of men. I doubt if the like ever occurs among
travelers of any other nationality. Englishmen or Frenchmen or Germans
want something more warm and human, if less "refined;" but the average
American, when in company, likes nothing so well as an opportunity to
show the national trait of "smartness." There is not a bit of danger
that we shall ever relapse into barbarism while so much latent
literature lies at the bottom of our daily cares and avocations, and is
sure to come to the surface the moment the latter are suspended or
annulled!

While abreast of New England, and I don't know how many miles at sea,
as I turned in my deck promenade, I distinctly scented the land, a
subtle, delicious odor of farms and homesteads, warm and human, that
floated on the wild sea air, a promise and a token. The broad red line
that had been slowly creeping across our chart for so many weary days,
indicating the path of the ship, had now completely bridged the chasm,
and had got a good purchase down under the southern coast of New
England; and according to the reckoning we ought to have made Sandy
Hook that night; but though the position of the vessel was no doubt
theoretically all right, yet practically she proved to be much farther
out at sea, for all that afternoon and night she held steadily on her
course, and not till next morning did the coast of Long Island, like a
thin, broken cloud just defined on the horizon, come into view. But
before many hours we had passed the Hook, and were moving slowly up the
bay in the midday splendor of the powerful and dazzling light of the
New World sun. And how good things looked to me after even so brief an
absence!--the brilliancy, the roominess, the deep transparent blue of
the sky, the clear, sharp outlines, the metropolitan splendor of New
York, and especially of Broadway; and as I walked up that great
thoroughfare, and noted the familiar physiognomy and the native
nonchalance and independence, I experienced the delight that only the
returned traveler can feel,--the instant preference of one's own
country and countrymen over all the rest of the world.

INTRODUCTION                                          ix
       I. HUNTING THE SNOW                                 1
      II. THE TURKEY DRIVE                                15
     III. WHITE-FOOT                                      29
      IV. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO SEE THIS WINTER          39
       V. CHRISTMAS IN THE WOODS                          46
      VI. CHICKADEE                                       61
     VII. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO DO THIS WINTER           74
    VIII. THE MISSING TOOTH                               80
      IX. THE PECULIAR ’POSSUM                            94
       X. A FEBRUARY FRESHET                             105
      XI. A BREACH IN THE BANK                           112
     XII. A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO HEAR THIS WINTER        123
    XIII. THE LAST DAY OF WINTER                         129
          NOTES AND SUGGESTIONS                          137




    ILLUSTRATIONS


    THE FOX SPARROWS’ BATH                         _Frontispiece_
    SKUNK TRACKS                                                3
    CAT TRACKS                                                  4
    TRACKS OF HARE JOINED BY DOGS                               6
    “IN A BURST OF SPEED ACROSS THE OPEN FIELD”                 7
    DOG TRACKS IN FOUR INCHES OF SNOW                           7
    TRACKS OF THE WHITE-FOOTED MOUSE                            9
    “A GRAY SQUIRREL WITH A RED SQUIRREL AT HIS HEELS”         11
    FOX TRACKS                                                 12
    MUSKRAT TRAIL                                              14
    “INTO THE AIR THEY WENT”                                   26
    WHITE-FOOT--“IN THE WINTER GALES”                          33
    “FIVE WEE MICE”                                            35
    WHITE-FOOT AND THE HICKORY-NUTS                            38
    A VIREO’S NEST IN WINTER                                   40
    “WIND-SWEEPINGS”                                           41
    ’POSSUM IN THE PERSIMMON TREE                              50
    WEASEL--“WATCHING ME FROM BETWEEN THE STICKS”              58
    “A CHICKADEE!”                                             62
    “DOING THE EXCAVATING THEMSELVES”                          69
    FOOD FOR THE NUTHATCHES                                    76
    THE MOURNING-CLOAK BUTTERFLY, AN EARLY FLITTER             77
    A RUFFED GROUSE TRAIL                                      78
    “THE SNOW HAD MELTED FROM THE RIVER MEADOWS”               80
    “CARRYING A BIG BOB-TAILED VOLE OUT OF MY ‘MOWING’”        85
    “SCURRYING THROUGH THE TOPS OF SOME PITCH PINES”           90
    “ALL THE AFTERNOON THE CROWS HAVE BEEN GOING OVER”         93
    THE DUCK-BILLED PLATYPUS, OR DUCK-BILL                     97
    THE ECHIDNA, OR PORCUPINE ANT-EATER                        98
    “STANDING BEFORE A LARGE ’POSSUM”                          99
    “OUT SHE SPILLED AND NINE LITTLE ’POSSUMS WITH HER”       100
    “A GREAT BLUE HERON WOULD BEAT PONDEROUSLY ACROSS”        106
    MEADOW MOUSE--“IN A DRIFTING CATBIRD’S NEST”              109
    “A LITTLE FIGURE IN YELLOW OIL-SKINS”                     114
    “DREW A LIMP LITTLE FORM OUT OF THE WATER”                121
    QUAIL--“ONE OF THE COVEY CALLING THE FLOCK TOGETHER”      127
    “A FLOCK OF ROBINS DASHING INTO THE CEDARS”               131
    PUSSY-WILLOWS AND WATERCRESS                              132
    “THE HAZELNUT BUSHES ARE IN BLOOM”                        133
    BLUEBIRD--“LIKE A BIT OF SUMMER SKY”                      135




INTRODUCTION


As in _The Fall of the Year_, so here in _Winter_, the second volume
of this series, I have tried by story and sketch and suggestion to
catch the spirit of the season. In this volume it is the large, free,
strong, fierce, wild soul of Winter which I would catch, the bitter
boreal might that, out of doors, drives all before it; that challenges
all that is wild and fierce and strong and free and large within us,
till the bounding red blood belts us like an equator, and the glow of
all the tropics blooms upon our faces and down into the inmost of our
beings.

Winter within us means vitality and purpose and throbbing life; and
without us in our fields and woods it means widened prospect, the
storm of battle, the holiness of peace, the poetry of silence and
darkness and emptiness and death. And I have tried throughout this
volume to show that Winter is only a symbol, that death is only an
appearance, that life is everywhere, and that everywhere life
dominates even while it lies buried under the winding-sheet of the
snow.

        “A simple child,
    That lightly draws its breath,
    What should it know of death?”

Why, this at least, that the winter world is not dead; that the cold
is powerless to destroy; that life flees and hides and sleeps, only
to waken again, forever stronger than death--fresher, fairer, sweeter
for its long winter rest.

But first of all, and always, I have tried here to be a naturalist and
nature-lover, pointing out the sounds and sights, the things to do,
the places to visit, the how and why, that the children may know the
wild life of winter, and through that knowledge come to love winter
for its own sake.

And they will love it. Winter seems to have been made especially for
children. They do not have rheumatism. Let the old people hurry off
down South, but turn the children loose in the snow. The sight of a
snowstorm affects a child as the smell of catnip affects a cat. He
wants to roll over and over and over in it. And he should roll in it;
the snow is his element as it is a polar bear cub’s.

I love the winter, and so do all children--its bare fields, empty
woods, flattened meadows, its ranging landscapes, its stirless
silences, its tumult of storms, its crystal nights with stars new cut
in the glittering sky, its challenge, defiance, and mighty wrath. I
love its wild life--its birds and animals; the shifts they make to
conquer death. And then, out of this winter watching, I love the
gentleness that comes, the sympathy, the understanding! One gets very
close to the heart of Nature through such understanding.

    DALLAS LORE SHARP.
    MULLEIN HILL, March, 1912.




WINTER




CHAPTER I

HUNTING THE SNOW


You want no gun, no club, no game-bag, no steel trap, no snare when
you go hunting the snow. Rubber boots or overshoes, a good, stout
stick to help you up the ridges, a pair of field-glasses and a keen
eye, are all you need for this hunt,--besides, of course, the snow and
the open country.

You have shoveled the first snow of the winter; you have been
snowballing in it; you have coasted on it; and gone sleigh-riding over
it; but unless you have gone hunting over it you have missed the
rarest, best sport that the first snowfall can bring you.

Of all the days to be out in the woods, the day that follows the first
snowfall is--the best? No, not the best. For there is the day in April
when you go after arbutus; and there is the day in June when the
turtles come out to lay in the sand; the muggy, cloudy day in August
when the perch are hungry for you in the creek; the hazy Indian
Summer day when the chestnuts are dropping for you in the pastures;
the keen, crisp February day when the ice spreads glassy-clear and
smooth for you over the mill-pond; the muddy, raw, half-thawed,
half-lighted, half-drowned March day when the pussy-willows are
breaking, and the first spring frogs are piping to you from the
meadow. Then there is--every day, every one of the three hundred and
sixty-five days, each of them best days to be out in the live world of
the fields and woods.

But _one_ of the very best days to be out in the woods is the day that
follows the first winter snowfall, for that is the day when you must
shoulder a good stout stick and go gunning. Gunning with a stick? Yes,
with a stick, and rubber boots, and bird-glasses. Along with this
outfit you might take a small jointed foot-rule with which to measure
your quarry, and a notebook to carry the game home in.

It ought to be the day after the first real snow, but not if that snow
happens to be a blizzard and lies deep in dry powdery drifts, for then
you could hardly follow a trail if you should find one. Do not try the
hunt, either, if the snow comes heavy and wet; for then the animals
will stay in their dens until the snow melts, knowing, as they do,
that the soft slushy stuff will soon disappear. The snow you need will
lie even and smooth, an inch or two deep, and will be just damp enough
to pack into tight snowballs.

If, however, the early snows are not ideal, then wait until over an
old crusted snow there falls a fresh layer about an inch deep. This
may prove even better hunting, for by this time in the winter the
animals and birds are quite used to snow-walking, and besides, their
stores of food are now running short, compelling them to venture forth
whether or not they wish to go.

It was early in December that our first hunting-snow came last year.
We were ready for it, waiting for it, and when the winter sun broke
over the ridge, we started the hunt at the hen-yard gate, where we saw
tracks in the thin, new snow that led us up the ridge, and along its
narrow back, to a hollow stump. Here the hunt began in earnest; for
not until that trail of close, double, nail-pointed prints went under
the stump were the four small boys convinced that we were tracking a
skunk and not a cat.

The creature had moved leisurely--that you could tell by the closeness
of the prints. Wide-apart tracks in the snow mean hurry. Now a cat,
going as slowly as this creature went, would have put down her dainty
feet almost in a single line, and would have left round,
cushion-marked holes in the snow, not triangular, nail-pointed prints
like these. Cats do not venture into holes under stumps, either.

We had bagged our first quarry! No, no! We had not pulled that wood
pussy out of his hole and put him into our game-bag. We did not want
to do that. We really carried no bag; and if we had, we should not
have put the wood pussy into it, for we were hunting tracks, not
animals, and “bagging our quarry” meant trailing a creature to its
den, or following its track till we had discovered something it had
done, or what its business was, and why it was out. We were on the
snow for animal _facts_, not pelts.

We were elated with our luck, for this stump was not five minutes by
the ridge path from the hen-yard. And here, standing on the stump, we
were only sixty minutes away from Boston Common by the automobile,
driving no faster than the law allows. So we were hunting, not in a
wilderness, but just outside our dooryard and almost within the
borders of a great city.

And that is the first interesting fact of our morning hunt. No one but
a lover of the woods and a careful walker on the snow would believe
that here in the midst of hayfields, in sight of the smoke of city
factories, so many of the original wild wood-folk still live and
travel their night paths undisturbed.

Still, this is a rather rough bit of country, broken, ledgy,
boulder-strewn, with swamps and woody hills that alternate with small
towns and cultivated fields for many miles around.

Here the animals are still at home, as this hole of the skunk’s under
the stump proved. But there was more proof. As we topped the ridge on
the trail of the skunk, we crossed another trail, made up of bunches
of four prints,--two long and broad, two small and roundish,--spaced
about a yard apart.

A hundred times, the winter before, we had tried that trail in the
hope of finding the form or the burrow of its maker; but it crossed
and turned and doubled, and always led us into a tangle, out of which
we never got a clue. It was the track of the great northern hare, as
we knew, and we were relieved to see the strong prints of our cunning
neighbor again; for, what with the foxes and the hunters, we were
afraid it might have fared ill with him. But here he was, with four
good legs under him; and, after bagging our skunk, we returned to pick
up the hare’s trail, to try our luck once more.

We followed his long, leisurely leaps down the ridge, out into our
mowing-field, and over to the birches below the house. Here he had
capered about in the snow, had stood up on his haunches and gnawed the
bark from off a green oak sucker two and a half feet from the ground.
This, doubtless, was pretty near his length, stretched out--an
interesting item; not exact to the inch, perhaps, but close enough for
us; for who would care to kill him in order to measure him with
scientific accuracy?

Nor was this all; for up the footpath through the birches came the
marks of two dogs. They joined the marks of the hare. And then, back
along the edge of the woods to the bushy ridge, we saw a pretty race.

It was all in our imaginations, all done for us by those long-flinging
footprints in the snow. But we saw it all--the white hare, the
yelling hounds, nip and tuck, in a burst of speed across the open
field which must have left a gap in the wind behind.

It had all come as a surprise. The hounds had climbed the hill on the
scent of a fox, and had started the hare unexpectedly. Off he had gone
with a jump. But just such a jump of fear is what a hare’s magnificent
legs were intended for.

Those legs carried him a clear twelve feet in some of the longest
leaps for the ridge; and they carried him to safety, so far as we
could read the snow. In the medley of hare-and-hound tracks on the
ridge there was no sign of a tragedy. He had escaped again--but how
and where we have still to learn.

We had bagged our hare,--yet we have him still to bag,--and taking up
the trail of one of the dogs, we continued our hunt. One of the joys
of this snow-hunting is having a definite road or trail blazed for you
by knowing, purposeful wild-animal feet.

You do not have to blunder ahead, breaking your way into this
wilderness world, trusting luck to bring you somewhere. The wild
animal or the dog goes this way, and not that, for a reason. You are
watching that reason all along; you are pack-fellow to the hound; you
hunt with him.

Here the hound had thrust his muzzle into a snow-capped pile of
slashings, had gone clear round the pile, then continued on his way.
But we stopped; for out of the pile, in a single, direct line, ran a
number of mouse prints, going and coming. A dozen white-footed mice
might have traveled that road since the day before, when the snow had
ceased falling.

We entered the tiny road, for in this kind of hunting a mouse is as
good as a mink, and found ourselves descending the woods toward the
garden patch below. Halfway down we came to a great red oak, into a
hole at the base of which, as into the portal of some mighty castle,
ran the road of the mice. That was the end of it. There was not a
single straying footprint beyond the tree.

I reached in as far as my arm would go, and drew out a fistful of
pop-corn cobs. So here was part of my scanty crop! I pushed in again,
and gathered up a bunch of chestnut shells, hickory-nuts and several
neatly rifled hazelnuts. This was story enough. There must be a family
of mice living under the slashing-pile, who for some good reason kept
their stores here in the recesses of this ancient red oak. Or was this
some squirrel’s barn being pilfered by the mice, as my barn is the
year round? It was not all plain. But this question, this constant
riddle of the woods, is part of our constant joy in the woods. Life
is always new, and always strange, and always fascinating.

It has all been studied and classified according to species. Any one
knowing the woods at all, would know that these were mouse tracks,
would even know that they were the tracks of the white-footed mouse,
and not the tracks of the jumping mouse, the house mouse, or the
meadow mouse. But what is the whole small story of these prints? What
purpose, what intention, what feeling, do they spell? What and why?--a
hundred times!

So it is not the bare tracks that we are hunting; it is the meaning of
the tracks--where they are going, and what they are going for. Burns
saw a little mouse run across the furrows as he was plowing and wrote
a poem about it. So could we write a poem if we like Burns would stop
to think what the running of these little mice across the snow might
mean. The woods and fields, summer and winter, are full of poems that
might be written if we only knew just all that the tiny snow-prints
of a wood mouse mean, or understood just what, “root and all, and all
in all,” the humblest flower is.

The pop-corn cobs, however, we did understand; they told a plain
story; and, falling in with a gray squirrel’s track not far from the
red oak, we went on, our burdenless game-bag heavier, our hearts
lighter that we, by the sweat of our brows, had contributed a few ears
of corn to the comfort of this snowy winter world.

The squirrel’s track wound up and down the hillside, wove in and out
and round and round, hitting every possible tree, as if the only road
for a squirrel was one that looped and doubled, and tied up every
stump, and zigzagged into every tree trunk in the woods.

But all this maze was no ordinary journey. He had not run this coil of
a road for breakfast, because a squirrel, when he travels, say for
distant nuts, goes as directly as you go to your school or office;
only he goes not by streets, but by trees, never crossing more of the
open in a single rush than the space between him and the nearest tree
that will take him on his way.

What interested us here in the woods was the fact that a second series
of tracks, just like the first, except that they were only about half
as large, dogged the larger tracks persistently, leaping tree for
tree, and landing track for track with astonishing accuracy--tracks
which, had they not been evidently those of a smaller squirrel, would
have read to us most menacingly.

As this was the mating season for squirrels, I suggested that it might
have been a kind of Atalanta’s race here in the woods. But why did so
little a squirrel want to mate with one so large? They would not look
well together, was the answer of the small boys. They thought it much
more likely that Father Squirrel had been playing wood-tag with one of
his children.

Then, suddenly, as sometimes happens in the woods, the true meaning of
the signs was fairly hurled at us, for down the hill, squealing and
panting, rushed a full-sized gray squirrel, with a red squirrel like a
shadow, like a weasel, at his heels.

For just an instant I thought it was a weasel, so swift and silent and
gliding were its movements, so set and cruel seemed its expression, so
sure, so inevitable, its victory.

Whether it ever caught the gray squirrel or not, and what it would
have done had it caught the big fellow, I do not know. But I have seen
the chase often--the gray squirrel nearly exhausted with fright and
fatigue, the red squirrel hard after him. They tore round and round
us, then up over the hill, and disappeared.

One of the rarest prints for most snow-hunters nowadays, but one of
the commonest hereabouts, is the quick, sharp track of the fox. In the
spring particularly, when my fancy young chickens are turned out to
pasture, I have spells of fearing that the fox will never be
exterminated here in this untillable but beautiful chicken country. In
the winter, however, when I see Reynard’s trail across my lawn, when I
hear the music of the baying hounds and catch a glimpse of the
white-tipped brush swinging serenely in advance of the coming pack, I
cannot but admire the capable, cunning rascal, cannot but be glad for
him, and marvel at him, so resourceful, so superior to his almost
impossible conditions, his almost numberless foes.

We started across the meadow on his trail, but found it leading so
straightaway for the ledges, and so continuously blotted out by the
passing of the pack, that, striking the wallowy path of a muskrat in
the middle of the meadow, we took up the new scent to see what the
shuffling, cowering water-rat wanted from across the snow.

A man is known by the company he keeps, by the way he wears his hat,
by the manner of his laugh; and among the wild animals nothing tells
more of character than their manner of moving. You can read animal
character as easily in the snow as you can read act and direction.

The timidity, the indecision, the lack of purpose, the restless,
meaningless curiosity of this muskrat were evident from the first in
the starting, stopping, returning, going-on track he had plowed out in
the thin snow.

He did not know where he was going or what he was going for; he knew
only that he insisted upon going back, but all the while kept going
on; that he wanted to go to the right or to the left, yet kept moving
straight ahead.

We came to a big wallow in the snow, where, in sudden fear, he had had
a fit at the thought of something that might not have happened to him
had he stayed at home. Every foot of the trail read, “He would if he
could; if he couldn’t, how could he?”

We followed him on, across a dozen other trails, for it is not every
winter night that the muskrat’s feet get the better of his head, and,
willy-nilly, take him abroad. Strange and fatal weakness! He goes and
cannot stop.

Along the stone wall of the meadow we tracked him, across the
highroad, over our garden, into the orchard, up the woody hill to the
yard, back down the hill to the orchard, out into the garden, and back
toward the orchard again; and here, on a knoll just at the edge of the
scanty, skeleton shadow where the sunlight fell through the trees, we
lost him.

Two mighty wings, we saw, had touched the snow lightly here, and the
lumbering trail had vanished as into the air.

Close and mysterious the shadowy silent wings hang poised indoors and
out. Laughter and tears are companions. Life begins, but death
sometimes ends the trail. Yet the sum of life, outdoors and in, is
peace, gladness, and fulfillment.




CHAPTER II

THE TURKEY DRIVE


The situation was serious enough for the two boys. It was not a large
fortune, but it was their whole fortune, that straggled along the
slushy road in the shape of five hundred weary, hungry turkeys, which
were looking for a roosting-place.

But there was no place where they could roost, no safe place, as the
boys well knew, for on each side of the old road stretched the forest
trees, a dangerous, and in the weakened condition of the turkeys, an
impossible roost on such a night as was coming.

For the warm south wind had again veered to the north; the slush was
beginning to grow crusty, and a fine sifting of snow was slanting
through the open trees. Although it was still early afternoon, the
gloom of the night had already settled over the forest, and the
turkeys, with empty crops, were peevishly searching the bare trees for
a roost.

It was a strange, slow procession that they made, here in the New
Brunswick forest--the flock of five hundred turkeys, toled forward by
a boy of eighteen, kept in line by a well-trained shepherd-dog that
raced up and down the straggling column, and urged on in the rear by
a boy of nineteen, who was followed, in his turn, by an old horse and
farm wagon, creeping along behind.

It was growing more difficult all the time to keep the turkeys moving.
But they must not be allowed to stop until darkness should put an end
to the march. And they must not be allowed to take to the trees at
all. Some of them, indeed, were too weak to roost high; but the flock
would never move forward again if exposed in the tall trees on such a
night as this promised to be.

The thing to do was to keep them stirring. Once allow them to halt,
give one of them time to pick out a roosting-limb for himself, and the
march would be over for that afternoon. The boys knew their flock.
This was not their first drive. They knew from experience that once a
turkey gets it into his small head to roost, he is bound to roost.
Nothing will stop him. And in this matter the flock acts as a single
bird.

In the last village, back along the road, through which they had
passed, this very flock took a notion suddenly to go to roost, and to
go to roost on a little chapel as the vesper bells were tolling. The
bells were tolling, the worshipers were gathering, when, with a loud
gobble, one of the turkeys in the flock sailed into the air and
alighted upon the ridge-pole beside the belfry! Instantly the flock
broke ranks, ran wildly round the little building, and with a clamor
that drowned the vesper bell, came down on the chapel in a feathered
congregation that covered every shingle of the roof. Only the humor
and quick wit of the kindly old priest prevented the superstitious of
his people from going into a panic. The service had to wait until the
birds made themselves comfortable for the night--belfry, roof,
window-sills, and porch steps thick with roosting turkeys!

The boys had come to have almost a fear of this mania for roosting,
for they never knew when it might break out or what strange turn it
might take. They knew now, as the snow and the gray dusk began to
thicken in the woods, that the flock must not go to roost. Even the
dog understood the signs,--the peevish _quint, quint, quint_, the
sudden bolting of some gobbler into the brush, the stretching necks,
the lagging steps,--and redoubled his efforts to keep the line from
halting.

For two days the flock had been without food. Almost a week’s supply
of grain, enough to carry them through to the border, had been loaded
into the wagon before starting in upon this wild, deserted road
through the Black Creek region; but the heavy, day-long snowstorm had
prevented their moving at all for one day, and had made travel so
nearly impossible since then that here they were, facing a blizzard,
with night upon them, five hundred starving turkeys straggling wearily
before them, and a two days’ drive yet to go!

The two brothers had got a short leave from college, and had started
their turkey drive in the more settled regions back from the New
Brunswick border. They had bought up the turkeys from farm to farm,
had herded them in one great flock as they drove them leisurely along,
and had moved all the while toward the state line, whence they planned
to send them through Maine for the New England market. Upon reaching
the railroad, they would rest and feed the birds, and ship them, in a
special freight-car ordered in advance, to a Boston commission house,
sell the horse and rig for what they could get, and, with their dog,
go directly back to college.

More money than they actually possessed had gone into the daring
venture. But the drive had been more than successful until the
beginning of the Black Creek road. The year before they had gone over
the same route, which they had chosen because it was sparsely settled
and because the prices were low. This year the farmers were expecting
them; the turkeys were plentiful; and the traveling had been good
until this early snow had caught them here in the backwoods and held
them; and now, with the sudden shift of the wind again to the north,
it threatened to delay them farther, past all chance of bringing a
single turkey through alive.

But George and Herbert Totman had not worked their way into their
junior year at college to sit down by the roadside while there was
light to travel by. They were not the kind to let their turkeys go to
roost before sundown. It was a slow and solemn procession that moved
through the woods, but it moved--toward a goal that they had set for
that day’s travel.

All day, at long intervals, as they had pushed along the deep forest
road, the muffled rumble of distant trains had come to them through
the silence; and now, although neither of them had mentioned it, they
were determined to get out somewhere near the tracks before the night
and the storm should settle down upon them. Their road, hardly more
here than a wide trail, must cross the railroad tracks, as they
remembered it, not more than two or three miles ahead.

Leaving more and more of the desolate forest behind them with every
step, they plodded doggedly on. But there was so much of the same
desolate forest still before them! Yet yonder, and not far away, was
the narrow path of the iron track through the interminable waste;
something human--the very sight of it enough to warm and cheer them.
They would camp to-night where they could see a train go by.

The leaden sky lowered closer upon them. The storm had not yet got
under full headway, but the fine icy flakes were flying faster,
slanting farther, and the wind was beginning to drone through the
trees.

Without a halt, the flock moved on through the thickening storm. But
the dog was having all that he could do to keep the stragglers in
order; and George, in the rear, saw that they must stir the flock, for
the birds were gradually falling back into a thick bunch before him.

Hurrying back to the wagon, he got two loaves of bread, and ran ahead
with them to Herbert. The famished turkeys seemed to know what he
carried, and broke into a run after him. For half a mile they kept up
the gait, as both boys, trotting along the road, dropped pieces of
bread on the snow.

Then the whole game had to be repeated; for the greater part of the
flock, falling hopelessly behind, soon forgot what they were running
after, and began to cry, “_Quint! quint! quint!_”--the roosting-cry!
So, starting again in the rear with the bread, George carried the last
of the flock forward for another good run.

“We should win this game,” Herbert panted, “if we only had loaves
enough to make a few more touch-downs.”

“There’s half an hour yet to play,” was George’s answer.

“But what on?”

“Oh, on our nerve now,” the older boy replied grimly.

“That railroad is not far ahead,” said Herbert.

“Half an hour ahead. We’ve got to camp by that track to-night or--”

“Or what?”

But George had turned to help the dog head off some runaways.

Herbert, picking up a lump of frozen leaves and snow, began to break
this in front of the flock to tole them on.

He had hardly started the birds again, when a long-legged gobbler
brushed past him and went swinging down the road, calling, “_Quint!
quint! quint!_” to the flock behind. The call was taken up and passed
along the now extended line, which, breaking immediately into
double-quick, went streaming after him.

Herbert got out of the way to let them pass, too astonished for a
moment to do more than watch them go. It was the roosting-cry! An old
gobbler had given it; but as it was taking him, for once, in the right
direction, Herbert ordered back the dog that had dashed forward to
head him off, and fell in with George to help on the stragglers in the
rear.

As the laggards were brought up to a slight rise in the road, the
flock was seen a hundred yards ahead, gathered in a dark mass about a
telegraph-pole! It could be nothing else, for through the whirling
snow the big cross-arms stood out, dim but unmistakable.

It was this that the gobbler had spied and started for, this sawed and
squared piece of timber, that had suggested a barnyard to him,--corn
and roost,--as to the boys it meant a human presence in the forest
and something like human companionship.

It was after four o’clock now, and the night was hard upon them. The
wind was strengthening every minute; the snow was coming finer and
swifter. The boys’ worst fears about the storm were beginning to be
realized.

But the sight of the railroad track heartened them. The strong-armed
poles, with their humming wires, reached out hands of hope to them;
and getting among the turkeys, they began to hurry them off the track
and down the steep embankment, which fortunately offered them here
some slight protection from the wind. But as fast as they pushed the
birds off, the one-minded things came back on the track. The whole
flock, meanwhile, was scattering up and down the iron rails and
settling calmly down upon them for the night.

They were going to roost upon the track! The railroad bank shelved
down to the woods on each side, and along its whitened peak lay the
two black rails like ridge-poles along the length of a long roof. In
the thick half-light of the whirling snow, the turkeys seemed suddenly
to find themselves at home: and as close together as they could crowd,
with their breasts all to the storm, they arranged themselves in two
long lines upon the steel rails.

And nothing could move them! As fast as one was tossed down the bank,
up he came. Starting down the lines, the boys pushed and shoved to
clear the track; but the lines re-formed behind them quickly, evenly,
and almost without a sound. As well try to sweep back the waves of the
sea! They worked together to collect a small band of the birds and
drive them into the edge of the woods; but every time the band
dwindled to a single turkey that dodged between their legs toward its
place on the roost. The two boys could have kept _two_ turkeys off the
rails, but not five hundred.

“The game is up, George,” said Herbert, as the sickening thought of a
passing train swept over him.

The words were hardly uttered when there came the _tankle, tankle_ of
the big cow-bell hanging from the collar of the horse, that was just
now coming up to the crossing!

George caught his breath and started over to stop the horse, when,
above the loud hum of the wires and the sound of the wind in the
forest trees, they heard through the storm the muffled whistle of a
locomotive.

“Quick! The horse, Herbert! Hitch him to a tree and come!” called
George, as he dived into the wagon and pulled out their lantern.
“Those birds could wreck the train!” he shouted, and hurried forward
along the track with his lighted lantern in his hand.

It was not the thought of the turkeys, but the thought of the people
on the flying Montreal express,--if that it was,--that sped him up
the track. In his imagination he saw the wreck of a ditched train
below him; the moans of a hundred mangled beings he heard sounding in
his ears!

On into the teeth of the blinding storm he raced, while he strained
his eyes for a glimpse of the coming train.

The track seemed to lie straightaway in front of him, and he bent his
head for a moment before the wind, when, out of the smother of the
snow, the flaring headlight leaped almost upon him.

He sprang aside, stumbled, and pitched headlong down the bank, as the
engine of a freight, with a roar that dazed him, swept past.

But the engineer had seen him, and there was a screaming of iron
brakes, a crashing of cars together, and a long-drawn shrieking of
wheels, as the heavy train slid along the slippery rails to a stop.

As the engineer swung down from his cab, he was met, to his great
astonishment, by a dozen turkeys clambering up the embankment toward
him. He had plowed his way well among the roosting flock and brushed
them unhurt from the rails as the engine skidded along to its slow
stop.

By this time the conductor and the train-hands had run forward to see
what it all meant, and stood looking at the strange obstruction on the
track, when Herbert came into the glare of the headlight and joined
them. Then George came panting up, and the boys tried to explain the
situation. But their explanation only made a case of sheer negligence
out of what at first had seemed a mystery to the trainmen. Both the
engineer and the conductor were anxious and surly. Their train was
already an hour late; there was a through express behind, and the
track must be cleared at once.

And they fell at once to clearing it--conductor, fireman, brakemen,
and the two boys. Those railroad men had never tried to clear a track
of roosting turkeys before. They cleared it,--a little of it,--but it
would not stay cleared, for the turkeys slipped through their hands,
squeezed between their legs, ducked about their heels, and got back
into place. Finally the conductor, putting two men in line on each
rail, ordered the engineer to follow slowly, close upon their heels,
with the train, as they scattered the birds before them.

The boys had not once thought of themselves. They had had no time to
think of anything but the danger and the delay that they had caused.
They helped with all their might to get the train through, and as they
worked, silently listened to the repeated threats of the conductor.

At last, with a muttered something, the conductor kicked one of the
turkeys into a fluttering heap beneath the engine, and, turning,
commanded his crew to stand aside and let the engineer finish the rest
of the flock.

The men got away from the track. Then, catching Herbert by the arm,
George pointed along the train, and bending, made a tossing motion
toward the top of the cars.

“Quick!” he whispered. “One on every car!” and stepping calmly back in
front of the engine, he went down the opposite side of the long train.

As he passed the tender, he seized a big gobbler, and sent him with a
wild throw up to the top of a low coal-car, just as Herbert, on his
side, sent another fluttering up to the same perch. Both birds landed
with a flap and a gobble that were heard by the other turkeys up and
down the length of the train.

Instantly came a chorus of answering gobbles as every turkey along the
track saw, in the failing light, that real, buildings--farmyard
buildings--were here to roost on! And into the air they went, helped
all along the train by the two boys, who were tossing them into the
cars, or upon the loads of lumber, as fast as they could pass from car
to car.

Luckily, the rails were sleety, and the mighty driving-wheels,
spinning on the ice with their long load, which seemed to freeze
continually to the track, made headway so slowly that the whole flock
had come to roost upon the cars before the train was fairly moving.

Conductor and brakeman, hurrying back to board the caboose, were
midway of the train before they noticed what was happening. _How_ it
was happening they did not see at all, so hidden were the movements of
the two boys in the swirl of the blinding snow.

For just an instant the conductor checked himself. But it was too late
to do anything. The train was moving, and he must keep it moving as
fast as he could to the freight-yards ahead at the junction--the very
yards where, even now, an empty car was waiting for the overdue
turkeys.

As he ran on down the track and swung aboard the caboose, two other
figures closed in behind the train. One of them, seizing the other by
the arm, landed him safe upon the steps, and then shouted at him
through the storm:--

“Certainly you shall! I’m safe enough! I’ll drive on to that old
sawmill to-night. Feed ’em in the morning and wait for me! Good-by,”
and as the wind carried his voice away, George Totman found himself
staring after a ghost-white car that had vanished in the storm.

He was alone; but the thought of the great flock speeding on to the
town ahead was company enough. Besides, he had too much to do, and to
do quickly, to think of himself; for the snow was blocking his road,
and the cold was getting at him. But how the wires overhead sang to
him! How the sounding forest sang to him as he went back to give the
horse a snatch of supper!

He was soon on the road, where the wind at his back and the tall trees
gave him protection. The four-wheeled wagon pulled hard through the
piling snow, but the horse had had an easy day, and George kept him
going until, toward eight o’clock, he drew up behind a lofty pile of
slabs and sawdust at the old mill.

A wilder storm never filled the resounding forests of the North. The
old mill was far from being proof against the fine, icy snow; but when
George rolled himself in his heavy blanket and lay down beside his
dog, it was to go to sleep to the comfortable munching of the horse,
and with the thought that Herbert and the turkeys were safe.

And they were safe. It was late in the afternoon the next day when
George, having left the wagon at the mill, came floundering behind the
horse through the unbroken road into the streets of the junction, to
find Herbert anxiously waiting for him, and the turkeys, with full
crops, trying hard to go to roost inside their double-decked car.




CHAPTER III

WHITE-FOOT


The December rain was falling down, down, down, as if the drops were
lead instead of water. The December sky, if you could call it sky, had
settled down, down, down, as if it too were of lead, and were being
propped up only by the tops of the stiff bare trees.

A green stick in the fireplace behind me sizzled and sputtered and
blew its small steam whistles to warn me away from the window,--from
the sight of the naked trees, and the cold, thick fog upon the meadow,
and the blur of the pine woods beyond, and the rain falling down,
down, down.

A dreary world out of doors surely, with not a sign of life! The pine
tree, rising up above the hillside in front of the window, was green,
but only a few lifeless leaves rattled among the middle branches of
the oaks, while up in the stark top of a hickory sapling was wedged a
robin’s nest, deserted and wet and going to pieces.

I shivered, in spite of the hearth-fire behind me, for the face of the
gray gloom pressed close up against the window outside. And the empty
robin’s nest, already a ruin! its mud walls broken, its tiny timbers
hanging loose in the rain!

But what a large nest for a robin, I thought; and how strangely peaked
and pointed it is, like a little haycock! Then all at once, inside of
me, and all over me, I felt a warm, delightful feeling.

“It isn’t possible,” said I aloud, but all to myself; “it isn’t
possible that little White-Foot has moved into that old robin’s nest
and fitted it up with a peaked roof for the winter?”

And the thought of it started the warm, delightful feeling again
inside of me and all over me; and snatching up the tongs by the
fireplace I ran out into the December rain and tapped a few times on
the slender hickory sapling.

And what do you think happened?

It stopped raining?

No.

You broke your tongs?

No.

The nest fell out and hit you on the head?

No.

You ran back into the house again out of the rain?

Yes, I did, and I went straight to the window and looked out again at
the robin’s nest,--my deserted, ruined robin’s nest, with its thick
thatch of waterproof cedar bark, with its little round door-hole in
the side, with its soft furry bed, all toasty warm, out of which with
my tapping tongs I had just roused White-Foot and brought him
sleepy-eyed to look down at me from his door.

The rain continued to fall down; but my spirits went up, and up, at
the thought of that little mouse all safe and warm for the winter in
Robin’s deserted nest.

And so, if “there are no birds in last year’s nest,” as mourns a
doleful poem, you need not be sad on that account, for if you look
closely, you may find, now and then, a mouse in last year’s nest--and
who will say that finding a mouse in a bird’s nest is not almost as
interesting as finding a bird there?

A robin’s nest in the winter-time would be the wettest, muddiest,
coldest place in the world for a robin; but a mouse can take that old
robin’s nest and turn it into a snuggery (if you know what a
“snuggery” is) so cozy and warm that neither the tip of Mr. Mouse’s
sharp nose, nor the tip of his thin ears, nor the tippy-tip of his
long bare tail ever feels one sharp nip of the cold outside.

So, if there are no birds in last year’s nest (as surely there ought
not to be), take your tongs and tap, or, better, climb up, and reach
gently into the nest with your finger, for a mouse may be waiting
inside to bite you,--and that would be interesting.

For a mouse is interesting--just as interesting in his mousy ways as a
whale in his whalish ways, or a robin in his ways. Can you name
anything that does not grow interesting as soon as you begin to watch
and study it? Large things, small things, Bengal tigers or
earthworms--all things will surprise and interest you if you will
study them for a season.

I have a friend, for instance, who has shot more tigers, in more
lands, than any other living man; who knows more about tiger habits
and the tempers of the dangerous beasts than any other man; and who,
as I am writing this, is himself writing a book which is to be called
“Tiger Lands.” That will be an exciting book, no doubt, for he has had
adventures that made my hair stand up on my head, just to hear about.
Yet I very much doubt if that book, with all its man-eaters, will be
any more interesting or any more valuable to us than Darwin’s book on
earthworms.

So am I going to sigh because there are no birds in last year’s nests?
Had the poem said, “there are no _mice_ in last year’s nests,” that
might have made me sad, perhaps; though I am sure that I could go into
the woods almost any winter day and find plenty of old _stumps_ with
mice in them. And I am equally sure that there will be plenty of birds
in next summer’s nests; so, until the robins come back and build new
nests, I am going to look out of the window these dark December days,
and think of White-Foot in Robin’s old nest, high up there in the
slender sapling, where no cat can climb to him, and where no crow
will dare come to tear his house to pieces.

[Illustration: “THERE HE WILL SWING IN THE WINTER GALES”]

There he will swing in the winter gales with the snow swirling around
and beneath him; there he will dream through the rain and the slanting
sleet when his high sapling stairway is coated with ice and impossible
for him to climb; there he will live, and whenever I thump with the
tongs at his outer gate, up there in the little round doorway will
appear his head--his eyes, I should say, for he looks all eyes up
there, so large, so black, so innocent, so inquiring are they, so near
to rolling off down the tip of his nose with sheer surprise.

I shall have many a cheering glimpse of White-Foot, many a comforting
thought of him, out there, his thatch snow-covered, his thick-walled
nest in the slender hickory riding the winter seas that sweep the
hilltop, as safe as the ships anchored yonder in the landlocked
harbor; and he will be much more comforting to me out there than here
in the house with me; for, strangely enough, while White-Foot never
seems to join the common mice in the barn, never a winter goes by
without one or more of his kind coming into the house for the cold
weather.

This would be very pleasant if they could keep out of the pop-corn and
the nuts and the apples and the linen-drawers. But only recently one
got into the linen in the china-closet, and _chewed together_ the
loveliest damask nest that any being ever slept in.

There was nothing for such conduct, then, of course, except to kill
her. But I did not kill her, though I take no credit to myself, for I
tried to kill her, as any one would have been tempted to do.

I got her out of that linen-drawer in a hurry and chased her from
cupboard to couch, to radiator and bookcase, and lost her. The next
day I resumed the chase, and upset most of the furniture before she
finally gave me the slip. The next day she appeared, and once more we
turned things upside down, and once more from some safe corner she
watched me put the chairs back on their legs and pick up the pieces of
things.

But the next morning, as I opened the grate of the kitchen stove to
light the fire, there in the ash-pan huddled that little mouse; and
under her in a bed of ashes, as if to reproach me forever, were five
wee mice, just born, blind and naked in the choking dust, babes that
should have been sleeping covered in a bed of downy damask in the
linen-drawer.

I said I did not kill her. No, I reached in slowly, lifted her and her
babes out softly in my hand, carried them into a safe, warm place and
left them, devoutly hoping that they might all grow up to help
themselves, if need be, to an ear of pop-corn, or even to a cozy
corner and a sip of honey in the beehives.

No, I don’t believe I hoped all of that, for White-Foot is exceedingly
fond of honey, and no roof in all the out-of-doors is so much to his
liking as a beehive, warm with the heat of the clustered swarm; and
nowhere can he make such a nuisance of himself as inside the hive.

A robin’s nest, a beehive, a linen-drawer, a woodpecker’s hole--almost
any place will do for the winter home, so thick and warm can the mice
build their walls, so many bins of acorns and grain do they lay up,
and so bold are they to forage when their winter stores run low.

I had a curious experience with a white-footed mouse in the cellar one
winter. The small boys had carried into the cellar (to hide them from
me, I imagine) about four quarts of chestnuts which they had gathered.
A little later, when they went to get their nuts, the box was empty.
Not a chestnut left!

“Have you eaten all our chestnuts, father?”

“No, I haven’t--not a nut,” I answered.

“Well, they are all gone!” was the wail.

And so they were, but how, and where, we did not know. House mice had
not eaten them, for no shells were left behind; there were no rats or
squirrels in the cellar that fall; and as for one of the small
boys--that was past thought. The fact is, more suspicion was attached
to me in the case than anything in my previous conduct called for;
and, though altogether guiltless, I continued to be uncomfortably
quizzed from time to time about those chestnuts, until I began to
wonder if I _had_ got up in my sleep and devoured the four quarts,
shells and all.

Then one day, while we were putting things shipshape in the vegetable
cellar, what did we come upon but a nice little pile of chestnuts
hidden away in a dark corner; then we discovered another pile, laid up
carefully, neatly, in a secret spot, where no human eye--except the
human house-cleaning eye, that misses nothing--would ever have seen
them, and where no big human hand would ever have put them.

I was allowed to go then and there scot-free; and a trap was set for
the wood mouse. It was White-Foot, we knew. But we never caught her.
And I am glad of it, for after we took away what chestnuts we could
find, she evidently felt it necessary to make a new hoard, and began
with a handful of old hickory-nuts, shagbarks, that had been left in
the vegetable cellar beside the box of chestnuts.

Now, however, she felt the insecurity of the inner cellar, or else she
had found a fine big bin out in the furnace cellar, for out there by
the furnace she took those nuts and tucked them compactly away into
the toe of one of my tall hunting-boots.

There were double doors and a brick partition wall between the two
cellars. No matter. Here were the nuts she had not yet stored; and out
yonder was the hole, smooth and deep and dark, to store them in. She
found a way past the partition wall.

Every morning I shook those nuts out of my boot and sent them rattling
over the cellar floor. Every night the mouse gathered them up and put
them snugly back into the toe of the boot. She could not have carried
more than one nut at a time--up the tall boot-leg and down the oily,
slippery inside.

I should have liked to see her scurrying about the cellar, looking
after her curiously difficult harvest. Apparently, they were new nuts
to her every evening. Once I came down to find them lying untouched.
The mouse, perhaps, was away over night on other business. But the
following morning they were all gathered and nicely packed in the boot
as before. And as before I sent them sixty ways among the barrels and
boxes of the furnace room.

But I did it once too often, for it dawned upon the mouse one night
that these were the same old nuts that she had gathered now a dozen
times. That night they disappeared. Where? I wondered.

Weeks passed, and I had entirely forgotten about the nuts, when I came
upon them, the identical nuts of my boot, tiered carefully up in a
corner of the deep, empty water-tank away off in the attic!




CHAPTER IV

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO SEE THIS WINTER


I

The first snowstorm! I would not miss seeing the first snowstorm, not
if I had to climb up to my high, tarry, smoky roof in the city and lie
down on my back, as I once did, in order to shut out everything but
the gray wavering flakes that came scattering from the sky. But how
marvelously white and airy they looked, too, coming down over the
blackened city of roofs, transfiguring it with their floating veil of
purity! You must see the first snowfall, and, if you want to, jump and
caper with the flakes, as I always do.


II

The sorrows of winter are its storms. They are its greatest glories
also. One should no more miss the sight of the winter storms than he
should miss the sight of the winter birds and stars, the winter suns
and moons! A storm in summer is only an incident; in winter it is an
event, a part of the main design. Nature gives herself over by the
month to the planning and bringing off of the winter storms--vast
arctic shows, the dreams of her wildest moods, the work of her
mightiest minions. Do not miss the soft feathery fall that plumes the
trees and that roofs the sheds with Carrara marble; the howling
blizzard with its fine cutting blast that whirls into smoking crests;
the ice-storm that comes as slow, soft rain to freeze as it falls,
turning all the world to crystal: these are some of the miracles of
winter that you must not fail to see.


III

You must see how close you had passed to and fro all summer to the
vireo’s nest, hanging from the fork on a branch of some low bush or
tree, so near to the path that it almost brushed your hat. Yet you
never saw it! Go on and make a study of the empty nests; see
particularly how many of them were built out along the roads or
paths, as if the builders wished to be near their human neighbors--as,
indeed, I believe they do. Study how the different birds
build--materials, shapes, finish, supports; for winter is the better
season in which to make such study, the summer being so crowded with
interests of its own.


IV

When the snow hardens, especially after a strong wind, go out to see
what you can find in the wind furrows of the snow--in the holes,
hollows, pockets, and in footprints in the snow. Nothing? Look again,
closely--that dust--wind-sweepings--seeds! Yes, seeds. Gather several
small boxes of them and when you return home take a small magnifying
glass and make them out--the sticktights, gray birches, yellow
birches, pines, ragweeds, milfoil--I cannot number them! It is a
lesson in the way the winds and the snows help to plant the earth.
Last winter I followed for some distance the deep frozen tracks of a
fox, picking out the various seeds that had drifted into every
footprint, just so far apart, as if planted in the snow by some modern
planting-machine. It was very interesting.


V

When the snow lies five or six inches deep, walk out along the
fence-rows, roadsides, and old fields to see the juncos, the sparrows,
and goldfinches feeding upon the seeds of the dead weeds standing
stiff and brown above the snow. Does the sight mean anything to you?
What does it mean?


VI

Burns has a fine poem beginning--

    “When biting Boreas, fell and doure,
    Sharp shivers thro’ the leafless bow’r,”

in which, he asks,--

    “Ilk happing bird--wee, helpless thing!--

           *       *       *       *       *

                    What comes o’ thee?
    Whare wilt thou cow’r thy chittering wing,
                    An’ close thy e’e?”

Did you ever ask yourself the question? Go forth, then, as the dusk
begins to fall one of these chill winter days and try to see “what
comes o’” the birds, where they sleep these winter nights. You will
find an account of my own watching in a chapter called “Birds’ Winter
Beds” in “Wild Life Near Home.”


VII

You will come back from your watching in the dusk with the feeling
that a winter night for the birds is unspeakably dreary, perilous, and
chill. You will close the door on the darkness outside with a shiver
as much from dread as from the cold.

    “List’ning the doors an’ winnocks rattle,”--

you will think of the partridge beneath the snow, the crow in his
swaying pine-top, the kinglet in the close-armed cedar, the wild duck
riding out the storm in his freezing water-hole, and you will be glad
for your four thick walls and downy blankets, and you will wonder how
any creature can live through the long, long night of cold and dark
and storm. But there is another view of this same picture; another
picture, rather, of this same stormy, bitter night which you must not
miss seeing. Go out to see how the animals sleep, what beds they have,
what covers to keep off the cold: the mice in the corn-shocks; the
muskrats in their thick mud homes; the red squirrels in their rocking,
wind-swung beds, so soft with cedar bark and so warm that never a
tooth of the cold can bite through!

    “I heard nae mair, for Chanticleer
      Shook off the pouthery snaw,
    And hail’d the morning with a cheer,
      A cottage-rousing craw.”


VIII

This winter I have had two letters asking me how best to study the
mosses and lichens, and I answered, “Begin now.” Winter, when the
leaves are off, the ground bare, the birds and flowers gone, and all
is reduced to singleness and simplicity--winter is the time to observe
the shapes, colors, varieties, and growth of the lichens. Not that
every lover of nature needs to know the long Latin names (and many of
these lesser plants have no other names), but that every lover of the
out-of-doors should notice them--the part they play in the color of
things, the place they hold in the scheme of things, their exquisite
shapes and strange habits.


IX

You should see the brook, “bordered with sparkling frost-work ... as
gay as with its fringe of summer flowers.” You should examine under a
microscope the wonderful crystal form of the snow-flakes--each flake
shaped by an infinitely accurate hand according to a pattern that
seems the perfection, the very poetry, of mechanical drawing.


X

What a world of gray days, waste lands, bare woods, and frozen waters
there is to see! And you should see them--gray and bare and waste and
frozen. But what is a frozen pond for if not to be skated on? and
waste white lands, but to go sleighing over? and cold gray days, but
so many opportunities to stay indoors with your good books?

See the winter bleak and cheerless as at times you will, and as at
times you ought; still if you will look twice, and think as you look,
you will see the fishermen on the ponds catching pickerel through the
ice--life swimming there under the frozen surface! You will see the
bare empty woodland fresh budded to the tip of each tiny twig--life
all over the trees thrust forward to catch the touch of spring! You
will see the wide flinty fields thick sown with seeds--life, more life
than the sun and the soil can feed, sleeping there under “the tender,
sculpturesque, immaculate, warming, fertilizing snow”!




CHAPTER V

CHRISTMAS IN THE WOODS

    “’Twas the night before Christmas, and all through the house
    Not a creature was stirring, not even a mouse.”


But on the night before this particular Christmas every creature of
the woods that could stir was up and stirring; for over the old snow
was falling swiftly, silently, a soft, fresh covering that might mean
a hungry Christmas unless the dinner were had before morning.

Yet, when the morning dawned, a cheery Christmas sun broke across the
great gum swamp, lighting the snowy boles and soft-piled limbs of the
giant trees with indescribable glory, and pouring, a golden flood,
into the deep, spongy bottom of the swamp below. It would be a perfect
Christmas in the woods, clear, mild, stirless, with silent footing for
me, and everywhere the telltale snow.

And everywhere in the woods would be the Christmas spirit, too. As I
paused among the pointed cedars of the pasture, looking down into the
tangle at the head of the swamp, a clear, wild whistle rang in the
thicket, followed by a flash through the alders like a tongue of fire,
as a cardinal grosbeak shot down to the tangle of greenbrier and
magnolia under the slope of the hill. The bird was a fleck of flaming
summer. As warm as summer, too, were the pointed cones of stag-horn
sumac burning on the crest of the ridge against the group of holly
trees--trees as fresh as April, and all aglow with red berries.

The woods were decorated for the Holy Day. The gentleness of the soft,
new snow touched everything; cheer and good-will lighted the unclouded
sky and warmed the thick depths of the evergreens, and blazed in the
crimson-berried bushes of the ilex and the alder. The Christmas woods
were glad. The heart of the woods was full of Christmas peace.

Now I did not imagine all of this as I went along. Perhaps there was
the spirit of Christmas in my heart, and so I found the spirit of
Christmas in the woods; but so it must have been with the household I
had just left, back on the city street. Every one had Christmas in his
heart, and so every one found Christmas in the Christmas-tree blazing
and glittering in its candle-flame blossoms and jeweled fruit.

So there was real Christmas joy and peace--a real Christmas
spirit--abroad in the woods this snowy Christmas morning. The sky had
it, the trees had it, the soft white slopes had it, the softly flowing
creek had it, flowing softly toward the bay.

But doubtless my own feelings had something to do with it all. This
was Christmas Day, and these were my home woods, the woods where I
tramped and trapped and “grew up” when a boy; and this was I, after
twenty years of absence, I, the boy again, back in the old familiar
pasture on my way to Lupton’s Pond!

Yes, I must say that I was almost afraid as I followed the old
cow-path across the pasture, now only a slightly sunken line in the
snow; I was afraid that the path might be gone. Twenty years are a
good many years for a cow-path to last. But evidently the cows had
been crossing every year since I had been away; and not a single new
crook had they worn in the old winding trail. Then I was afraid, as I
came to the fence where I could look down upon the pond, lest the pond
might have disappeared. But no, there it lay, sealed over, as if kept
for me by the snow! Then I looked fearfully over the pond, over the
steep ridge on the opposite shore to where there used to stand two
particular persimmon trees.

My heart beat wildly for a moment. The woods up the ridge had been cut
off! Things had changed! I was confused and looked this way and that,
when, so near to me that I could scarcely believe my eyes, I saw the
twin trees, their hard, angular limbs closely globed with fruit, and
standing softly out against the sky!

It was enough. Forgetting the twenty years, I hurried down across the
pond and up to the persimmon trees on the other side--up _into_ the
trees indeed, for I never stopped until I had climbed clear up into
the top among the ripe persimmons!

Do you know what a persimmon, picked from a particular tree along
Cohansey Creek on Christmas Day, tastes like? especially when you have
not had a taste of persimmon for twenty years? No, you do not--because
you are not twenty years old, perhaps, and because you were not a boy
along Cohansey Creek, perhaps, and because, if you were, you did not
know those two particular persimmon trees, maybe.

Nobody ever seemed to know the perfection of those persimmons, except
myself and the ’possums. Not one of the Luptons, who owned the
pasture, the pond, and the trees, had ever been a boy, so far as I
could remember, and certainly not one of them had ever tasted the
fruit of those two trees. There were other persimmon trees up and down
the township, others here along the pond; but these two were the only
trees to hold their fruit until Christmas, preserved with such
richness of flavor, such a gummy, candied, wild, woodsy quality, that
it could not decay. Those persimmons never decayed. They candied,
evaporated, wrinkled, fell, and vanished away.

Or else the ’possums ate them--those that I did not eat. A ’possum had
already been here this Christmas morning before me. I had noted his
fresh tracks beneath the tree when I came up; and now, in the tree, I
saw where the snow had been brushed from several of the large limbs as
the ’possum had moved about in the top, eating his Christmas dinner.

You never ate a Christmas dinner high up in the top of a persimmon
tree? But you will, perhaps, some day, as good a Christmas dinner, I
hope, as ours was. For such persimmons! Bob Cratchit’s goose (“There
never was such a goose!”) could not have been any better flavored. Nor
could the little Cratchits have been any hungrier for goose than I was
for persimmons.

Now the ’possum had been having persimmons every night since the
frosts of October; so of course he felt no such hunger for persimmons
as I felt. But ripe persimmons would be a Christmas dinner for a
’possum every day in the year. There is nothing so unspeakably good as
persimmons if you happen to be a ’possum, or if you happen to be a
boy--even after twenty years!

So the ’possum and I had our Christmas dinner together at Nature’s
invitation, in the top of the persimmon tree. The ’possum, to be
sure, had eaten and gone before I came. But that is good form in the
woods. He was expecting me, so he came early, just before dawn, that
neither of us might be embarrassed, leaving his greetings for me in
sign-language in the snow.

A Christmas dinner all alone would be cold cheer indeed. But I was not
alone. Here was good company and plenty of it. Did not the tracks talk
to me? With abundance of fruit still left in the tree, did I need to
see that ’possum fold up his napkin, pull down his vest, spread his
hands over his expansive person and groan in the fullness of his
feast? No; all of that was printed plainly in the snow. Why, I could
even hear his groans in his tumbled tracks at the foot of the tree,
where the fat old fellow had literally fallen over himself! What an
appetite! What a pudding of persimmons he must be! He can hardly walk
for fat! Look at his trail in the snow leading down toward the pond--a
big wide wallow where he has bounced along!

So I slide down the tree and take up the ’possum’s trail. We have
broken bread together, this ’possum and I, and now we will enter the
woods together in the same good-fellowship for the rest of the day.
Persimmons and good-will are very proper things to be filled with when
you go into the Christmas woods.

And there is no better fellowship for such a tramp than the trail of
some animal like the possum or the mink or the fox. To go in with one
of these through the woods-door is to find yourself at home. Any one
can manage to get inside the woods, as the grocery boy or the census
man manages to get inside our houses. You can bolt in at any time on
business. But a _trail_, remember, is Nature’s invitation. Go softly
in with possum, or rabbit, or coon, and at the threshold of the trees
you will be met by the Spirit of the Woods--you will be made a guest
in this secret, shadowy house of the out-of-doors.

But do not fail first to break bread with the ’possum. A persimmon, or
a handful of wintergreen berries, or a nip of sassafras root, or a
piece of spruce gum, or a lump of liquid amber--share anything, take
any small part in the life of these who live wild in the woods, and
they will meet you at the threshold and make you more than welcome.

I went in with the ’possum. He had traveled home leisurely and without
fear, as his tracks plainly showed. He was full of persimmons. A good
happy world this, where such fare could be had for the picking! What
need to hurry home? Unless, indeed, one were in danger of falling
asleep by the way! So I thought, too, as I followed his winding path;
and if I was tracking him to his den, it was only to wake him for a
moment with the compliments of the season. But when I finally found
him in his hollow gum, he was so sound asleep he barely knew that
some one was poking him gently in the ribs and wishing him a merry
Christmas.

The ’possum had led me far along the creek to the centre of the empty,
hollow swamp, where the great-boled gums lifted their branches like a
timbered, unshingled roof between me and the wide sky. Far away
through the spaces of the rafters I saw a pair of wheeling buzzards,
and under them, in lesser circles, a broad-winged hawk. Here, at the
feet of the tall, clean trees, looking up through the leafless limbs,
I had something of a measure for the flight of the great birds. And
what power, what majesty and mystery in those distant buoyant wings!

I have seen the turkey buzzard sailing the skies on the bitterest
winter days. To-day, however, could hardly be called winter. Indeed,
nothing yet had felt the pinch of the cold. There was no hunger yet in
the swamp, though this new snow had scared the raccoons out, and their
half-human tracks along the margin of the swamp stream showed that, if
not hungry, they at least feared that they might be.

For a coon hates snow. He invariably stays in during the first light
snowfalls, and even in the late winter he will not venture forth in
fresh snow unless driven by hunger or some other dire need. Perhaps,
like a cat or a hen, he dislikes the wetting of his feet. Or it may be
that the soft snow makes bad hunting--for him. The truth is, I
believe, that such a snow makes too good hunting for the dogs and the
gunner. The new snow tells too clear a story. For the coon’s home is
no dark den among the ledges; only a hollow in some ancient oak or
tupelo. Once within, he is safe from the dogs, but his long, fierce
fight for life taught him generations ago that the nest-tree is a
fatal trap when behind the dogs come the axe and the gun. So he has
grown wary and enduring. He waits until the snow grows crusty, when
without sign, and almost without scent, he can slip forth among the
long shadows and prowl to the edge of dawn.

Skirting the stream out toward the higher back woods, I chanced to spy
a bunch of snow in one of the great sour gums, that I thought was an
old nest. A second look showed me tiny green leaves, then white
berries, then mistletoe!

It was not a surprise, however, for I had found it here before--a
long, long time before. It was back in my schoolboy days that I first
stood here under the mistletoe and had my first romance. There was no
chandelier, no pretty girl, in that romance--only a boy, the
mistletoe, the giant trees, and the sombre silent swamp. But there was
more than that, there was the thrill of discovery, for until that day
the boy did not know that mistletoe grew outside of England, did not
know that it grew in his own native swamps! Rambling alone through the
swamps along the creek that day, he stopped under a big curious bunch
of green, high up in one of the gums, and--made his first discovery!

So this Christmas Day the boy climbed up again at the peril of his
precious neck, and brought down a bit of that old romance.

       *       *       *       *       *

I followed the stream along through the swamp to the open meadows, and
then on under the steep wooded hillside that ran up to the higher land
of corn and melon fields. Here at the foot of the slope the winter sun
lay warm, and here in the sheltered, briery border I came upon the
Christmas birds.

There was a great variety of them, feeding and preening and chirping
in the vines. The tangle was a-twitter with their quiet, cheery talk.
Such a medley of notes you could not hear at any other season outside
a city bird store. How far the different species understood one
another I should like to know, and whether the hum of voices meant
sociability to them, as it certainly did to me. Doubtless the first
cause of their flocking here was the sheltered warmth and the great
numbers of berry-laden bushes, for there was no lack of abundance or
of variety on this Christmas table.

In sight from where I stood hung bunches of withering chicken, or
frost, grapes, plump clusters of blue-black berries of the greenbrier,
and limbs of the smooth winterberry beaded with their flaming fruit.
There were bushes of crimson ilex, too, trees of fruiting dogwood and
holly, cedars in berry, dwarf sumac and seedy sedges, while patches on
the wood slopes uncovered by the sun were spread with trailing
partridge-berry and the coral-fruited wintergreen. I had eaten part of
my dinner with the ’possum; now I picked a quantity of these
wintergreen berries, and continued my meal with the birds. And they
too, like the ’possum, had enough, and to spare.

Among the birds in the tangle was a large flock of northern fox
sparrows, whose vigorous and continuous scratching in the bared spots
made a most lively and cheery commotion. Many of them were splashing
about in tiny pools of snow-water, melted partly by the sun and partly
by the warmth of their bodies as they bathed. One would hop to a
softening bit of snow at the base of a tussock, keel over and begin to
flop, soon sending up a shower of sparkling drops from his rather
chilly tub. A winter snow-water bath seemed a necessity, a luxury
indeed; for they all indulged, splashing with the same purpose and
zest that they put into their scratching among the leaves.

A much bigger splashing drew me quietly through the bushes to find a
marsh hawk giving himself a Christmas souse. The scratching, washing,
and talking of the birds; the masses of green in the cedars, holly,
and laurels; the glowing colors of the berries against the snow; the
blue of the sky, and the golden warmth of the light made Christmas in
the heart of the noon, that the very swamp seemed to feel.

Two months later there was to be scant picking here, for this was the
beginning of the severest winter I ever knew. From this very ridge, in
February, I had reports of berries gone, of birds starving, of whole
coveys of quail frozen dead in the snow; but neither the birds nor I
dreamed to-day of any such hunger and death. A flock of robins whirled
into the cedars above me; a pair of cardinals whistled back and forth;
tree sparrows, juncos, nuthatches, chickadees, and cedar-birds cheeped
among the trees and bushes; and from the farm lands at the top of the
slope rang the calls of meadowlarks.

Halfway up the hill I stopped under a blackjack oak, where, in the
thin snow, there were signs of something like a Christmas revel. The
ground was sprinkled with acorn-shells and trampled over with feet of
several kinds and sizes,--quail, jay, and partridge feet; rabbit,
squirrel, and mouse feet, all over the snow as the feast of acorns had
gone on. Hundreds of the acorns were lying about, gnawed away at the
cup end, where the shell was thinnest, many of them further broken and
cleaned out by the birds.

As I sat studying the signs in the snow, my eye caught a tiny trail
leading out from the others straight away toward a broken pile of
cord-wood. The tracks were planted one after the other, so directly in
line as to seem like the prints of a single foot. “That’s a weasel’s
trail,” I said, “the death’s-head at this feast,” and followed it
slowly to the pile of wood. A shiver crept over me as I felt, even
sooner than I saw, a pair of small, sinister eyes fixed upon mine. The
evil pointed head, heavy but alert, and with a suggestion of fierce
strength out of all proportion to the slender body, was watching me
from between the sticks of cord-wood. And just so had it been watching
the mice and the rabbits and the birds feasting under the tree!

I packed a ball of snow round and hard, slipped forward upon my knees
and hurled it. _Spat!_ it struck the end of a stick within an inch of
the ugly head, nearly filling the crevice with snow. Instantly the
head appeared at another crack, and another ball struck viciously
beside it. Now it was back where it first appeared, nor did it flinch
for the next ball, or the next. The third went true, striking with a
_chug_ and packing the crack. But the black, hating eyes were still
watching me a foot lower down.

It is not all peace and good-will in the Christmas woods. But happily
the weasels are few. More friendly and timid eyes were watching me
than bold and murderous. It was foolish to want to kill--even the
weasel, for one’s woods are what one makes them. And so I let the man
with the gun, who just then chanced along, think that I had turned boy
again, and was snowballing the woodpile just for the fun of trying to
hit the end of the biggest stick.

I was glad he had come. The sight of him took all hatred out of me. As
he strode off with his stained bag I felt kindlier toward the
weasel--there were worse in the woods than he. He must kill to live,
and if he gloated over the kill, why, what fault of his? But the
other, the one with the blood-stained game-bag, he killed for the love
of killing. I was glad he had gone.

The crows were winging over toward their great roost in the pines when
I turned toward the town. They, too, had had good picking along the
creek flats and the ditches of the meadows. Their powerful wing-beats
and constant play up in the air told of full crops and no fear for the
night, already softly gray across the silent fields.

The air was crisper; the snow began to crackle under foot; the twigs
creaked and rattled as I brushed along; a brown beech leaf wavered
down and skated with a thin scratch over the crust; and pure as the
snow-wrapped crystal world, and sweet as the soft gray twilight, came
the call of a quail.

These were not the voices, colors, odors, and forms of summer. The
very face of things had changed; all had been reduced, made plain,
simple, single, pure! There was less for the senses, but how much
keener now their joy! The wide landscape, the frosty air, the tinkle
of tiny icicles, and, out of the quiet of the falling twilight, the
voice of the quail!

There is no day but is beautiful in the woods; and none more beautiful
than one like this Christmas Day--warm, and still, and wrapped to the
round red berries of the holly in the magic of the snow.




CHAPTER VI

CHICKADEE


I was crunching along through the January dusk toward home. The cold
was bitter. A half-starved partridge had just risen from the road and
fluttered off among the naked bushes--a bit of life vanishing into the
winter night of the woods. I knew the very hemlock in which he would
roost; but what were the thick, snow-bent boughs of his hemlock, and
what were all his winter feathers in such a night as this?--this night
of cutting winds and frozen snow!

The road dipped from the woods down into a wide, open meadow, where
the winds were free. The cold was driving, numbing here, with a power
for death that the thermometer could not mark. I backed against the
gale and sidewise hastened forward toward the double line of elms that
arched the road in front of the house. Already I could hear them creak
and rattle like things of glass. It was not the sound of life. Nothing
was alive; for what could live in this long darkness and fearful cold?

The question was hardly thought, when an answer was whirled past me
into the nearest of the naked elms. A chickadee! He caught for an
instant on a dead stub of a limb that stuck out over the road,
scrambled along to its broken tip, and whisked into a hole that ran
straight down the centre of the old stub, down, for I don’t know how
far.

I stopped. The limb lay out upon the wind, with only an eddy of the
gale sucking at the little round hole in the broken end, while
somewhere far down in its hollow heart, huddling himself into a downy,
dozy ball for the night, had crept the chickadee. I knew by the very
way he struck the limb and by the way he turned in at the hole that he
had been there before. He knew whither, across the sweeping meadows,
he was being blown. He had even helped the winds as they whirled him,
for, having tarried along the roads until late, he was in a great
hurry to get home. But he was safe for the night now, in the very bed,
it may be, where he was hatched last summer, and where at this moment,
who knows, were crowded half a dozen other chickadees, the rest of
that last summer’s brood, unharmed still, and still sharing the old
home hollow, where they were as snug and warm this fierce, wild night
as ever they were in the soft May days when they nestled here
together.

The cold drove me on; but the sight of the chickadee had warmed me,
and all my shivering world of night and death. And so he ever does.
For the winter has yet to be that drives him seeking shelter to the
sunny south. I never knew it colder than in January and February of
1904. During both of those months I drove morning and evening through
a long mile of empty, snow-buried woods. For days at a time I would
not see even a crow, but morning and evening at a certain dip in the
road two chickadees would fly from bush to bush across the hollow and
cheer me on my way.

They came out to the road, really to pick up whatever scanty crumbs of
food were to be found in my wake. They came also to hear me, and to
see me go past--to escape for a moment, I think, from the silence, the
desertion, and the death of the woods. They helped me to escape, too.

Four other chickadees, all winter long, ate with us at the house,
sharing, so far as the double windows would allow, the cheer of our
dining-room. We served them their meals on the lilac bush outside the
window, tying their suet on so that they could see us and we could see
them during meal-time. Perhaps it was mere suet, and nothing else at
all, that they got; but constantly, when our “pie was opened, the
birds began to sing”--a dainty dish indeed, a dish of live, happy
chickadees that fed our souls.

There are states in the far Northwest where the porcupine is protected
by law, as a last food resource for men who are lost and starving in
the forests. Porcupine is so slow that a dying man can catch him and
make a meal on him. Perhaps the porcupine was not designed by nature
for any such purpose, and would not approve of it at all. Perhaps
Chickadee was not left behind by Summer to feed my lost and starving
hope through the cheerless months of winter. But that is the use I
make of him. He is Summer’s pledge to me. He tells me that this winter
world is a living world and not a dreary world of death. The woods are
hollow, the winds are chill, the earth is cold and stiff, but there
flits Chickadee, and--I cannot lose faith, nor feel that this
procession of bleak white days is all a funeral! If Chickadee can
live, then so can I.

He is the only bird in my out-of-doors that I can find without fail
three hundred and sixty-five days in the year. From December to the
end of March he comes daily to my lilac bush for suet; from April to
early July he is busy with domestic cares in the gray birches down the
hillside; from August to December he and his family come hunting
quietly and sociably as a little flock among the trees and bushes of
the farm; and from then on he is back again for his winter meals at
“The Lilac.”

Is it any wonder that he was the first bird I ever felt personally
acquainted with? That early acquaintance, however, was not brought
about by his great abundance, nor by his very bad, bold manners, as
might be with the English sparrow. I got acquainted with him first,
because he wanted to get acquainted with me, he is such a cheerful,
confiding, sociable little bird! He drops down and peeps under your
hat-brim to see what manner of boy you are, and if you are really fit
to be abroad in this beautiful world, so altogether good both summer
and winter--for chickadees.

He is not quite so sociable in summer as in winter, but if you were no
bigger than a chickadee (two and one half inches without your tail!)
and had eight babies nearly as big as yourself to hunt grubs for,
besides a wife to pet and feed, do you think you could be very
sociable? In the winter, however, he is always at liberty to stop and
talk to you, a sweet little way he has that makes him the easiest bird
in the world to get acquainted with.

Last winter while I was tying up a piece of suet that had fallen into
the snow, a hungry and impatient chickadee lighted on the brim of my
felt hat. The brim bent under him, and he came fluttering down against
my nose, which I thought for an instant he was going to take for suet!
He didn’t snip it off, however, as a certain blackbird did a certain
maiden’s nose, but lighted instead on my shoulder. Then, seeing the
lump of suet in my hand, he flew up and perched upon my fingers and
held on, picking at the suet all the time I was tying it fast in the
bush.

He is a friendly little soul, who loves your neighborhood, as, indeed,
most birds do; who has no fear of you, because he cannot think that
you could fear him and so would want to hurt him.

Nature made him an insect-eater; but he has a mission to perform
besides eating pestiferous insects, and their eggs and grubs. This
destruction of insects he does that the balance of things may be
maintained out of doors, lest the insects destroy us. He has quite
another work to do, which is not a matter of grubs, and which in no
wise is a matter of fine feathers or sweet voice, but simply a matter
of sweet nature, vigor, and concentrated cheerfulness.

Chickadee is a sermon. I hear him on a joyous May morning calling
_Chick-a-dee! dee! Chick-a-dee! dee!_--brisk, bright, and cheery; or,
soft and gentle as a caress, he whistles, _Phœ-ee-bee!
Phœ-ee-bee!_ I meet him again on the edge of a bleak winter night.
He is hungry and cold, and he calls, as I hasten along, _Chick-a-dee!
dee! Chick-a-dee! dee!_ brisk, bright, and cheery; or, following after
me, he talks to me with words as soft and gentle as a caress.

Will you lend me your wings, Chickadee, your invisible wings on which
you ride the winds of life so evenly?

The abundant summer, the lean and wolfish winter, find Chickadee
cheerful and gentle. He is busier at some seasons than at others, with
fewer chances for friendship. He almost disappears in the early
summer. But this is because of family cares; and because the bigger,
louder birds have come back, and the big leaves have come out and
hidden him. A little searching, and you will discover him, in one of
your old decayed fence-posts, maybe, or else deep in the swamp,
foraging for a family of from six to eight, that fairly bulge and boil
over from the door of their home.

Here about Mullein Hill, this is sure to be a gray-birch home. Other
trees will do--on a pinch. I have found Chickadee nesting in live
white oaks, maples, upturned roots, and tumbling fence-posts. These
were shifts, only, mere houses, not real homes. The only good homelike
trees are old gray birches, dead these many years and gone to
punk--mere shells of tough circular bark walls. Halfway down the hill
is a small grove of these birches that we call the Seminary (because,
as a poet friend says, “they look like seminary girls in white
frocks”). Here the chickadees love to build.

Why has Chickadee this very decided preference? Is it a case of
protective coloration--the little gray and black bird choosing to nest
in this little gray and black tree because bird and tree so exactly
match one another in size and color? Or is there a strain of poetry
in Chickadee’s soul, something fine, that leads him into this
exquisite harmony--into this little gray house for his little gray
self?

Explain it as you may, it is a fact that the little bird shows this
marked preference, makes this deliberate choice; and in the choice is
protection and poetry, too. Doubtless he follows the guidance of a
sure and watchful instinct. But who shall deny to him a share of the
higher, finer things of the imagination?

His life is like his home--gentle and sweet and idyllic. There is no
happier spot in the summer woods than that about the birch of the
chickadees; and none whose happiness you will be so little liable to
disturb.

Before the woods were in leaf last spring I found a pair of chickadees
building in a birch along the edge of the swamp. They had just begun,
having dug out only an inch of the cavity. It was very interesting to
discover them doing the excavating themselves, for usually they refit
some abandoned chamber or adapt to their needs some ready-made hole.

The birch was a long, limbless cylinder of bark, broken off about
fourteen feet up, and utterly rotten, the mere skin of a tree stuffed
with dust. I could push my finger into it at any point. It was so weak
that every time the birds lighted upon the top the whole stub wobbled
and reeled. Surely they were building their house upon the sand! Any
creature without wings would have known that. The birds, however,
because they have wings, seem to have lost the sense of such
insecurity, often placing their nests as if they expected the nests
themselves to take wings and fly to safety when the rains descend and
the winds come.

This shaking stub of the chickadees was standing directly beneath a
great overshadowing pine, where, if no partridge bumped into it, if
two squirrels did not scamper up it together, if the crows nesting
overhead in the pine did not discover it, if no strong wind bore down
upon it from the meadow side, it might totter out the nesting-season.
But it didn’t. The birds were leaving too much to luck. I knew it, and
perhaps I should have pushed their card house down, then and there,
and saved the greater ruin later. Perhaps so, but who was I to
interfere in their labor?

Both birds were at the work when I discovered them, and so busily at
it that my coming up did not delay them for a single billful. It was
not hard digging, but it was very slow, for Chickadee is neither
carpenter nor mason. He has difficulty killing a hard-backed beetle.
So, whenever you find him occupying a clean-walled cavity, with a
neat, freshly chipped doorway, you may be sure that some woodpecker
built the house, and not this short-billed, soft-tailed little tit.
Chickadee lacks both the bill chisel and the tail brace. Perhaps the
explanation of his fondness for birch trees lies here--because the
birch trees die young and soon decay!

The birds were going down through the broken-off top, and not by a
hole through the leathery rind of the sides, for the bark was too
tough for their beaks. They would drop into the top of the stub, pick
up a wad of decayed wood and fly off to a dead limb of the pine. Here,
with a jerk and a snap of their bills, they would scatter the punk in
a shower so thin and far that I could neither hear it fall nor find a
trace of it upon the dead leaves of the ground. This nest would never
be betrayed by the workmen’s chips, as are the woodpeckers’
nest-holes.

Between the pair there averaged three beakfuls of excavating every two
minutes, one of the birds regularly shoveling twice to the other’s
once. They looked so exactly alike that I could not tell which bird
was pushing the enterprise; but I had my suspicions. It was Mrs.
Chickadee!

Mr. Chickadee was doing only part of his duty, and only
half-heartedly at that! Hers was the real interest, the real anxiety.
To be a Mr. Chickadee and show off! That’s the thing!

I sat a long time watching the work. It went on in perfect silence,
not a chirp, not the sound of a fluttering wing. The swamp along whose
margin the birds were building had not a joyous atmosphere. Damp,
dim-shadowed, and secret, it seemed to have laid its spell upon the
birds. Their very color of gray and black was as if mixed out of the
dusky colors of the swamp; their noiseless coming and going was like
the slipping to and fro of small shadows. They were a part of the
swamp--of its life, of its color, of its silence. They were children
of the swamp, sharing its very spirit, and that sharing was their
defense, the best protection that they could have had.

It didn’t save their nest, however. They felt and obeyed the spirit of
the Swamp in their own conduct, but the Swamp did not tell them where
to build. Birds and animals have wonderful instinct, or family wisdom,
but not much personal, individual wisdom.

It was about three weeks later when I stopped again under the pine and
found the birch stub in pieces upon the ground. Some strong wind had
come, or some robber had been after the eggs, and had brought the
whole house tumbling down.

But this is not the fate of all such birch-bark houses. Now and again
they escape; yet when they do it is always a matter for wonder.

I was following an old disused wood-road once when I frightened a
robin from her nest. Her mate joined her, and together they raised a
great hubbub. Immediately a chewink, a pair of vireos, and two black
and white warblers joined the robins in their din. Then a chickadee
appeared. He had a worm in his beak. His anxiety seemed so real that I
began to watch him, when, looking down among the stones for a place to
step, what should I see but his mate emerging from the end of a tiny
birch stump at my very feet! She had heard the racket and had come out
to see what it was all about. At sight of her, Mr. Chickadee hastened
with his worm, brushing my face, almost, as he darted to her side. She
took the worm sweetly, for she knew he had intended it for her. But
how do I know it was intended for her, and not for the young? There
were no young in the nest; only eggs. Even after the young came (there
were eight of them!), when life, from daylight to dark, was one
ceaseless, hurried hunt for worms, I saw him over and over again fly
to Mrs. Chickadee’s side caressingly and tempt her to eat.

The house of this pair did not fall. How could it when it stood
precisely two and a half feet from the ground? But that it wasn’t
looted is due to the amazing boldness of its situation. It stood
alone, close to the road, so close that the hub of a low wheel in
passing might have knocked it down. Perhaps a hundred persons had
brushed it in going by. How many dogs and cats had overlooked it no
one can say; nor how many skunks and snakes and squirrels. The
accident that discovered it to me had happened apparently to no one
else, so here it stood still safe, but only by the grace of Luck!

Cutting a tiny window in the bark just above the eggs, I looked in
upon the little children every day. I watched them hatch, grow, and
fill the cavity and hang over at the top. I was there the day they
forced my window open; I was there the day when there was no more room
at the top, and when, at the call of their parents, one child after
another of this large, sweet bird family found his wings and flew away
through the friendly woods.




CHAPTER VII

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO DO THIS WINTER


I

You should go skating--crawling, I ought to say--over a pond of glare
ice this winter. Take the pond you are most familiar with. Go early on
a bright day, before any skater arrives, and lying flat upon the
clear, “black” ice, study the bottom of the pond and the fish that
swim below you. They have boats with glass bottoms along the
California coast, through which to watch the marvelous bottoms off
shore. But an Eastern pond covered with glare ice is as good, for such
ice is a plate-glass window into a wonder world.


II

Fight your way one of these winter days to the crest of some high hill
and stand up against a northwest gale. Feel the sweep of the winds
from across the plain beneath you; hear them speaking close in your
ear, as they fly past; catch them and breathe them, until they run red
in your leaping veins. Master them, and make them, mighty as they are,
your own. And something large and free, strong and sound will pass
into you; and you will love the great world more, and you will feel
how fit a place, for the strong of heart, is this earth to live on.


III

Keep a careful list of the winter birds you see; and visit every
variety of wood, meadow, and upland in your neighborhood--not
neglecting the parks and city trees--for a sight of the rarer winter
visitors, such as the snowy owl, the snow buntings, and the
crossbills.


IV

If you know little about the birds, then this is the time to begin
your study. When they are so few and scarce? Yes, just because they
are few and scarce. On a June morning (unless you are at home in the
woods) you will be confused by the medley of songs you hear, and the
shapes flitting everywhere about you; and you may be tempted to give
up your study for the very multitude. Get a pair of good field or
opera glasses and a good bird book, such as Hoffmann’s, “Guide to the
Birds,” and go into the fields and woods--leaving the book at home.
The first bird you see follow up until you can remember (1) his size,
color--whether he has a white bar on wings, or small spots or large
clear spots on breast; (2) his chirp, or call; (3) something peculiar
about his flight--a flirt of the tail, a habit of flying down to the
ground in getting away. Then come back to your book and identify him
_from memory_. If you cannot, then go out again and again; and it will
not be long before either this first one, or others, will be
accurately made out--the beginning of an acquaintance that you can
extend in the summer, but which will be plenty large enough for your
“coming-out” winter into bird society. For here is a list of the birds
you may be able to find during the winter:--

Screech owl, crow, robin, flicker, jay, goldfinch, tree sparrow,
English sparrow, song sparrow, junco, golden-crowned kinglet,
nuthatch, brown creeper, downy woodpecker, quail, partridge.


V

See to it that no bird in your neighborhood starves for lack of food
that you can supply. Tie a piece of suet to a tree or bush near the
house (by the window if you can) for the chickadees and blue jays;
keep a place on the lawn cleared of snow and well supplied with crumbs
and small seeds for the juncos and the sparrows; hang a netted bag of
cracked nuts out somewhere for the nuthatches; and provide corn and
nuts for the squirrels.


VI

Go out on a cold December day, or a January day, and see how many
“signs” of spring--“Minor Prophets,” as Mr. Torrey calls them--you can
bring home. They will be mostly buds of various sorts. Then, on a
warm, soft day, go again to see what you can bring home--flitting,
creeping, crawling things that the warm sun has brought from their
winter hiding.


VII

Make a map of your sky, showing the positions of the planets, the
constellations, and the most brilliant stars, the points in the
horizon for the rising and setting of the sun, say, in January, noting
the changes in places of things since your last map drawn in October.
Any school child can do it, and, in doing it, learn the few large
facts about the sky that most people are pitifully ignorant of.


VIII

Go out after a fresh light snow and take up the trail of a fox or a
rabbit or a partridge, as you might take up a problem in arithmetic,
or as a detective might take up a clew, and “solve” it--where the
creature came from, where going, what for, in a hurry or not, pursued
or pursuing, etc. It will give you one of the best of lessons in
observation, in following a clew, and in learning to take a hint.


IX

Go out to study the face of the ground--the ridges, hollows, level
places, the ledges, meadows, sandbanks, the course of the streams, the
location of the springs--the general shape and contour, the pitch and
slant and make-up of the region over which you tramp in the summer.
Now, when the leaves are off and things swept bare, you can get a
general idea of the lay of the land that will greatly aid you in your
more detailed study of plants and birds, of individual things, in the
summer. It is like an outline map in your geography.


X

Winter is the time to do much good reading. A tramp over real fields
is to be preferred to a tramp in a book. But a good book is pretty
nearly as good as anything under the stars. You need both fields and
books. And during these cold days--impossible days, some of them, for
work afield--you will read, read. Oh, the good things to read that
have been written about the out-of-doors!




CHAPTER VIII

THE MISSING TOOTH


The snow had melted from the river meadows, leaving them flattened,
faded, and stained with mud--a dull, dreary waste in the gray
February. I had stopped beside a tiny bundle of bones that lay in the
matted grass a dozen feet from a ditch. Here, still showing, was the
narrow path along which the bones had dragged themselves; there the
hole by which they had left the burrow in the bank of the ditch. They
had crawled out in this old runway, then turned off a little into the
heavy autumn grass and laid them down. The rains had come and the
winter snows. The spring was breaking now and the small bundle, gently
loosened and uncovered, was whitening on the wide, bare meadow.

Shall I stop beside this small bundle of whitening bones or shall I
turn my head away and pass on? Shall I allow you to stop with me in
our winter ramble and let you see the tragedy here in the flattened
meadow grass, or shall I hide from your eyes the dark, the bitter, the
tragic in the lives of the wild things out of doors?

I think it is best to hide nothing from you. Real love for nature is
largely sympathy with nature; and there can be no sympathy without
intimate and full understanding of the struggle and suffering in the
lives out of doors. There is a dark story in this little bundle of
bones. Do you wish to hear it? There is a fierce, cruel threat in the
growl of the winter wind. Do you wish to hear that? There is menace
and death in the shrill scream of the hawk. Do you wish to hear that?
Or do you wish to hear only the song of the robin? only the whisper of
the summer breeze? only the story of the life and love and joy of
things?

No, there are two sides to life--two sides to your life, the bright
and dark sides; two sides to the lives of all men, and to the lives of
all things. Summer is the bright side of Nature’s life; winter is the
dark side. Summer and winter are both needed to round out the life of
the year; so tears and laughter seem to be needed in our lives; joy
and sorrow, peace and suffering, rest and hardship--these, or
something like them, seem to be needed in the lesser lives of birds
and beasts to round out their experience and make them keen and
strong.

Happily, the pain and suffering in nature are largely hidden from us.
Wild things when stricken “turn their faces to the wall,” retreat,
slink silently away out of sight to be alone. They do not wish us to
know. But we do know, and we need to know, if we would enter into
their lives as a sharer in them; and if we would enter into and
understand the larger, wider, deeper life of which they, and we, and
all things, are a part.

You must pause with me above this little bundle of bones until I tell
you their story.

       *       *       *       *       *

I had recognized the bones at once as the skeleton of a muskrat. But
it was something peculiar in the way they lay that had caused me to
pause. They seemed outstretched, as if composed by gentle hands, the
hands of sleep. They had not been flung down. The delicate ribs had
fallen in, but not a bone was broken nor displaced, not one showed the
splinter of shot, or the crack that might have been made by a steel
trap. No violence had been done them. They had been touched by nothing
rougher than the snow. Out into the hidden runway they had crept.
Death had passed by them here; but no one else in all the winter
months.

The creature had died--a “natural” death. It had starved, while a
hundred acres of plenty lay round about. Picking up the skull, I
found the jaws locked together as if they were a single solid bone.
One of the two incisor teeth of the upper jaw was missing, and
apparently had never developed. The opposite tooth on the lower jaw,
thus unopposed and so unworn, had grown beyond its normal height up
into the empty socket above, then on, turning outward and piercing the
cheek-bone in front of the eye, whence, curving like a boar’s tusk, it
had slowly closed the jaws and locked them, rigid, set, as fixed as
jaws of stone.

At first the animal had been able to gnaw; but as the tooth curved
through the bones of the face and gradually tightened the jaws, the
creature got less and less to eat, until, one day, creeping out of the
burrow for food, the poor thing was unable to get back.

We seldom come upon the like of this. It is commoner than we think;
but, as I have said, it is usually hidden away and quickly over. How
often do we see a wild thing sick--a bird or animal suffering from an
accident, or dying, like this muskrat, because of some physical
defect? The struggle between animals--the falling of the weak as prey
to the strong--is ever before us; but this single-handed fight between
the creature and Nature is a far rarer, silenter tragedy. Nature is
too swift to allow us time for sympathy.

At best there is only a fighting chance in the meadow. Only strength
and craft may win; only those who have all of their teeth. The muskrat
with a single missing tooth never enters the real race of life at all.
He slinks from some abandoned burrow, and, if the owl and mink are not
watching, he dies alone in the grass, and we rarely know.

I shall never forget the impression made upon me by those quiet bones.
It was like that made by my first visit to a great city hospital--out
of the busy, cheerful street into a surgical ward, where the sick and
injured lay in long white lines. We tramp the woods and meadows and
never step from the sweet air and the pure sunlight of health into a
hospital. But that is not because no sick, ill-formed, or injured are
there. The proportion is smaller than among us humans, and for very
good reasons, yet there is much real suffering, and to come upon it,
as we will, now and then, must certainly quicken our understanding and
deepen our sympathy with the life out of doors.

No sensible person could for a moment believe the animals capable of
suffering as a human being can suffer; nor that there is any such call
for our sympathy from them as from our human neighbors. But an
unselfish sharing of the life of the fields demands that we take part
in all of it.

Nature wears a brave face. Her smile is ever in the open, her laughter
quick and contagious. This brave front is no mask. It is real.
Sunlight, song, color, form, and fragrance are real. And so is our
love and joy in Nature real. Real, also, should be our sympathy and
sorrow with Nature.

Here, for instance, are my crows: do I share fully in the life of
Nature so long as I think of the crow only with admiration for his
cunning or with wrath at his destruction of my melons and corn?

A crow has his solemn moments. He knows fear, pain, hunger, accident,
and disease; he knows something very like affection and love. For all
that, he is a mere crow. But a mere crow is no mean thing. He is my
brother, and a real love will give me part in all his existence. I
will forage and fight with him; I will parley and play; and when the
keen north winds find him in the frozen pines, I will suffer with him,
too.

Here again are my meadow voles. I know that my hay crop is shorter
every year for them,--a very little shorter. And I can look with
satisfaction at a cat carrying a big bob-tailed vole out of my
“mowing,” for the voles, along with other mice, are injurious to man.

But one day I came upon two of my voles struggling for life in the
water, exhausted and well-nigh dead. I helped them out, as I should
have helped out any other creature, and having saved them, why, what
could I do but let them go--even into my own meadow? This has happened
several times.

When the drought dries the meadow, the voles come to the deep,
plank-walled spring at the upper end, to drink. The water usually
trickles over the curb, but in a long dry spell it shrinks to a foot
or more below the edge, and the voles, once within for their drink,
cannot get out. Time and again I had fished them up, until I thought
to leave a board slanting down to the water, so that they could climb
back to the top.

It is wholesome to be the good Samaritan to a meadow mouse, to pour
out, even waste, a little of the oil and wine of sympathy on the
humblest of our needy neighbors.

Here are the chimney swallows, too. One can look with complacency,
with gratitude, indeed, upon the swallows of other chimneys, as they
hawk in the sky; yet, when the little creatures, so useful, but so
uncombed and unfumigated, set up their establishments in _your_
chimney, to the jeopardy of the whole house, then you need an
experience like mine.

I had had a like experience years before, when the house did not
belong to me. This time, however, the house was mine, and if it became
infested with vermin because of the swallows, I could not move away;
so I felt like burning them in the chimney, bag and baggage. There
were four nests, as nearly as I could make out, and, from the
frequent squeakings, I knew they were all filled with young. Then one
day, when the young were nearly ready to fly, there came a rain that
ran wet far down the sooty chimney, loosened the mortar of the nests,
and sent them crashing into the fireplace.

Some of the young birds were killed outright; the others were at my
mercy, flung upon me,--helpless, wailing infants! Of course I made it
comfortable for them on the back-log, and let their mothers flutter
down unhindered to feed them. Had I understood the trick, I would have
hawked for them and helped feed them myself!

They made a great thunder in the chimney; they rattled down into the
living-room a little soot; but nothing further came of it. We were not
quarantined. On the contrary, we had our reward, according to promise;
for it was an extremely interesting event to us all. It dispelled some
silly qualms, it gave us intimate part in a strange small life, so
foreign, yet so closely linked to our own; and it made us pause with
wonder that even our empty, sooty chimney could be made use of by
Nature to our great benefit.

I wonder if the nests of the chimney swallows came tumbling down when
the birds used to build in caves and hollow trees? It is a most
extraordinary change, this change from the trees to the chimneys, and
it does not seem to have been accompanied by an increase of
architectural wisdom necessary to meet all the conditions of the new
hollow. The mortar or glue, which, I imagine, held firmly in the empty
trees, will not mix with the chimney soot, so that the nest,
especially when crowded with young, is easily loosened by the rain,
and sometimes even broken away by the slight wing stroke of a
descending swallow, or by the added weight of a parent bird as it
settles with food.

We little realize how frequent fear is among the birds and animals,
and how often it proves fatal. A situation that would have caused no
trouble ordinarily, becomes through sudden fright a tangle or a trap.
I have known many a quail to bolt into a fast express train and fall
dead. Last winter I left the large door of the barn open, so that my
flock of juncos could feed inside upon the floor. They found their way
into the hayloft and went up and down freely. On two or three
occasions I happened in so suddenly that they were thoroughly
frightened and flew madly into the cupola to escape through the
windows. They beat against the glass until utterly dazed, and would
have perished there, had I not climbed up later and brought them down.
So thousands of the migrating birds perish yearly by flying wildly
against the dazzling lanterns of the lighthouses, and thousands more
either lose their course in the thick darkness of the stormy nights,
or else are blown out of it, and drift far away to sea.

Hasty, careless, miscalculated movements are not as frequent among the
careful wild folk as among us, perhaps; but there is abundant evidence
of their occasional occurrence and of their sometimes fatal results.

Several instances are recorded of birds that have been tangled in the
threads of their nests; and one instance of a bluebird that was caught
in the flying meshes of an oriole’s nest into which it had been
spying.

I once found the mummied body of a chippy twisting and swinging in the
leafless branches of a peach tree. The little creature was suspended
in a web of horsehair about two inches below a nest. It looked as if
she had brought a snarled bunch of the hair and left it loose in the
twigs. Later on, a careless step and her foot was fast, when every
frantic effort for freedom only tangled her the worse. In the nest
above were four other tiny mummies--a double tragedy that might with
care have been averted.

A similar fate befell a song sparrow that I discovered hanging dead
upon a barbed-wire fence. By some chance it had slipped a foot through
an open place between the two twisted strands, and then, fluttering
along, had wedged the leg and broken it in the struggle to escape.

We have all held our breath at the hazardous traveling of the
squirrels in the treetops. What other animals take such
risks?--leaping at dizzy heights from bending limbs to catch the tips
of limbs still smaller, saving themselves again and again by the
merest chance.

But luck sometimes fails. My brother, a careful watcher in the woods,
on one occasion when he was hunting, saw a gray squirrel miss its
footing in a tree and fall, breaking its neck upon a log beneath.

I have frequently known squirrels to fall short distances, and once I
saw a red squirrel come to grief like this gray squirrel. He was
scurrying through the tops of some lofty pitch pines, a little hurried
and flustered at sight of me, and, nearing the end of a high branch,
was in the act of springing, when the dead tip cracked under him and
he came tumbling headlong. The height must have been forty feet, so
that before he reached the ground he had righted himself,--his tail
out and legs spread,--but the fall was too great. He hit the earth
heavily, and before I could reach him he lay dead upon the needles,
with blood oozing from his eyes and nostrils.

Unhoused and often unsheltered, the wild things suffer as we hardly
yet understand. No one can estimate how many of our wild creatures die
in a year from severe cold, heavy storms, high winds and tides. I
have known the nests of a whole colony of gulls and terns to be swept
away in a great storm; while the tides, over and over, have flooded
the inlet marshes and drowned out the nests in the grass--those of the
clapper rails by thousands.

I remember a late spring storm that came with the returning redstarts
and, in my neighborhood, killed many of them. Toward evening of that
day one of the little black-and-orange voyageurs fluttered against the
window and we let him in, wet, chilled, and so exhausted that for a
moment he lay on his back in my open palm. Soon after there was
another soft tapping at the window,--and _two_ little redstarts were
sharing our cheer and drying their butterfly wings in our warmth. Both
of these birds would have perished had we not harbored them for the
night.

The birds and animals are not as weather-wise as we; they cannot
foretell as far ahead nor provide as certainly against need, despite
the popular notion to the contrary.

We point to the migrating birds, to the muskrat houses, to the hoards
of the squirrels, and say, “How wise and far-sighted these
Nature-taught children are!” True, they are, but only for conditions
that are normal. Their wisdom does not cover the unusual. The gray
squirrels did not provide for the unusually hard weather of last
winter. Three of them from the woodlot came begging of me, and lived
on my wisdom, not their own.

Consider the ravens, that neither sow nor reap, that have neither
storehouse nor barn, yet they are fed--but not always. Indeed, there
are few of our winter birds that go hungry so often as do the cousins
of the ravens, the crows, and that die in so great numbers for lack of
food and shelter.

After severe and protracted cold, with a snow-covered ground, a
crow-roost looks like a battlefield, so thick lie the dead and
wounded. Morning after morning the flock goes over to forage in the
frozen fields, and night after night returns hungrier, weaker, and
less able to resist the cold. Now, as the darkness falls, a bitter
wind breaks loose and sweeps down upon the pines.

    “List’ning the doors an’ winnocks rattle,
    I thought me on the ourie cattle,”--

and how often I have thought me of the crows biding the night yonder
in the moaning pines! So often, as a boy, and with so real an awe,
have I watched them returning at night, that the crows will never
cease flying through my wintry sky,--an endless line of wavering black
figures, weary, retreating figures, beating over in the early dusk.

And to-night another wild storm sweeps across the winter fields. All
the afternoon the crows have been going over, and are still passing as
the darkness settles at five o’clock. Now it is nearly eight, and the
long night is but just begun. The storm is increasing. The wind
shrieks about the house, whirling the fine snow in hissing eddies past
the corners and driving it on into long, curling crests across the
fields. I can hear the roar as the wind strikes the shoal of pines
where the fields roll into the woods--a vast surf sound, but softer
and higher, with a wail like the wail of some vast heart in pain.

I can see the tall trees rock and sway with their burden of dark
forms. As close together as they can crowd on the bending limbs cling
the crows, their breasts turned all to the storm. With crops empty and
bodies weak, they rise and fall in the cutting, ice-filled wind for
thirteen hours of night.

Is it a wonder that the life fires burn low? that sometimes the small
flames flicker and go out?




CHAPTER IX

THE PECULIAR ’POSSUM


If you are a New Englander, or a Northwesterner, then, probably, you
have never pulled a ’possum out of his hollow stump or from under some
old rail-pile, as I have done, many a time, down in southern New
Jersey. And so, probably, you have never made the acquaintance of the
most peculiar creature in our American woods.

Even roast ’possum is peculiar. Up to the time you taste roast ’possum
you quite agree with Charles Lamb that roast pig is peculiarly the
most delicious delicacy “in the whole _modus edibilis_,” in other
words, bill of fare. But once you eat roast ’possum, you will go all
over Lamb’s tasty “Dissertation upon Roast Pig,” marking out “pig”
with your pencil and writing in “’possum,” making the essay read
thus:--

“There is no flavor comparable, I will contend, to that of the crisp,
tawny, well-watched, not over-roasted, _’possum_, as it is
called,--the very teeth are invited to their share of the pleasure at
this banquet in overcoming the coy, brittle resistance,--with the
adhesive oleaginous--O call it not fat! but an indefinable sweetness
growing up to it--the tender blossoming of fat--fat cropped in the
bud--taken in the shoot--in the first innocence--” For no matter how
old your roast ’possum, he is as tender as the tenderest roast pig.
And that, of course, is peculiar.

But live ’possum is more peculiar than roast ’possum. It is peculiar,
for instance, that almost all of the ’possum’s relations, except his
immediate family, dwell apart in Australia,--in Australasia, for
marsupials are found also in Tasmania, New Guinea, and the
Moluccas--which islands the marsupials seem to have had given them for
their own when the world was made. There, at least, most of them live
and have lived for ages, except the ’possums. These latter, strangely
enough, live in South and North America, and nowhere else. The
peculiar, puzzling thing about them is: how they, and they only of the
marsupials, got away from Australia across the sea to America. Did a
family of them get set adrift on a log and float across? Or was there
once, as geologists tell us, a long string of islands close together,
stretching from the tip of South America, from the “Horn,” off across
the sea to Australia, over which the ’possums might once have made
their way? But if they came by such a route, why did not the kangaroos
come too? Ah, the kangaroo is not a ’possum. There is no other
creature in the woods that would dare play “Follow the leader” with
the ’possum. No, I am half inclined to think the scientists right who
say that the ’possum is the great-great-grandfather of all the
marsupials, and that the migration might have been the other way
about--from America, across the sea.

But what is the use of speculating? Here is the ’possum in our woods;
that we know; and yonder in Australasia are his thirteen sets of
cousins, and there they seem always to have been, for of these
thirteen sets of cousins, four sets have so long since ceased to live
that they are now among the fossils, slowly turning, every one of
them, to stone!

A queer history he has, surely! But queerer than his history, is his
body, and the way he grows from babyhood to twenty-pound ’possumhood.

For besides having a tail that can be used for a hand, and a paw with
a thumb like the human thumb, the female ’possum has a pocket or pouch
on her abdomen, just as the kangaroo has, in which she carries her
young.

Now that is peculiar, so very peculiar when you study deeply into it,
that the ’possum becomes to the scientist quite the most interesting
mammal in North America.

Returning from a Christmas vacation one year, while a student in
college, I brought back with me twenty-six live ’possums so that the
professor of zoölogy could study the peculiar anatomy of the ’possum
for several of its many meanings.

This pouch, for instance, and the peculiar bones of the ’possum, show
that it is a very primitive mammal, one of the very oldest mammals, so
close to the beginning of the mammalian line that there are only two
other living “animals” (we can hardly call them mammals) older and
more primitive--the porcupine ant-eater, and, oldest of all, the
duck-bill, not “older” at all perhaps, but only more primitive.

For the duck-bill, though classed as a mammal, not only has the bill
of the duck, but also lays eggs like the birds. The porcupine
ant-eater likewise lays eggs, and so seems almost as much bird or
reptile as mammal. And as the birds and reptiles lived upon the earth
before the age of mammals, and are a lower and more primitive order of
creatures, so the duck-bill, the porcupine ant-eater, and the ’possum,
because in their anatomy they are like the birds and the reptiles in
some respects, are perhaps the lowest and the oldest of all the
mammals.

The ’possum, therefore, is one of the most primitive of mammals, and
dates as far back as the reptilian age, when only traces of mammalian
life are to be found, the ’possum’s fossil ancestors being among the
notable of these early remains.

The mammals at that time, as I have just said, were only partly
mammal, for they were partly bird or reptile, as the duck-bill and
ant-eater still are. Now the ’possum does not lay eggs as these other
two do, for its young are born, not hatched; yet so tiny and
undeveloped are they when born, that they must be put into their
mother’s pouch and nursed, as eggs are put into a nest and brooded
until they are hatched--really born a second time.

For here in their mother’s pouch they are like chicks in the shell,
and quite as helpless. It is five weeks before they can stick their
heads out and take a look at the world.

No other mammalian baby is so much of a baby and yet comes so near to
being no baby at all. It is less than an inch long when put into the
pouch, and it weighs only four grains! Four grains? Think how small
that is. For there are 7000 grains to a pound, which means that it
would take 1750 baby ’possums to weigh as much as two cups of sugar!

“I should say he was peculiar!” I hear you exclaim; and you will agree
with an ancient History of Carolina which I have, when it declares:
“The Opoffom is the wonder of all the land animals.”

I wish you had been with me one spring day as I was stretching a
“lay-out” line across Cubby Hollow. (A lay-out line is a long
fish-line, strung with baited hooks, and reaching across the pond from
shore to shore.) I was out in the middle of the pond, lying flat on a
raft made of three cedar rails, when my dog began to bark at something
in a brier-patch on shore.

Paddling in as fast as I could, I found the dog standing before a
large ’possum, which was backed up against a tree. I finally got Mrs.
’Possum by the tail and dropped her unhurt into my eel-pot--a
fish-trap made out of an empty nail-keg--which I had left since fall
among the bushes of the hillside. Then paddling again to the middle of
the pond, I untangled and set my hooks on the lay-out line, and came
back to shore for my ’possum.

I didn’t quite fancy pushing my hand down through the burlap cover
over the end of the keg; so I turned it upside down to spill the
’possum out,--and out she spilled and nine little ’possums with her!

I had put in one and spilled out--ten! And this proves again that the
’possum is peculiar. Nine of these were babies that had been hidden
from me and the dog in their mother’s pouch.

Peculiar, too, was the history of one of these nine young ’possums
(the one we named “Pinky”). For after Pinky’s mother choked to death
on a fish-bone, I gave all his brothers and sisters away, and devoted
myself to training Pinky up in the way he should go. And strangely
enough, when he was grown, unlike any other wild animal I had ever
tamed, he would not depart from these domesticated ways, but insisted
upon coming back home every time I took him away to the woods. Of
course he was only a few months old when I tried to turn him loose in
the woods, and that may account for his returning and squeezing
through the opening of the pump-box trough into the kitchen and going
fast asleep on the cushion of the settee; as it may also account for
his getting into a neighbor’s yard by mistake on his way back one
night and drowning in the well.

You have read of ’possum hunts;--and they are peculiar, too, as
naturally they must needs be. For you hunt ’possums with rabbit
hounds, and shoot them with a meal-sack--shoot them _into_ a meal-sack
would be more exact. And you hunt by moonlight if you really love
’possum.

We used to start out just as the moon, climbing over the woods, fell
soft across the bare fields. The old dog would be some distance ahead,
her nose to the ground, sometimes picking up a trail in the first
cornfield, or again not until we reached the woods, or again leading
us for miles along the creek meadows among the scattered persimmon
trees, before striking a fresh scent.

Wherever the trail started it usually led away for the woods, for some
hollow stump or tree, where the ’possum made his nest. Once in a while
I have overtaken the fat fellow in an open field or atop a fence, or
have even caught him in a hencoop; but usually, if hunting at night,
it has been a long, and not always an easy, chase, for a ’possum, in
spite of his fat and his fossil ancestors, is not stupid. Or else he
is so slow-witted that there is no telling, by man or dog, which way
he will go, or what he may do next.

A rabbit, or a deer, or a coon, when you are on their trail, will do
certain things. You can count upon them with great certainty. But a
’possum never seems to do anything twice alike; he has no traveled
paths, no regular tricks, no set habits. He knows the road home,
but it is always a different road--a meandering, roundabout,
zigzag, criss-cross, up-and-down (up-the-trees-and-down) road,
we-won’t-get-home-till-morning road, that takes in all the way
stations, from the tops of tall persimmon trees to the bottoms of all
the deep, dark holes that need looking into, along the route.

Peculiar!--So, at least, a dog with an orderly mind and well-regulated
habits thinks, anyhow. For a ’possum trail will give a good rabbit dog
the blues; he hasn’t the patience for it. Only a slow rheumatic old
hound will stick to a ’possum trail with the endurance necessary to
carry it to its end--in a hollow log, or a hollow stump, or under a
shock of corn or a rail-pile. Once the trail actually led me, after
much trouble, into a hen-house and into a stove in the hen-house,
where, upon the grate, I found three ’possums in their nest!

It is a peculiar sport, this ’possum-hunting; yet it is mildly
exciting; and when you get your ’possum by the tail, he smiles at
you--grins, I ought to say--and has a fit. To go hunting for a
creature that smiles at you in a dreadful manner when you capture him,
that flops down in a dead faint or has a fit when you take him up by
the tail, that shows the spunk and fight of a boiled cabbage--to go
hunting for such a beast must be exciting, as exciting as going to the
store for a quart of beans.

But here are the winter woods at night, and the wide, moonlit fields,
covered, it may be, with the glistening snow. The full, round moon
rides high overhead, the pointed corn-shocks stand silent over the
fields, the woods rise dark and shadowy beyond. Only the slow, musical
cry of the hound echoes through the stirless air, which seems to
sparkle like the snow, as if filled with gleaming frost-dust that only
the moonlight can catch and set to glancing silvery-bright.

You don’t care whether you catch a ’possum or not; you are abroad in a
world so large and silent, so crystal-clear and shining, so crisp, so
open, so acreep with shadows, so deep and mysterious in its distances,
so pure and beautiful and unblemished, that just to be abroad is
wonder enough, and you are not sorry to come back under the brilliant
midnight sky with the old dog at your heels and over your shoulder an
empty bag.

But if your bag is heavy with fat ’possum then that, too, is good. You
have peered into his black hole; you have reached in and pulled him
out--nothing more. No roar of a gun has shattered your world of
crystal; you have killed nothing, wounded nothing--no, not even the
silence and the serenity of your soul. You and the clear, calm night
are still one.

You have dropped a smiling ’possum into an easy, roomy bag. He feels
warm against your back. The old dog follows proud and content at your
heels. And you feel--as the wide, softly shining sky seems to feel.

And that, too, is peculiar.




CHAPTER X

A FEBRUARY FRESHET


One of the very interesting events in my out-of-door year is the
February freshet. Perhaps you call it the February _thaw_. That is all
it could be called this year; and, in fact, a _thaw_ is all that it
ever is for me, nowadays, living, as I do, high and dry here, on
Mullein Hill, above a sputtering little trout brook that could not
have a freshet if it tried.

But Maurice River could have a freshet without trying. Let the high
south winds, the high tides, and the warm spring rains come on
together, let them drive in hard for a day and a night, as I have
known them to do, and the deep, dark river goes mad! The tossing tide
sweeps over the wharves, swirls about the piles of the great bridge,
leaps foaming into the air, and up and down its long high banks beats
with all its wild might to break through into the fertile meadows
below.

There are wider rivers, and other, more exciting things, than spring
freshets; but there were not when I was a boy. Why, Maurice River was
so wide that there was but a single boy in the town, as I remember,
who could stand at one end of the drawbridge and skim an oyster-shell
over to the opposite end! The best that I could do was to throw my
voice across and hear it echo from the long, hollow barn on the other
bank. It would seem to me to strike the barn in the middle, leap from
end to end like a creature caged, and then bound back to me faint and
frightened from across the dark tide.

I feared the river. Oh, but I loved it, too. Its tides were always
rising or falling--going down to the Delaware Bay and on to the sea.
And in from the bay, or out to the bay, with white sails set, the big
boats were always moving. And when they had gone, out over the wide
water the gulls or the fish hawks would sail, or a great blue heron,
with wings like the fans of an old Dutch mill, would beat ponderously
across.

I loved the river. I loved the sound of the calking-maul and the adze
in the shipyard, and the smell of the chips and tarred oakum; the
chatter of the wrens among the reeds and calamus; the pink of the
mallow and wild roses along the high mud banks; the fishy ditches with
their deep sluiceways through the bank into the river; and the vast,
vast tide-marshes that, to this day, seem to me to stretch away to the
very edge of the world.

What a world for a boy to drive cows into every morning, and drive
them home from every night, as I used to help do! or to trap muskrats
in during the winter; to go fishing in during the summer; to go
splashing up and down in when the great February freshet came on!

For of all the events of the year, none had such fascination for me as
the high winds and warm downpour that flooded the wharves, that drove
the men of the village out to guard the river-banks, and that drowned
out of their burrows and winter hiding-places all the wild things that
lived within reach of the spreading tide.

The water would pour over the meadows and run far back into the swamps
and farm lands, setting everything afloat that could float--rails,
logs, branches; upon which, as chance offered, some struggling
creature would crawl, and drift away to safety.

But not always to safety; for over the meadows the crows and fish
hawks, gulls, herons, bitterns, and at night the owls, were constantly
beating to pounce upon the helpless voyagers, even taking the
muskrats an easy prey, through their weakness from exposure and long
swimming in the water.

There would be only two shores to this wild meadow-sea--the
river-bank, a mere line of earth drawn through the water, and the
distant shore of the upland. If the wind blew from the upland toward
the bank, then the drift would all set that way, and before long a
multitude of shipwrecked creatures would be tossed upon this narrow
breakwater, that stood, a bare three feet of clay, against the wilder
river-sea beyond.

To walk up and down the bank then was like entering a natural history
museum where all the specimens were alive; or like going to a small
menagerie. Sparrows, finches, robins, mice, moles, voles, shrews,
snakes, turtles, squirrels, muskrats, with even a mink and an opossum
now and then, would scurry from beneath your feet or dive back into
the water as you passed along.

And by what strange craft they sometimes came! I once saw two muskrats
and a gray squirrel floating along on the top of one of the muskrats’
houses. And again a little bob-tailed meadow mouse came rocking along
in a drifting catbird’s nest which the waves had washed from its
anchorage in the rosebushes. And out on the top of some tall stake, or
up among the limbs of a tree you would see little huddled bunches of
fur, a muskrat perhaps that had never climbed before in his life,
waiting, like a sailor lashed to the rigging, to be taken off.

But it was not the multitude of wild things--birds, beasts,
insects--that fascinated me most, that led me out along the slippery,
dangerous bank through the swirling storm; it was rather the fear and
confusion of the animals, the wild giant-spirit raging over the face
of the earth and sky, daunting and terrifying them, that drew me.

Many of the small creatures had been wakened by the flood out of their
deep winter sleep, and, dazed and numbed and frightened, they seemed
to know nothing, to care for nothing but the touch of the solid earth
to their feet.

All of their natural desires and instincts, their hatreds, hungers,
terrors, were sunk beneath the waters. They had lost their wits, like
human creatures in a panic, and, struggling, fighting for a foothold,
they did not notice me unless I made at them, and then only took to
the water a moment to escape the instant peril.

The sight was strange, as if this were another planet and not our
orderly, peaceful world at all. Nor, indeed, was it; for fear cowered
everywhere, in all the things that were of the earth, as over the
earth and everything upon it raged the fury of river and sky.

The frail mud bank trembled under the beating of the waves; the sunken
sluices strangled and shook deep down through the whirlpools sucking
at their mouths; the flocks of scattered sea-birds--ducks and
brant--veered into sight, dashed down toward the white waters or drove
over with mad speed, while the winds screamed and the sky hung black
like a torn and flapping sail.

And I, too, would have to drop upon all fours, with the mice and
muskrats, and cling to the bank for my life, as the snarling river,
leaping at me, would plunge clear over into the meadow below.

A winter blizzard is more deadly, but not more fearful, nor so wild
and tumultuous. For in such a storm as this the foundations of the
deep seem to be broken up, the frame of the world shaken, and you, and
the mice, and the muskrats, share alike the wild, fierce spirit and
the fear.

To be out in such a storm, out where you can feel its full fury, as
upon a strip of bank in the midst of the churning waters, is good for
one. To experience a common peril with your fellow mortals, though
they be only mice and muskrats, is good for one; for it is to share
by so much in their humble lives, and by so much to live outside of
one’s own little self.

And then again, we are so accustomed to the order and fair weather of
our part of the globe, that we get to feel as if the universe were
being particularly managed for us; nay, that we, personally, are
managing the universe. To flatten out on a quaking ridge of earth or
be blown into the river; to hear no voice but the roar of the storm,
and to have no part or power in the mighty tumult of such a storm,
makes one feel about the size of a mouse, makes one feel how vast is
the universe, and how fearful the vortex of its warring forces!

The shriek of those winds is still in my ears, the sting of the
driving rains still on my face, the motion of that frail mud bank,
swimming like a long sea-serpent in the swirling waters, I can still
feel to my finger-tips. And the growl of the river, the streaming
shreds of the sky, the confusion beneath and about me, the mice and
muskrats clinging with me for a foothold--I live it all again at the
first spatter of a February rain upon my face.

To be out in a February freshet, out in a big spring break-up, is to
get a breaking up one’s self, a preparation, like Nature’s, for a new
lease of life--for spring.




CHAPTER XI

A BREACH IN THE BANK


The February freshet had come. We had been expecting it, but no one
along Maurice River had ever seen so wild and warm and ominous a
spring storm as this. So sudden and complete a break-up of winter no
one could remember; nor so high a tide, so rain-thick and driving a
south wind. It had begun the night before, and now, along near noon,
the river and meadows were a tumult of white waters, with the gale so
strong that one could hardly hold his own on the drawbridge that
groaned from pier to pier in the grip of the maddened storm.

It was into the teeth of this gale that a small boy dressed in large
yellow “oil-skins” made his slow way out along the narrow bank of the
river toward the sluices that controlled the tides of the great
meadows.

The boy was _in_ the large yellow oil-skins; not dressed, no, for he
was simply inside of them, his feet and hands and the top of his head
having managed to work their way out. It seems, at least, that his
head was partly out, for on the top of the oil-skins sat a large black
sou’wester. And in the arms of the oil-skins lay an old army musket,
so big and long that it seemed to be walking away with the oil-skins,
as the oil-skins seemed to be walking away with the boy.

I can feel the kick of that old musket yet, and the prick of the dried
sand-burs among which she knocked me. I can hear the rough rasping of
the chafing legs of those oil-skins too, though I was not the boy this
time inside of them. But I knew the boy who was, a real boy; and I
know that he made his careful way along the trembling river-bank out
into the sunken meadows, meadows that later on I saw the river burst
into and claim--and it still claims them, as I saw only last summer,
when after thirty years of absence I once more stood at the end of
that bank looking over a watery waste which was once the richest of
farm lands.

Never, it seemed, had the village known such wind and rain and such a
tide. It was a strange, wild scene from the drawbridge--wharves
obliterated, river white with flying spume and tossing ice-cakes, the
great bridge swaying and shrieking in the wind, and over everything
the blur of the swirling rain.

The little figure in yellow oil-skins was not the only one that had
gone along the bank since morning, for a party of men had carefully
inspected every foot of the bank to the last sluice, for fear that
there might be a weak spot somewhere. Let a breach occur with such a
tide as this and it could never be stopped.

And now, somewhat past noon, the men were again upon the bank. As they
neared Five-Forks sluice, the central and largest of the water-gates,
they heard a smothered _boom_ above the scream of the wind in their
ears. They were startled; but it was only the sound of a gun somewhere
off in the meadow. It was the gun of the boy in the oil-skins.

Late that afternoon Doctor “Sam,” driving home along the flooded road
of the low back swamp, caught sight, as he came out in view of the
river, of a little figure in yellow oil-skins away out on the meadow.

The doctor stopped his horse and hallooed. But the boy did not hear.
The rain on his coat, the wind and the river in his ears drowned every
other sound.

The dusk was falling, and as the doctor looked out over the wild
scene, he put his hands to his mouth and called again. The yellow
figure had been blotted out by the rain. There was no response, and
the doctor drove on.

Meanwhile the boy in the yellow oil-skins was splashing slowly back
along the narrow, slippery clay bank. He was wet, but he was warm, and
he loved the roar of the wind and the beat of the driving rain.

As the mist and rain were fast mixing with the dusk of the twilight,
he quickened his steps. His path in places was hardly a foot wide,
covered with rose and elder bushes mostly, but bare in spots where
holes and low worn stretches had been recently built up with cubes of
the tough blue mud of the flats.

The tide was already even with the top of the bank and was still
rising. It leaped and hit at his feet as he picked his way along. The
cakes of white ice crunched and heeled up against the bank with here
and there one flung fairly across his path. The tossing water
frequently splashed across. Twice he jumped places where the tide was
running over down into the meadows below.

How quickly the night had come! It was dark when he reached
Five-Forks sluice--the middle point in the long, high bank. While
still some distance off he heard the sullen roar of the big sluice,
through which the swollen river was trying to force its way.

He paused to listen a moment. He knew the peculiar voice of every one
of these gateways, as he knew every foot of the river-bank.

There was nothing wrong with the sullen roar. But how deep and
threatening! He could _feel_ the sound even better than he could hear
it, far down below him. He started forward, to pass on, when he half
felt, through the long, regular throbbing of the sluice, a shorter,
faster, closer quiver, as of a small running stream in the bank very
near his feet.

Dropping quickly to his knees, he laid his ear to the wet earth. A
cold, black hand seemed to seize upon him. He heard the purr of
running water!

It must be down about three feet. He could distinctly feel it tearing
through.

Without rising he scrambled down the meadow side of the bank to see
the size of the breach. He could hear nothing of it for the boiling at
the gates of the sluice. It was so dark he could scarcely see. But
near the bottom the mud suddenly caved beneath his feet, and a rush of
cold water caught at his knees.

The hole was greater than he feared.

Crawling back to the top of the bank, he leaned out over the river
side. A large cake of ice hung in water in front of him. He pushed it
aside and, bending until his face barely cleared the surface of the
river, he discovered a small sucking eddy, whose swirling hole he knew
ran into the breach.

He edged farther out and reached down under the water and touched the
upper rim of the hole. How large might it be? Swinging round, he dug
his fingers into the bank and lowered himself feet first until he
stood in the hole. It was the size of a small bucket, but he could
almost feel it going beneath his feet, and a sudden terror took hold
upon him.

He was only a boy, and the dark night, the wild river, the vast,
sweeping storm, the roar and tremor and tumult flattened him for a
moment to the ridge of the bank in a panic of fear!

But he heard the water running, he felt the bank going directly
beneath where he lay, and getting to his feet he started for the
village. A single hasty step and, but for the piles of the sluice, he
would have plunged into the river.

He must feel his way; but he never could do it in time to save the
bank. The breach must be stopped at once. He must stop it and keep it
stopped until the next patrol brought help.

Feeling his way back, he dropped again upon his hands and knees above
the breach to think for a moment. The cake of ice hung as before in
the eddy. Catching it, he tipped it and thrust it down across the
mouth of the hole, but it slipped from his cold fingers and dived
away. He pushed down the butt of his musket, turned it flat, but it
was not broad enough to cover the opening. Then he lowered himself
again, and stood in it, wedging the musket in between his boots; but
he could feel the water still tearing through at the sides, and eating
all the faster.

He clambered back to the top of the bank, put his hand to his mouth
and shouted. The only answer was the scream of the wind and the cry of
a brant passing overhead.

Then the boy laughed. “Easy enough,” he muttered, and, picking up the
musket, he leaned once more out over the river and thrust the steel
barrel of the gun hard into the mud just below the hole. Then,
stepping easily down, he sat squarely into the breach, the gun like a
stake in front of him sticking up between his knees.

Then he laughed again, as he caught his breath, for he had squeezed
into the hole like a stopper into a bottle, his big oil-skins filling
the breach completely.

The water stood above the middle of his breast, and the tide was still
rising. Darkness had now settled, but the ghostly ice-cakes, tipping,
slipping toward him, were spectral white. He had to shove them back as
now and then one rose before his face. The sky was black, and the deep
water below him was blacker. And how cold it was!

Doctor Sam had been stopped by the flooded roads on his way home, and
lights shone in the windows as he entered the village. He turned a
little out of his way and halted in front of a small cottage near the
bridge.

“Is Joe here?” he asked.

“No,” answered the mother; “he went down the meadow for muskrats and
has not returned yet. He’s probably over with the men at the store.”

Doctor Sam drove on to the store.

There was no boy in yellow oil-skins in the store.

Doctor Sam picked up a lighted lantern.

“Come on,” he said; “I’m wet, but I want a look at those sluices,” and
started for the river, followed immediately by the men, whom he led in
single file out along the bank.

Swinging his lantern low, he pushed into the teeth of the gale at a
pace that left the line of lights straggling far behind.

“What a night!” he growled. “If I had a boy of my own--” and he threw
the light as far as he could over the seething river and then down
over the flooded meadow.

Ahead he heard the roar of Five-Forks sluice, and swung his lantern
high, as if to signal it, so like the rush of a coming train was the
sound of the waters.

But the little engineer in yellow oil-skins could not see the signal.
He had almost ceased to watch. With his arm cramped about his gun, he
was still at his post; but the ice-cakes floated in and touched him;
the water no longer felt cold.

On this side, then on that, out over the swollen river, down into the
tossing meadow flared the lantern as the doctor worked his way along.

Above the great sluice he paused a moment, then bent his head to the
wind and started on, when his foot touched something soft that yielded
strangely, sending a shiver over him, and his light fell upon a bunch
of four dead muskrats lying in the path.

Along the meadow side flashed the lantern, up and over the riverside,
and Doctor Sam, reaching quickly down, drew a limp little form in
yellow oil-skins out of the water, as the men behind him came up.

A gurgle, a hiss, a small whirlpool sucking at the surface,--and the
tide was again tearing through the breach that the boy had filled.

The men sprang quickly to their task, and did it well, while Doctor
Sam, shielding the limp little form from the wind, forced a vial of
something between the white lips, saying over to himself as he watched
the closed eyes open, “If I had a boy of my own--If I had a boy--”

       *       *       *       *       *

No, Doctor Sam never had a boy of his own; but he always felt, I
think, that the boy of those yellow oil-skins was somehow pretty
nearly his.

       *       *       *       *       *

After a long, cold winter how I love the spatter on my face of the
first February rain! The little trout brook below me foams and
sometimes overruns the road, and as its small noise ascends the hill,
I can hear--the wind on a great river, the wash of waves against a
narrow bank, and the muffled roar of quaking sluices as when a
February freshet is on.

[Illustration: “DREW A LIMP LITTLE FORM OUT OF THE WATER”]




CHAPTER XII

A CHAPTER OF THINGS TO HEAR THIS WINTER


I

You should hear the three great silences of winter: the wide, sudden
silence that falls at twilight on the coming of the first winter
frost; the smothered hush that waits the breaking of a winter storm;
the crystal stillness, the speech of the stars, that pervades earth
and sky on a brilliant, stirless winter night. You should hear--or is
it _feel_?--them all.


II

So should you hear the great voices of the winter: the voice of the
north wind; the voice of a pine forest; the voice of the surf on a
stormy shore. There is no music that I know like the wild mighty music
of the winter winds in the winter woods. It will often happen that you
can pass through a bare stretch of naked hardwoods immediately into a
grove of thick-limbed spruces or pines. Never miss such an
opportunity. Do not let the high winds of this winter blow on and away
without your hearing them--at least once--as they sweep through the
hardwoods on into the deep resounding pines.


III

Did you ever hear the running, rumbling, reverberating sound of the
shore-to-shore split of a wide sheet of new ice? You will hear it as
the sun rises over the pond, as the tide turns in the ice-bound river,
and when the ice contracts with falling temperature,--a startling bolt
of sound, a quake, that cleaves the ice across and splits its way into
the heart of the frozen hills.


IV

One of the most unnatural of all the sounds out-of-doors is the
clashing, glassy rattle of trees ice-coated and shaken by the wind. It
is as if you were in some weird china shop, where the curtains, the
very clothes of the customers, were all of broken glass. It is the
rattle of death, not of life; no, rather it is the rustle of the
ermine robe of Winter, as he passes crystal-booted down his crystal
halls.


V

If winter is the season of large sounds, it is also the season of
small sounds, for it is the season of wide silence when the slightest
of stirrings can be heard. Three of these small sounds you must listen
for this winter: the smothered _tinkle-tunkle_ of water running under
thin ice, as where the brook passes a pebbly shallow; then the
_tick-tick-tick_ of the first snowflakes hitting the brown leaves on
a forest floor; then the fine sharp scratch of a curled and toothed
beech leaf skating before a noiseless breath of wind over the crusty
snow. Only he that hath ears will hear these sounds, speaking, as they
do, for the vast voiceless moments of the winter world.


VI

I have not heard the “covey call” of the quail this winter. But there
is not a quail left alive in all the fields and sprout-lands within
sound of me. I used to hear them here on Mullein Hill; a covey used to
roost down the wooded hillside in front of the house; but even they
are gone--hunted out of life; shot and eaten off of my small world.
What a horribly hungry animal man is!

But you may have the quail still in your fields. If so, then go out
toward dusk on a quiet, snowy day, especially if you have heard
shooting in the fields that day, and try to hear some one of the covey
calling the flock together: _Whir-r-rl-ee! Whir-r-rl-ee!
Whirl-ee-gee!_--the sweetest, softest, tenderest call you will ever
hear!


VII

And you certainly do have chickadees in your woods. If so, then go out
any time of day, but go on a cold, bleak, blustery day, when
everything is a-shiver, and, as Uncle Remus would say, “meet up” with
a chickadee. It is worth having a winter, just to meet a chickadee in
the empty woods and hear him call--a little pin-point of live sound,
an undaunted, unnumbed voice interrupting the thick jargon of the
winter to tell you that all this bluster and blow and biting cold
can’t get at the heart of a bird that must weigh, all told, with all
his winter feathers on, fully--an ounce or two!


VIII

And then the partridge--you must hear him, bursting like a bottled
hurricane from the brown leaves at your feet!


IX

Among the sweet winter sounds, that are as good to listen to as the
songs of the summer birds, you should hear: the loud joyous cackling
of the hens on a sunny January day; the munching of horses at night
when the wild winds are whistling about the barn; the quiet hum about
the hives,--

    “When come the calm mild days, as still such days will come,
    To call the squirrel and the bee from out their winter home.”

And then, the sound of the first rain on the shingles--the first
February rain after a long frozen period! How it spatters the shingles
with _spring--spring--spring!_

[Illustration: “ONE OF THE COVEY CALLING THE FLOCK TOGETHER”]


X

It was in the latter end of December, upon a gloomy day that was heavy
with the oppression of a coming storm. In the heart of the maple swamp
all was still and cold and dead. Suddenly, as out of a tomb, I heard
the small, thin cry of a tiny tree-frog. And how small and thin it
sounded in the vast silences of that winter swamp! And yet how clear
and ringing! A thrill of life tingling out through the numb, nerveless
body of the woods that has ever since made a dead day for me
impossible.

Have you heard him yet?


XI

“After all,” says some one of our writers, “it is only a matter of
which side of the tree you stand on, whether it is summer or winter.”
Just so. But, after all, is it not a good thing to stand on the winter
side during the winter? to have a winter while we have it, and then
have spring? No shivering around on the spring side of the tree for
me. I will button up my coat, brace my back against the winter side
and shout to the hoary old monarch--

    “And there’s a hand, my trusty fiere,
    And gie’s a hand o’ thine;”

and what a grip he has!




CHAPTER XIII

THE LAST DAY OF WINTER


According to the almanac March 21st is the last day of winter. The
almanac is not always to be trusted--not for hay weather, or picnic
weather, or sailing weather; but you can always trust it for March
21st weather. Whatever the weather man at Washington predicts about
it, whatever comes,--snow, sleet, slush, rain, wind, or frogs and
sunshine,--March 21st _is_ the last day of winter.

The sun “crosses the line” that day; spring crosses with him; and I
cross over with the spring.

Let it snow! I have had winter enough. Let the wind rage! It cannot
turn back the sun; it cannot blow away the “equinoctial line”; it
cannot snow under my determination to have done, here and now, with
winter!

The sun crosses to my side of the Equator on the 21st of March; there
is nothing in the universe that can stop him. I cross over the line
with him; and there is nothing under the sun that can stop me. When
you want it to be spring, if you have the sun on your side of the line
you can have spring. Hitching your wagon to a star is a very great
help in getting along; but having the big sun behind you--

    “When descends on the Atlantic
        The gigantic
    Storm-wind of the equinox”

is a tremendous help in ridding you of a slow and, by this time,
wearisome winter, storm-wind and all.

Almanacs are not much to trust in; but if ever you prize one, it is on
the 21st of March,--that is, if you chance to live in New England. Yet
you can get along without the almanac--even in New England. Hang it up
under the corner of the kitchen mantelpiece and come out with me into
the March mud. We are going to find the signs of spring, the proofs
that this is the last day of winter, that the sun is somewhere in the
heavens and on _this_ side of the equatorial line.

Almanac or no, and with all other signs snowed under, there are still
our bones! Spring is in our bones. I cannot tell you how it gets into
them, nor describe precisely how it feels. But, then, I do not need
to. For you feel it in _your_ bones too--a light, hollow feeling, as
if your bones were birds’ bones, and as if you could flap your arms
and fly!

Only that you feel it more in your feet; and you will start and run,
like the Jungle-folk, like Mowgli--run, run, run! Oh, it is good to
have bones in your body, young bones with the “spring-running,” in
their joints, instead of the grit of rheumatism to stiffen and cripple
you!

The roads are barely thawed. The raw wind is penetrating, and we need
our greatcoats to keep out the cold. But look! A flock of
robins--twenty of them, dashing into the cedars, their brown breasts
glowing warm and red against the dull sky and the dark green of the
trees! And wait--before we go down the hill--here behind the barn--no,
there he dives from the telephone wire--Phœbe! He has just gotten
back, and is simply killing time now (and insects too), waiting for
Mrs. Phœbe to arrive, and housekeeping to begin.

Don’t move! There in the gray clouds--two soaring, circling hen-hawks!
_Kee-ee-you!_ _Kee-ee-you!_ Round and round they go, their shrill,
wild whistle piercing the four quarters of the sky and tingling down
the cold spine of every forest tree and sapling, stirring their life
blood until it seems to run red into their tops.

For see the maple swamp off yonder--the ashy gray of the boles, a
cold steel-color two thirds of the way toward the top, but there
changing into a faint garnet, a flush of warmth and life that seems
almost to have come since morning!

Let us go on now, for I want to get some watercress from the
brook--the first green growing thing for the table thus far!--and some
pussy-willows for the same table, only not to eat. (There are many
good things in this world that are not good to eat.) If the sun were
shining I should take you by way of the beehives to show you, dropping
down before their open doors, a few eager bees bringing home baskets
of pollen from the catkins of the hazelnut bushes. The hazelnut bushes
are in bloom! Yes, in bloom! No, the skunk-cabbages are not out yet,
nor the hepaticas, nor the arbutus; but the hazelnut bushes are in
bloom, and--see here, under the rye straw that covers the
strawberry-bed--a small spreading weed, green, and cheerily starred
with tiny white flowers!

It is the 21st of March; the sun has crossed the line; the phœbes
have returned; and here under the straw in the garden the
chickweed,--_starwort_,--first of the flowers, is in blossom!

But come on; I am not going back yet. This is the last day of winter.
Cold? Yes, it is cold, raw, wretched, gloomy, with snow still in the
woods, with frost still in the ground, and with not a frog or hyla
anywhere to be heard. But come along. This is the last day of
winter--of winter? No, no, it is the first day of spring. Robins back,
phœbes back, watercress for the table, chickweed in blossom, and a
bird’s nest with eggs in it! Winter? Spring? Birds’ eggs, did I say?

The almanac is mixed again. It always is. Who’s Who in the Seasons
when all of this is happening on the 21st of March? For here is the
bird’s nest with eggs in it, just as I said.

Watch the hole up under that stub of a limb while I tap on the trunk.
How sound asleep! But I will wake them. _Rap-rap-rap!_ There he
comes--the big barred owl!

Climb up and take a peek at the eggs, but don’t you dare to touch
them! Of course you will not. I need not have been so quick and severe
in my command; for, if we of this generation do not know as much about
some things as our fathers knew, we do at least know better than they
that the owls are among our best friends and are to be most jealously
protected.

Climb up, I say, and take a peek at those round white eggs, and
tell me, Is it spring or winter? Is it the last day, or the first
day, or the first and last in one? What a high mix-up is the
weather--especially this New England sort!

But look at that! A snowflake! Yes, it is beginning to snow--with the
sun crossing the line! It is beginning to snow, and down with the
first flakes, like a bit of summer sky drops a bluebird, calling
softly, sweetly, with notes that melt warm as sunshine into our
hearts.

“For, lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone.” But see how
it snows! Yes, but see--

    The willows gleam with silver light;
      The maples crimson glow--
    The first faint streaks on winter’s east,
      Far-off and low.

    The northward geese, with winged wedge,
      Have split the frozen skies,
    And called the way for weaker wings,
      Where midnight lies.

    To-day a warm wind wakes the marsh;
      I hear the hylas peep
    And o’er the pebbly ford, unbound,
      The waters leap.

    The lambs bleat from the sheltered folds;
      Low whispers spread the hills:
    The rustle of the spring’s soft robes
      The forest fills.

    The night, ah me! fierce flies the storm
      Across the dark dead wold;
    The swift snow swirls; and silence falls
      On stream and fold.

    All white and still lie stream and hill--
      The winter dread and drear!
    Then from the skies a bluebird flies
      And--spring is here!
